
Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive 001-09070200

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information about the Annual Activity Requirement
for jobactive job seekers.

Annual Activity Requirement

The Annual Activity Requirement is the set number of hours that a job
seeker must complete in approved activities when in the Work for the
Dole (WFD) Phase.

Eligible job seekers have an Annual Activity Requirement when they enter
into the WFD Phase and must participate in an approved activity or
combination of approved activities to meet their Annual Activity
Requirement.

All eligible job seekers will enter the WFD Phase after 12 months of
participation with a jobactive provider and every subsequent year that
they remain connected to their provider.

The jobactive provider will record the activities in the job seeker’s
Job Plan, including the relevant hours of participation the job seeker
needs to undertake each fortnight.

The following job seekers do not have an Annual Activity Requirement:

principal carer parents (PCP) and customers with a partial capacity to
work (PCW) (15 to 29 hours per week) and are fully meeting their
part-time mutual obligation requirements through 30 hours per fortnight
of paid work or approved study

job seekers aged 55 years and over who are meeting their full-time
mutual obligation requirements through 30 hours per fortnight of paid
work or approved voluntary work

job seekers with a PCW or temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) (0 to
14 hours per week)

job seekers participating in:

-   Community Development Program (CDP), or
-   Disability Employment Services (DES)

job seekers who are identified as early school leavers

Hours of participation to meet Annual Activity Requirement

The number of hours of participation in approved activities that a job
seeker requires in order to meet their Annual Activity Requirement
depends on their age, their assessed capacity to work and whether they
are a principal carer parent (PCP).

Job seekers with full-time mutual obligation requirements

-   Aged under 30 years: Generally must participate for 650 hours over
    26 weeks (50 hours per fortnight)
-   Aged 30 to 49: Generally must participate for 650 hours over 26
    weeks (50 hours per fortnight)
-   Aged 50 to 59: Generally must participate for 390 hours over 26
    weeks (30 hours per fortnight)
-   Aged 60 and over: From 20 September 2018, generally must participate
    for 130 hours over 26 weeks (10 hours per fortnight)

Principal carer parents (PCP) and partial capacity to work (PCW) (15 - 29 hours per week)

-   Aged under 30 years: Generally must participate for 390 hours over
    26 weeks (30 hours per fortnight)
-   Aged 30 to 59: Generally must participate for 200 hours over 26
    weeks (15 to 16 hours per fortnight)
-   Aged 60 and over: from 20 September 2018, generally must participate
    for 130 hours over 26 weeks (10 hours per fortnight)

Note: if undertaking Defence Force Reserves: 240 hours over 26 weeks (18
to 20 hours per fortnight).

Role of jobactive

The jobactive organisation is required to consult with the job seeker
and set appropriate activities for the job seeker to meet their Annual
Activity Requirement. These will then be included in the job seeker’s
Job Plan.

Job seekers with concerns or questions in relation to participation in
their approved activity to meet their Annual Activity Requirement should
be directed to their jobactive provider for advice and assistance.

Role of Services Australia

Services Australia will receive system advice when a customer has
commenced the Work for the Dole (WFD) Phase. This will be displayed on
the Participation Summary screen, along with advice received about
approved activities the customer is undertaking.

Job seeker obligations

Job seekers will continue to have job search requirements while meeting
their Annual Activity Requirement.

Job seekers must meet their mutual obligation requirements to continue
to receive their income support payment. This includes participating in
any approved activities set by their provider and outlined in their Job
Plan.

Related links

Participation with jobactive

Community Development Program (CDP)

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Approved activities included for Job Plans

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Job Plans

Work for the Dole (WFD) under jobactive

Defence Force Reserves as an approved activity

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
