
Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a couple 001-04060020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a customer is eligible for
independent status for Youth Allowance (YA) or the independent rate of
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Definition of independence

A customer is considered independent if they are or have been:

-   legally married
-   in a registered relationship
-   in a de facto relationship for a minimum of 12 months, or
-   in a de facto relationship for a minimum of 6 months, in special
    circumstances

This includes living (or having previously lived) as a member of a
couple for a continuous period of at least 12 months or more (or 6
months in special circumstances - this can include the death of a
partner or when the customer may have left an abusive relationship).

Both members of the couple must be over the age of consent in the state
or territory where the couple resides and it must not be a prohibited
relationship under section 23B of the Marriage Act 1961, for example, a
relationship between close blood relatives.

If a YA customer is considered independent under this criterion, they
are not subject to the Parental Means tests.

Assessing relationship status for independence

The length of a relationship excludes any periods the young person or
their partner were under the age of consent in the state they were
living.

A young person must not be assessed as a member of a couple if they are
under the age of consent, or not legally married or in a registered
relationship. This means that the customer and their 'partner' must be
assessed under single qualification and payability conditions. They
should not be linked to their 'partner' now or previously.

If the relationship as a member of a couple started while living outside
Australia, the age of consent is the age that applied in the State or
Territory where they first lived on arrival or return to Australia.

Forms used to assess a customer's relationship status are:

-   Relationship Details (SS284)
-   Relationship Details - Separated under one roof (SS293)

Temporary separations and breakups interrupt the continuity of the
relationship, unless the customer can prove the continuous nature of the
relationship during those separations.

Automatic assessments of independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a YA couple

Certain YA customers, under 22 years of age in some circumstances, may
have their independence automatically assessed within their online
claim.

If current or previous relationship details on the YA customer's file
indicate they are independent, the independence coding will pre-fill
when processing their claim.

In these situations, it is not necessary for the customer to supply
further information or verification. The Parental Income Details (MOD
JY) will not be requested at the Next Steps page.

Youth Disability Supplement

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is available to:

-   DSP customers under 21 years
-   YA/ABSTUDY customers under 22 years who have been assessed as having
    a partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples of assessing if a customer is a
member (or former member) of a couple for independence and links to
Online forms.

Related links

Review of decision

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Creating reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and
ACTDOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
