
Registering Volunteer job seekers 001-02040020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to register volunteer job seekers with
Community Development Programme (CDP) Providers and Workforce Australia
Services.

Eligibility for Volunteer registration with Employment Services

A Volunteer registration may be offered when a job seeker meets the
eligibility criteria for registration as a volunteer.

Note: all job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are not
eligible for registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) job
seeker must be registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEP).

Job seeker requests to be registered with Employment Services

Eligible job seekers can be registered as a volunteer by any Service
Officer of Services Australia. If the job seeker approaches Services
Australia to register and they are eligible, Service Officers can
provide this service. Workforce Australia Employment Service Providers
may also refer job seekers to be registered as a volunteer to Services
Australia. Job seekers can also register directly via myGov or the
Workforce Australia website.

Registration process for volunteers

Volunteer job seekers are referred to Workforce Australia Online
services. A Job Seeker Snapshot is not required for volunteer
registrations.

Job seekers must provide their identity documentation when registering
in person. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR)
requires job seekers registering as a volunteer to provide at least one
acceptable identity document.

Access to volunteer services starts from the Registration Start Date for
all eligible job seekers.

Duration of volunteer registration

Access to Workforce Australia Online as a volunteer is not time limited.

Volunteers may, at any time, tell DEWR or Services Australia they no
longer wish to participate.

A job seeker's volunteer registration will become inactivate
automatically if they do not use their online account for 12 months. If
the job seeker wants to regain access to Workforce Australia Online as a
volunteer they must re-register via their online account.

Remote Areas and CDP Registration as a volunteer

If a job seeker lives in a Community Development Programme (CDP)
designated area, they cannot be registered by Services Australia as a
volunteer and must approach a CDP Provider to enquire about eligibility
and registration.

The Resources page contains links to Visa Entitlement Verification
Online (VEVO) which confirms current visa details and entitlements and
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations National Customer
Service Line.

Related links

Identity Confirmation for registration as a Volunteer Job Seeker

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Self service terminals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
