-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what the Job Seeker Snapshot is and how it
supports job seekers.

Access requirements

All staff who register customers as a job seeker, view or update the Job
Seeker Snapshot must be registered in the ESSWeb 2.0 system before
running the workflow in Process Direct.

To register, follow the process outlined in the Registering access to
ESSWEB 2.0 task card on the Resources page.

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations administers the Job
Seeker Snapshot policy. They periodically reassess these factors and
their weighting. The Services Australia requirement to accurately apply
the Job Seeker Snapshot, is set out in the Business Partnership
Agreement (BPA) between Services Australia and the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations.

Primary function of the Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot collects information that aims to identify
different aspects of a participant’s labour market experience, such as
work capacity and educational qualifications, assessed through the
questionnaire. As part of the enhancements to the Job Seeker Snapshot,
information related to a participant’s internet skills has been
integrated into the assessment.

Questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot related to each other have been
grouped into the following domains:

-   Experience and Education
-   Internet skills
-   Ability to work
-   Your background
-   Personal circumstances

The job seeker is asked a series of questions regarding their individual
circumstances to determine their eligibility to access employment
services. For example:

-   Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider, or
-   Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) provider

In addition, the questions asked during the initial registration
process, which relate to the participant’s demographic characteristics:

-   help complete the overall picture of the participant's
    circumstances, and
-   contribute to the Job Seeker Snapshot score

These are described in the 'Other Factors'.

A number of questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot may be pre-populated
from the online claim, including:

-   Hours previously worked
-   Indigenous status
-   Refugee status
-   Visa details
-   Country of birth
-   Work capacity – conditions affecting work
-   Living circumstances – accommodation in last 12 months and living
    alone details
-   Personal factors affecting ability to work

For more information on these factors, see the Process page.

Application of the Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot may be completed by:

the agency:

-   during the job seeker's initial contact, or
-   when the Job Seeker Snapshot is re-run as a result of a change in
    circumstances

the job seeker online, as part of the new claim process and prior to the
Participation Interview

a Workforce Australia or Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)
provider:

-   as part of the direct registration process for a job seeker with no
    mutual obligation requirements, or
-   for job seekers who have already commenced with them

a Time to Work Employment Service (TWES) provider, as part of the TWES
programme

The job seeker's responses to Job Seeker Snapshot questions are used to
determine the most appropriate referral based on answers relating to the
Job Seeker Snapshot factors. Service Officers consider any personal and
sensitive issues that may affect the job seeker. One important
consideration is to identify job seekers who are refugees that may have
experienced torture or trauma.

Run the Job Seeker Registration workflow for customers who:

-   submitted an online claim or a Service Officer has completed the
    Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow
-   are currently receiving a payment, or
-   want to register as a Volunteer jobseeker

Identifying disadvantage

The Job Seeker Snapshot is used to identify the relative disadvantage
that job seekers have in finding employment because of:

-   their personal circumstances
-   labour market skills, and
-   local labour market environment

Responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot questions will identify the job
seeker's appropriate level of service.

Based on their Job Seeker Snapshot results, job seekers may be referred
to:

-   an Employment Services Provider that best suits their needs
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
-   Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
-   an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

In some cases, a further assessment will be required in addition to the
Job Seeker Snapshot. This is known as an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt), and is undertaken by an Assessor. This interview will:

-   further explore the barriers faced with gaining employment, and
-   address the job seeker's needs, and
-   may also result in the allocation of an additional score to the Job
    Seeker Snapshot

The outcomes of the ESAt will also determine the customer's suitability
for other programs, including disability employment assistance services
such as Disability Employment Services (DES).

When a Job Seeker Snapshot initiated ESAt is triggered, a JSRUPD
activity is created and will remain on the job seeker's record until an
ESAt appointment is booked. Until the ESAt is submitted, the Job Seeker
Snapshot will remain unfinalised or pending on the record. This will
prevent referral to an Employment Services Provider, except for job
seekers who are identified as Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth
(Student) (VY(S)). VY or VY(S) can be referred to an Employment Services
Provider for immediate access to employment services, even when the ESAt
outcome is still pending.

Note: where an ESAt has been conducted as part of the Time to Work
Employment Service (TWES) programme, another one does not need to be
completed unless there has been a change in circumstances that may
affect the result.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations website for information on the rationale behind the
factors that make up the Job Seeker Snapshot.

Contents

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Job Seeker Snapshot and short term illness/incapacity

Job Seeker Snapshot factors for torture and trauma

Requirement for a Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) as a result of an Employment Services Provider update

Job Seeker Snapshot Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
flags

Related links

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Participation Interview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
