-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a debt activity has generated
because a customer has failed to report or failed to notify of a change
in circumstances. A debt may also exist where the customer's payment
should have been cancelled before their due to report day.

Variable reporting (VR)

Customers who report every 4, 6, 8, 10 or 12 weeks are on variable
reporting (VR). They need to lodge their report at the end of their VR
cycle. As customers on VR are paid fortnightly, a debt activity may
occur if:

-   the payment should be cancelled before their reporting day, or
-   they fail to lodge their report

A debt activity will generate an amount equal to the amount paid to the
customer since:

-   their last due to report date, or
-   from the day their payments should have been cancelled

Reporting via service centre or Smart Centre

Service Officers who accept the report must follow the Early or late
lodgement of job seeker reports when a customer reports after their
payment has been cancelled:

-   Did not lodge (DNL), or
-   Failed to report (FRP)

Contravention debts

Contravention debts result from a failure to notify or a
misrepresentation of circumstance. The failure does not have to have
been intentional.

The Section of the Social Security Act 1991 used to raise contravention
debts changed on 1 July 2001:

-   before 1 July 2001, use subsection 1224(1)
-   on or after 1 July 2001, use subsection 1223(1)

There has been no change to debts raised under other sub-sections of
1224.

Pensions and benefits are paid under the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999. Payments can be terminated if the customer
loses qualification for payment and they have:

-   failed to notify of a change of circumstances
-   mis-represented their circumstances

Where this occurs, the social security payment is not payable from:

-   the date the event or change of circumstances occurred, or
-   the first day in that period specified in the notice issued under
    the termination provisions in the Act

The rate of payment received by the customer is based on their
circumstances. A contravention debt will occur where a customer's rate
should have been reduced, but it wasn't because the customer:

-   failed to notify of a change of circumstances
-   misrepresented their circumstances

Contravention debts are treated the same whether they involve a loss of
qualification or a rate reduction.

Consider applying a recovery fee to working age payment customers who:

-   refuse or fail to provide information about the person's income from
    personal exertion, or
-   provide false or misleading information about the person's income
    from personal exertion

The Resources page of Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from
incorrect declaration of income contains a list of payments that may
attract a recovery fee.

Debt staff involvement

After a debt has been raised, Debt staff are responsible for making
adjustments to the debt.

Use Fast Note to refer the case to the relevant Debt Team. See the
Resources page in Debt ownership for referral details.

The Resources page has common payment cancellation reasons.

Related links

Reporting overview

Specific cause of debt raising

General debt management information

Debt raising

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker), and Special Benefit (SpB)

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
