
PaTH Internship Programme 001-17021400

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PaTH Internship Programme which aims to give
job seekers under 25 years of age employability skills and real work
experience. Participants receive the $200 fortnightly PaTH Internship
Incentive (PII) payment, which is paid in addition to their income
support payment. The PII payment is taxable, regardless of the tax
status of the primary income support payment.

1 July 2022 changes

Following a government announcement, from 1 July 2022 providers have
paused making referrals to the PaTH Internship Programme. Current
participants will continue in their placement until they reach their end
date or are exited for any reason.

Objectives of the PaTH Internship Programme

The objective of participating in the PaTH Internship Programme is to
address barriers to employment by providing opportunities for job
seekers that increase their chances of obtaining sustainable employment.

PaTH Internship Programme eligibility

Job seekers with mutual obligation or participation requirements are
eligible to participate if they are:

receiving any of the following income support payments

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (other)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

and

aged 17 to 24 and already serviced in either:

-   Transition to Work (TtW)
-   Disability Employment Services (DES), or
-   Workforce Australia Provider Services

or

aged 17 to 24 and already serviced in:

-   Workforce Australia Online for Individuals, and
-   have received 2 months (63 days) of Online services or have
    participated in an Employability Skills Training (EST) course or are
    participating in a Workforce Specialist activity

Participation in the PaTH Internship Programme

A PaTH Internship runs for 4 to 12 weeks.

All referrals to the PaTH Internship Programme are completed by the
participant’s Employment Service Provider. The Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations (DEWR) will notify Services Australia when a
participant commences or ceases in the PaTH Internship Programme.

The PaTH Internship Programme will be included as an Approved Activity
in the participant’s Job Plan by their provider. Participants are also
required to comply with all other compulsory requirements in their Job
Plan.

Participation in the PaTH Internship Programme is not subject to the
Targeted Compliance Framework and participants cannot incur a failure
for not attending a day of unpaid work experience. If a participant
continually fails to attend or does not satisfactorily participate in
the PaTH Internship Programme, their internship may be cancelled by
their provider.

Role of Services Australia

The agency's role is to:

-   provide basic information about the PaTH Internship Programme to job
    seekers who are interested, and
-   pay the taxable fortnightly $200 PaTH Internship Incentive (PII)
    payment

If job seekers ask about the PaTH Internship Programme, advise them to
discuss this with their provider.

The PaTH Internship Programme Approved Activity keyed in a Job Plan will
automatically display on the Activity and Exemption (AEX) summary screen
as PTH and include a start date and expected end date. Upon receipt of
the 'Placed' transaction from DEWR, the PII payment is automatically
paid if the participant:

-   has participated in the PaTH Internship Programme for at least one
    day within their entitlement period (excluding the first 5 days of
    participation), and
-   is in receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (other),
    Special Benefit, Parenting Payment Single or Disability Support
    Pension (DSP)

Note: participants are not entitled to an initial PII payment until they
have participated for the first 5 days in the Internship.

PII payment is not an automated payment for Disability Support Pension
(DSP) participants and is paid manually. See the Process page for more
information.

Services Australia will cease a participant’s PII payments on advice
from DEWR where the:

-   PaTH Internship Programme’s expected end date has been reached, or
-   the participant ceases to participate in the PaTH Internship
    Programme

The PII payment is displayed as a separate taxable component on the
Payment Summary (PS) screen.

PaTH Internship Incentive (PII) payment not to be treated as income

Participants are not required to declare the PII payment when reporting.

Tell participants who contact the agency to advise they have started or
ceased participating in the PaTH Internship Programme, they are not
required to report the PII payment as income and to contact their
Employment Services Provider for any further information.

For both Centrelink and Child Support purposes, the PII payment cannot
be garnisheed directly from Centrelink to address a child support debt.

Child Support Smart Centre (CSSC) staff will need to ensure any PII
payment received by a participant is included in their Adjusted Taxable
Income (ATI) when taking an estimate of income or updating a provisional
income.

CSSC staff should not seek to garnishee this amount from Centrelink.
However, once paid, the amount may be garnisheed from a participant’s
bank account in line with current debt collection processes.

Note: Service Officers must not advocate or contact an Employment
Services Provider on the participant’s behalf.

PII payment and other supplements

The payability of the taxable PII payment does not exclude the payment
of other supplements, such as Language Literacy Numeracy Supplement
(LLNS) and Approved Programme of Work Supplement (APWS) if the
participant is eligible.

PII payment overpayments

Overpayments of PII payments are not recoverable. Do not raise debts for
an overpayment of PII.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations and the contact details for Participation Programmes
and Compliance Section.

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
