
The away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA) customers 001-04040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the away from home rate of Youth
Allowance (YA).

The away from home rate

The away from home rate is a higher rate of payment available to YA
customers who need to live away from home to access study, undertake an
Australian Apprenticeship or improve their employment prospects.

Dependent YA customers

Dependent YA customers may receive the away from home rate when they
need to live away from home to:

-   study full-time
-   undertake an Australian Apprenticeship
-   undertake approved activities to improve employment prospects, or
-   increase employment opportunities (not including full-time students)

Living away from the parental home does not immediately qualify
dependent YA customers for the away from home rate. Customers must have
an approved reason to live away from home and must actually be living
away from the parental home. This means the customer must spend the
majority of time away from the parental home.

Independent YA customers

Independent YA customers will receive the away from home rate when they
are:

-   living away from the parental home
-   single, living with their parents but have previously been a member
    of a YA couple or have had a dependent YA child, or
-   in state care, but not being supported by the state/territory,
    either by direct payments to themselves or indirect payments to
    other people or organisations

All other independent customers who live in the parental home receive
the at home rate (known as an accommodated independent rate).

Independent customers who are currently a member of a YA couple will
receive the member of a couple rate of YA. This rate is equivalent to
the away from home rate of YA, regardless of where they live.
Independent customers who currently have a dependent child are eligible
for the partnered with child or single with child rate of payment. See
Rates of Youth Allowance (YA).

Accommodated independent

Generally, independent customers who live in the parental home are
accommodated independents. These customers will receive the at home rate
of YA, unless they are exempt from the accommodated independent status.
See Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the
away from home (AFH) rate of Youth Allowance (YA).

Customers who are exempt from the accommodated independent status are
entitled to a higher rate of YA. The higher rate is determined by the
independent reason coded on the Independent/Homeless/Away From Home
Details (NIH) screen.

Long-term income support customers

A higher away from home rate also applies to YA customers who are
long-term income support students. This means customers who:

-   are 22 years and older when they commence their approved course or
    Australian Apprenticeship
-   have received income support payments for at least 26 weeks out of
    the last 39 weeks, and
-   are approved to live away from home

State care

Customers who are in unsupported state care are eligible for the away
from home rate. See Assessing independence when a customer is in State
care.

Approved reasons to live away from home for YA customers

To determine if the customer has an approved reason to live away from
the parental home, consider the following reasons:

-   excessive travelling time
-   parents move frequently
-   parental home is isolated
-   parental home inadequate for study or undertaking job search
    activities
-   customer disabled and parental home isolated from required special
    facilities
-   parents move out of area
-   equivalent activity not available locally
-   compulsory residence at educational institution
-   tertiary student studying overseas

Coronavirus (COVID-19) impacts on the away from home rate

During the COVID-19 pandemic, some students were required to leave their
campus term accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online
study, as face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home (AFH) rate, and
temporarily transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19,
remain eligible for the AFH rate. To continue to be eligible for the AFH
rate tertiary students must return to face-to-face study as soon as it
becomes available.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, they will remain eligible for the AFH rate providing they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

In this case, the change in accommodation should be assessed as
temporary. See Returning to the parental home when independent or
qualified for the away from home (AFH) rate of Youth Allowance (YA).

Circumstances that do not qualify for the away from home rate

The following customers do not qualify for the away from home rate:

-   Dependent YA customers living in the parental home
-   Dependent YA customers who choose to live away from the parental
    home for an unapproved reason
-   Independent YA customers who are considered to be an accommodated
    independent
-   State care customers who receive support from their state/territory

Generally, secondary students who go overseas as exchange students are
not eligible for YA. This is because the overseas course would not be an
approved course. Family Tax Benefit (FTB) may be payable for these
students.

The Resources page contains links to information on the Services
Australia website.

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing excessive travelling time for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parents moving frequently for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parental home isolated for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parental home inadequate for study, work or job search for
Youth Allowance (YA) at the away from home rate

Assessing a customer with a disability when the parental home is
isolated from required facilities for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing the away from home rate of Youth Allowance (YA) when parents
move out of the area

Assessing equivalent activity not available locally for Youth Allowance
(YA) at the away from home rate

Assessing compulsory residence at educational institution for Youth
Allowance (YA) at the away from home rate

Assessing a tertiary student studying overseas for Youth Allowance (YA)
at the away from home rate

Assessing improved employment prospects for Youth Allowance (YA) at the
away from home rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
