
Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct 001-10060000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy and procedures that apply when a job
seeker voluntarily ceases suitable employment without reasonable excuse
or becomes unemployed due to misconduct as a worker.

Policy context

Australia's welfare system is designed to provide a strong safety net
for those who are unable to support themselves.

For people of working age who have the capacity to work, participation
payments are intended to support those who are actively seeking and
prepared to move into suitable paid work as this becomes available.

The job seeker compliance system helps to reinforce these expectations.
Penalties may apply if a job seeker has contributed to their
unemployment, through voluntary unemployment or dismissal for
misconduct.

Consequence of voluntary unemployment or dismissal due to misconduct

If unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct occurs, Services
Australia staff are required to apply legislation and policy in a firm
but fair manner.

If a customer or job seeker leaves suitable work voluntarily (without a
reasonable excuse), or is dismissed from suitable work due to
misconduct, the consequence depends on which compliance system applies.

Under the:

Targeted Compliance Framework, when an unemployment failure has been
committed:

-   customers incur a 4 week unemployment preclusion period or 6 weeks
    if they received relocation assistance
-   job seekers receiving a participation payment will have this payment
    cancelled. A post cancellation non-payment period prevents them from
    receiving payment for the preclusion period if they reapply

Job Seeker Compliance Framework, when an unemployment failure has been
committed, an 8 week Unemployment Non-payment Period (UNPP) applies, or
12 weeks if they received relocation assistance

Note: ParentsNext participants are not subject to compliance action if
they are unemployed due to a voluntary act or due to misconduct.

Voluntary unemployment

Voluntary unemployment refers to a situation where a job seeker becomes
unemployed as a result of a voluntary act. Compliance action is required
where the job seeker has left suitable employment and their reason for
leaving is not considered reasonable.

Voluntary unemployment does not include leaving work as a result of:

-   an employment contract ending
-   no further work being available (for example, factory closures or a
    voluntary redundancy is accepted), or
-   being within 6 weeks of the date of confinement but not having
    access to Maternity Leave

Dismissal due to misconduct

Unemployment due to misconduct refers to situations where a job seeker
has contributed to their unemployment, either due to having been
dismissed or being given the option of resigning from suitable work, as
a result of inappropriate actions as an employee.

The reason for termination must be a result of misconduct as an employee
and not because of their general behaviour. The incident must have
either occurred in their place of work or be directly related to their
work.

Examples of unemployment due to misconduct include:

-   deliberate failure to produce or deliver a reasonable amount of work
-   unauthorised absences from work without good reason
-   improper behaviour or practices such as theft, assault or harassment
    of other employees or customers
-   deliberate misuse of work related equipment or facilities, such as
    vehicles, internet connections or IT hardware
-   actions that cause serious risk to the health or safety of other
    employees or customers, or
-   actions that threaten the reputation, viability or profitability of
    the business

Identifying unemployment due to voluntary act or misconduct

All Service Officers have an important role in the identification of
potential non-compliance where the job seeker became unemployed
voluntarily or as a result of misconduct.

If an Employment Separation Certificate (SU1) has been provided
(including collected verbally by the Service Officer), the Service
Officer must consider whether compliance action should be generated for
further investigation if the employer has indicated the reason for
separation was any of the following:

-   employee ceased work voluntarily
-   misconduct as an employee
-   unsatisfactory work performance
-   other

Where compliance action is generated, the job seeker must be advised
that their reason for unemployment will be further investigated and a
penalty may be applied.

If a non-compliance event is generated when a person is commencing or
lodging a claim for a participation payment, the compliance
investigation and decision must occur before the claim can be finalised.
This decision may have a direct impact on the job seeker's income
support payment start date.

If the non-compliance event is generated from Single Touch Payroll (STP)
cessation data and the employer has indicated the reason for separation
as an employee is:

-   ceasing work voluntarily
-   misconduct as an employee, or
-   dismissed

The job seeker must talk to the Participation Solutions Team (PST) to
have their reason for unemployment investigated.

An Employment Services Provider may submit a report to Services
Australia if they identify that while receiving a participation payment
a job seeker:

-   voluntarily ceased suitable employment
-   became unemployed due to misconduct

The provider must have considered the suitability of work and reasons
for leaving before submitting the report. The PST is responsible for
undertaking these compliance investigations.

Evidence to be collected before generating compliance action

If a Service Officer identifies unemployment due to a voluntary act or
misconduct may have occurred, they should gather sufficient evidence
before generating any compliance action. For example:

-   Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)
-   job seeker statement, or
-   additional employer statement

Compliance action does not need to be generated where:

-   any potential non-payment period has been self-served by the job
    seeker
-   any potential non-payment period is entirely overlapped by another
    waiting period (for example, Income Maintenance Period)
-   an employee was genuinely unable to produce a satisfactory standard
    of work
-   had a good reason for unauthorised absences (although not advising
    absences may constitute misconduct on its own)
-   the employer is unable or unwilling to substantiate their
    allegations
-   there is evidence that the job seeker was acting in self-defence
    rather than being the instigator
-   an employment contract ended

If a decision is made not to generate compliance action, this must be
clearly documented. For example, the Service Officer assessing the new
claim can note in the Progress of claim DOC that a potential
non-compliance event has already been considered and further
investigation is not required as the potential non-payment period has
been self served.

If the information contained in the Employment Separation Certificate
(SU1) is obtained verbally from the employer and there is an indication
that further investigation will be required, the employer should be
advised another Service Officer may make contact to obtain more details
about the reason for the voluntary unemployment or dismissal due to
misconduct. Contact details of the most relevant person to speak with
should be recorded when generating compliance action.

Generating compliance action

Compliance action must be generated once there is sufficient evidence to
identify that a non-compliance event is likely to have occurred.

For current job seekers, Special Benefit (SpB) and Parenting Payment
(PP) claimants, the Service Officer must generate the compliance action
using the Participation Compliance Hub in Process Direct.

Compliance action for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA)
new claims must be generated in Process Direct using the More Options
UNPP workflow. This includes documenting the evidence gathered.

The workflow will identify the job seeker compliance system the job
seeker is managed under. If at the time the compliance action is
generated the job seeker is:

-   not a declared programme participant they are managed under Targeted
    Compliance Framework and an unemployment failure will be generated
-   a declared programme participant they are managed under the Job
    Seeker Compliance Framework and an Unemployment Non-Payment Period
    will be generated

Once the compliance action is generated, the compliance investigation is
undertaken by an appropriately skilled Service Officer.

If the compliance action is generated:

-   before the job seeker's claim for a participation payment is
    finalised, a Service Officer with a UNPP IT security resource is
    responsible for undertaking the compliance investigation (except
    where the job seeker received relocation assistance)
-   and the job seeker is receiving a participation payment, or where it
    is identified that they may have received relocation assistance for
    the position, the Participation Solutions Team is responsible for
    undertaking the compliance investigation

Investigating unemployment due to voluntary act or misconduct

Service Officers with a UNPP IT security resource and Participation
Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers are responsible for
undertaking the compliance investigation and making a decision to apply
or reject the compliance action. The investigation will focus on the
matters that are relevant to making an evidence-based decision that is
in line with the legislative framework and policy intent.

These matters are:

-   the circumstances that led the job seeker becoming unemployed
-   whether the employment was suitable work
-   whether there were any factors that made it reasonable for the job
    seeker to leave employment voluntarily, or
-   whether an incident of misconduct that led to dismissal actually
    occurred

Service Officers with a UNPP IT security resource and PST-skilled
Service Officers have responsibility for:

-   investigating unemployment due to a voluntary act or dismissal due
    to misconduct
-   delivering strong messages that reinforce the expectation that job
    seekers remain in suitable work
-   gathering sufficient evidence required to support their decision
-   determining whether an unemployment failure has been committed or an
    UNPP is applied
-   explaining this decision to the job seeker, including their review
    and appeal rights
-   where a UNPP (Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers) is
    applied, assessing eligibility for payment under hardship provisions

Consultation with a PST-Service Officer (SO5), PST-skilled social worker
or other specialist officer may be required to assist with assessing the
impact of job seeker circumstances on the suitability of work, their
reason for leaving or behaviour at the time of dismissal.

A PST-skilled Service Officer must consult with a social worker where
the job seeker presents with family and domestic violence or has a
current Family relationships/Domestic violence circumstance recorded.
See Accessing a PST-skilled social worker.

PST-skilled Service Officers with the WNPPD IT security resource are
responsible for explaining the decision to the job seeker. They will
also record the job seeker's application for a formal review by an
Authorised Review Officer (ARO) if required. See Initial contact about a
decision and the review of decision process.

The Resources page contains information about conducting investigations
for common scenarios where the job seeker is unemployed due to a
voluntary act or as a result of misconduct and links to relevant
external websites.

Related links

Suitable/unsuitable work

Targeted Compliance Framework

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Gathering information and weighing evidence to establish facts for a
compliance investigation

Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers
affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements- reviews and appeals

Participation Compliance workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
