
Community Development Program (CDP) 001-02140000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Community Development Program (CDP). CDP
provides an integrated and flexible approach to participation and
employment services for people living in 60 Department of Education,
Skills and Employment designated remote servicing regions in Australia.

Aim of Community Development Program (CDP)

The CDP is the Government’s remote employment and community development
service. CDP supports job seekers in remote Australia to build skills,
address barriers to employment and contribute to their communities
through a range of flexible activities.

For eligible job seekers living in one of 60 remote servicing regions,
CDP is the only Employment Services Provider type available. These job
seekers cannot be referred to:

-   jobactive
-   Transition to Work (TTW)
-   Disability Employment Services (DES)

Key elements of the CDP

The key elements of the CDP are:

-   CDP providers deliver a range of services based on the needs of both
    the community and the individuals in that community
-   Each CDP region will generally have only 1 or 2 CDP service
    providers
-   Community development to support economic and employment
    development - Indigenous and community organisations in partnership
    with local leaders will have a say in the design and implementation
    of community projects and voluntary activities
-   'Jobs first' employment services - job seekers will be provided with
    personalised support and case management, including access to job
    opportunities, skills development and training

Eligibility for participation in CDP

There are two types of eligibility for CDP participants:

-   Remote Fully Eligible job seekers
-   Remote Community Volunteers

Department of Education, Skills and Employment will determine the job
seeker's CDP employment services eligibility and therefore job seeker
registration type:

-   Remote Fully Eligible (RFE)
-   Remote Community Volunteer (RCV)
-   No Remote Referral Required (NRRR)

Remote Fully Eligible job seekers

Remote Fully Eligible job seekers are those who live in a designated CDP
remote region and meet one of the following 4 criteria.

1: Customers with mutual obligation requirements

Customers who have mutual obligations requirements and receive or claim
any of the following:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (other)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP - under 35 years of age)
-   Special Benefit

This also applies to customers who are fully meeting their mutual
obligation requirements through approved activities and volunteer for
CDP provider servicing, such as:

-   Principal Carer parents and job seekers with a Partial Capacity to
    Work who are fully meeting their requirements through part-time paid
    employment or study
-   Mature Age (age 55 years and over) job seekers who are fully meeting
    their requirements through part-time paid employment,
    self-employment, voluntary work, study or a combination of these
    activities

2: Volunteering for CDP during a mutual obligation exemption

These are customers where both of the following apply:

-   they have an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements
-   they volunteer for CDP provider services during their exemption

3. Young people not receiving an income support payment, and vulnerable
young people

Young people aged 15-21 years who are either of the following:

-   not on an income support payment and are not employed for more than
    15 hours per week or in full-time education
-   vulnerable young people who are full-time students

4. Pre-released prisoners

Pre-released prisoners who:

-   are not receiving income support
-   are on approved day or partial day release
-   are referred by their correctional institution to engage in paid
    work through a work-release program

Remote Community Volunteers

Remote Community Volunteers are customers who live in a designated CDP
remote region, volunteer for CDP services, and meet one of the following
2 criteria.

1: Customers with no mutual obligation requirements

Customers who receive or claim an income support payment with no mutual
obligation requirements, such as:

-   Parenting Payment customers (with a youngest child under 6 years of
    age)
-   Youth Allowance (student) and ABSTUDY recipients who do not meet the
    Vulnerable Youth criteria
-   customers who receive a non-activity-tested income support payment
    such as Carer Payment, Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (aged
    over 35 years)

2: People who are not eligible for CDP services as they do not receive
an income support payment

CDP providers register Remote Community Volunteers directly. Services
Australia cannot refer them.

CDP Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)

Job seekers participating in CDP may be eligible to receive the APWS if
they are participating in approved activities such as Work for the Dole.

Mutual obligation requirements

CDP providers are responsible for managing mutual obligation
requirements for provider managed job seekers in remote servicing
regions.

From 12 May 2021, CDP activities which were previously compulsory
requirements are now voluntary. This includes:

-   Work for the Dole
-   training
-   work experience

CDP job seekers are not penalised if they fail to attend these
activities. If they cease Work for the Dole, and the CDP provider
notifies Services Australia that the job seeker has exited the activity,
their Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS) of $20.80 per fortnight
will stop..

CDP job seekers still need to meet other compulsory mutual obligation
requirements such as:

-   agreeing to a Job Plan
-   attending provider and third party appointments when notified
-   attending job interviews
-   meeting job search requirements if appropriate
-   accepting suitable paid work

Job Plans in CDP

Job seekers who are provider managed will have a Job Plan negotiated
with their CDP provider.

In negotiating Job Plans with CDP job seekers, providers consider each
job seeker’s assessed capacity and individual circumstances.

For 'assessed capacity' see Job seekers with a partial capacity to work
or a temporary reduced work capacity.

There are no specific requirements for CDP job seekers according to
their age group or job seeker category, e.g. for principal carer parents
or job seekers aged over 55.

Minimum hourly requirements do not apply for CDP job seekers. If a CDP
job seeker elects to participate in an activity such as Work for the
Dole, the provider records in the Job Plan the number of hours the job
seeker has volunteered to undertake. If the job seeker does not
participate in the activity for the elected number of hours, penalties
will not apply, as their participation is voluntary.

If a job seeker does not elect to participate in an activity, the hourly
requirements in their Job Plan are zero.

Job seekers who are Centrelink managed will have a Job Plan negotiated
by Services Australia. The type of plan to be negotiated will be
determined automatically by the system, based on information sent by the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment IT system, and will
depend on whether a CDP provider referral is in place or not.

Work for the Dole (WFD) in CDP

The key aim of Work for the Dole in CDP regions is providing real
pathways to long-term employment. Eligible job seekers will also have
access to support services and activities such as basic literacy and
numeracy training, driver's license training, and other training that is
linked directly to a job.

Work for the Dole (WFD) activities in CDP

Under the CDP, WFD activities:

-   can provide a combination of work-like experiences and
    vocational/non-vocational training linked to a job
-   can be individual or group based
-   can be delivered by the CDP provider or through the providers
    arranging a third party host organisation to undertake them
-   are not added as a compulsory activity within a Job Plan
-   are voluntary for any CDP job seekers who elect to undertake Work
    for the Dole
-   will not be subject to the job seeker compliance framework

Note: CDP providers may approve flexible participation hours for some
CDP participants, which may include activities outside of standard
business hours, or variation in the number of days per week. CDP
participants can discuss this in more detail with their CDP provider.

Payments, supplement and services during Work for the Dole in CDP

Participants remain entitled to their income support payment (that is,
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Special Benefit (SpB), Youth Allowance (YA),
Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment (PP)) and a
supplement of $20.80 per fortnight, to assist with the costs of their
placement. Job seekers cannot get the WFD supplement and the Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) at the same time.

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) may also be
available to participants.

Community Participation Activities

Community Participation Activities aim to support and increase job
seekers' participation while supporting community advancement. CDP
providers are expected to work with the communities in their region/s to
identify community activities, community development opportunities, and
employment opportunities that that will contribute to the communities'
well-being and development towards sustainability. The Community
Participation Activities will be linked to the Community Action Plan.

Breakdown in relationship between a job seeker and their CDP provider

Job seekers who approach Services Australia about a breakdown in their
relationship with their CDP provider organisation should be advised to
discuss their situation with their provider in the first instance. In
situations when a job seeker feels they can't talk to their provider, or
are not happy with the provider's response to their issue, job seekers
should be advised to contact the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

Changing provider after change of address

If the job seeker has moved to a new region, but remains linked to the
provider in their previous region, advise the job seeker to contact
their provider or to call the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment Customer Service Line. For further information see Job seeker
change of address.

Transition to the Remote Engagement Program

A new Remote Engagement Program will replace the CDP in 2024. The new
program aims to improve employment pathways and economic opportunities
for people in remote communities.

From 2022, trials are commencing in 5 remote regions to co-design and
test elements of the new Remote Engagement Program. The 5 trial regions
are:

-   Mid West/West region in Western Australia (CDP Region 5)
-   Ngaanyatjarra Lands in Western Australia (CDP Region 3)
-   Eyre in South Australia (CDP Region 17)
-   Barkly (incorporating South East Barkly and North Barkly) in the
    Northern Territory; (CDP Regions 26 & 28) and
-   Palm Island in Queensland (CDP Region 50)

To inform the development of the new program, the trial regions will
trial different approaches to:

-   engaging job seekers
-   mutual obligation requirements
-   job seeker compliance
-   training and skill development,
-   non-vocational support

Lessons learned from the trials will inform the design of the new Remote
Engagement Program.

Trial phases: co-design, transition and implementation

The trials will be implemented in three phases:

-   A: Co-design
-   B: Transition
-   C: Implementation

A: Co-design

The National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA) will work with
stakeholders, including community representatives, to co-design the
Remote Engagement Program. This phase will involve a series of workshops
and activities in each of the five trial regions. These will design the
specific details for the REP trial in their region.

B: Transition

Following the co-design phase, a short transition phase will involve:

-   communicating about the trial to stakeholders, including job seekers
-   updating CDP provider contracts to deliver the REP trial

C: Implementation

All job seekers living in a trial region will participate in the trial.
They will remain linked with and serviced by the REP trial provider,
which was previously their CDP provider.

Remote Engagement Placements

The REP trials will include voluntary opportunities for up to 150
eligible job seekers to participate in Remote Engagement Placements that
are like having a job.

Eligible job seekers will voluntarily participate in a placement for
between 15 and 18 hours per week with a host organisation. Job seekers
will build skills and experience in roles that deliver goods or services
to benefit local communities. These placements will provide a pathway to
employment.

Job seekers are eligible to participate in a Remote Engagement Placement
if they are:

living in a trial region

registered with the CDP or REP provider in the region

currently on a qualifying income support payment of:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (jobseeker) (YA(o))
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) with mutual obligation requirements
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) with participation requirements

not undertaking full-time study

Note: for the purposes of REP, currently means any of the following:

-   current (CUR)
-   cancelled next pay (CNP)
-   current zero rate (CZR)
-   suspended (SUS)

During the placement, participants will receive the new Remote
Engagement Program (REP) Payment of between $100 and $190 per fortnight,
as well as their usual income support payments and supplementary
benefits.

The amount of the REP Payment is determined by each trial region through
the co-design process. Each job seeker in an individual trial region
will receive the same REP Payment amount.

Remote Engagement Placements may start at any time from 26  March  2022.
However, a system implementation for the payment will not be released
until 3  September 2022. Until 3 September 2022, the REP Payment will be
delivered manually and is:

-   taxable
-   recoverable
-   available for other debt raising and recovery action

It is not:

-   included in any job seeker compliance penalty calculations
-   reportable income for income tests (personal, partner or parental)
-   affected by compensation
-   included in Income Management
-   available for Centrepay

Manual payments

The National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA) will provide the
participant’s details to the Participation Programmes Team. The
Participation Programmes team will quality-check the data and pass the
cleared file to Service Operations.

Service Operations will allocate this work to Service Officers who have
access to the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen for manual coding.

Service Officers making REP Payments via PYAJ do not have to assess a
customer's participation in a Remote Engagement Placement. However, if
they note a change to eligibility, or have a payment query, they must
email  PROGRAMME.MUTUAL.OBLIGATION with the details.

Automatic payments

After the system release on 3  September 2022, the REP Payment is paid
automatically and will be:

-   taxable
-   recoverable
-   available for Centrepay
-   available for other debt raising and recovery action

It will not be:

-   included in any job seeker compliance penalty calculations
-   reportable income for income tests (personal, partner or parental)
-   affected by compensation
-   included in Income Management

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Contact details for the National Customer Service Line at the
    Department of Education, Skills and Employment, and
-   the National Indigenous Australians Agency webpage, which includes
    provider information and information on the Community Development
    Program (CDP)

Contents

Exits and suspensions from jobactive or Community Development Program
(CDP)

Jobactive/Community Development Program (CDP) registration inactivated
and cancellation of income support in error

Related links

Investigating a No Show, No Pay Failure

Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Job seeker change of address

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
