
Approved activities for Job Plans 001-09070000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines what activities can be included in a Job Plan. A
Job Plan records the activities negotiated between a job seeker and
their Employment Services Provider or Services Australia. Job seekers
subject to RapidConnect and in the Online Employment Service (OES) will
need to complete their Career Profile before they can access and agree
to their Job Plan online.

Job Seeker approved activities

To meet their mutual obligation requirements, job seekers must
participate in a range of activities aimed at improving their employment
prospects and targeted towards a job seeker's individual needs.

Compulsory and voluntary activities, or a combination of both, can be
included in the Job Plan. Services Australia is responsible for
negotiating and maintaining Job Plans for Centrelink managed job
seekers.

Job seekers must comply with all compulsory activities included in their
Job Plan. There are consequences under the Targeted Compliance Framework
or the Job Seeker Compliance Model if the job-seeker does not comply.

Approved activities during the Annual Activity Requirement for jobactive job seekers

In addition to mutual obligation requirements, if a job seeker has been
with a provider for 12 months, they will also have an Annual Activity
Requirement (AAR). An AAR is the set number of hours that a job seeker
must complete in approved activities in addition to their standard
mutual obligation requirements. The number of hours each week that job
seekers must participate in their AAR will vary according to their age
and work capacity.

When the job seeker commences in an activity to meet their AAR, this
will be entered into the job seeker's Job Plan as a compulsory activity.
This then forms part of the job seeker's mutual obligation requirements
that the job seeker must satisfy.

Jobactive organisations are responsible for negotiating Job Plans for
WFD.

For job seekers who have an AAR, Work for the Dole is the principal
activity they must undertake to meet their AAR unless they:

-   arranged to meet their AAR through another approved activity that
    will start at the same time they become subject to the AAR, or
-   are already undertaking other approved activities at the time they
    enter the Work for the Dole Phase

The approved activities a job seeker can undertake, if they have
arranged to meet their AAR by undertaking an activity other than Work
for the Dole, are:

Part-Time Employment

Unpaid Work Experience Placements

Voluntary Work

Part-time study/training (in a Certificate III or higher)

Accredited language, literacy and numeracy courses, which can include:

-   Skills for Education and Employment
-   Adult Migrant English Programme
-   Intensive Support - Transition to Work

Defence Force Reserves

Other government programmes, including state government programmes

PaTH Internship Programme may be undertaken concurrently with Work for
the Dole

Job seekers can volunteer to undertake drug dependency treatments or
interventions which may count towards meeting their mutual obligation
and AAR if they are provider managed.

Job seekers may also undertake a combination of the activities listed
above where it is deemed suitable or necessary by their jobactive
organisation. These activities however, will not be concurrent with Work
for the Dole.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY payments

If a part-time course is included in the Job Plan, and the customer is
Indigenous, they may be eligible for assistance, for example Incidentals
Allowance, under the ABSTUDY scheme. If the customer is thinking about
applying for ABSTUDY for the part-time course, then the customer must be
made aware that the course cannot be included in the Job Plan as a
compulsory activity. They must be given the option to not include it, as
a customer is not eligible for ABSTUDY assistance if the same course of
study is a compulsory part of the job seeker's Job Plan. They will,
however, be eligible to apply for ABSTUDY assistance if the course is
included as a voluntary activity in their Job Plan.

The Resources page contains attachments with information about types of
activities that may be added to a Job Plan. It also includes attachments
for manual Job Plans and a manual Job Plan task card, which should only
be used when the workflow is not available.

Contents

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Defence Force Reserves as an approved activity

Self-employment as an approved activity

Voluntary work as an approved activity

Paid work as an approved activity

Drug or Alcohol dependency treatment program or intervention as an
approved activity

PaTH Internship Programme

Youth Activities as an approved activity

Indigenous Self Employment Programme (ISEP) as an approved activity

Approved Activities for mature age customers

Career Transition Assistance (CTA) Program

Approved activities for principal carers

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive

Refugee Activities (RAC) as an approved activity

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
