
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers should action job seeker
management activities generated on customer records, to ensure job
seekers are referred to appropriate services.

Job seeker management activities

Job seeker management activities alert Service Officers that follow-up
action is required for a job seeker.

There may be a keyword (parameter) attached to an activity. It is a
short code or description that provides more details, such as the source
or purpose of an activity, and allows for a search of that activity via
the Worklist in Work Optimiser.

Job seeker activities can be created via job seeker activity management
processing or Job Seeker Registration processing.

Job seeker management activities can be actioned by Service Officers in
Smart Centres or service centres.

Outstanding activities are completed during contact with the job seeker
via the Participation Summary within Process Direct.

System generated activities

Job seeker management activities generated on customer records include
the following:

-   JSR/ADD activities are created when the job seeker is receiving an
    income support payment that has mutual obligation requirements, but
    does not have an active Job seeker registration (JSR/ACT) status.
    They will create when a student lodges a student to job seeker
    transitional claim within four weeks of their Student End Date
    (SED). See Student to job seeker transfers, and Eligibility and
    registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO)/No Remote
    Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker for assistance. An Action Item
    message will display on the job seeker Key Information tab within
    the Process Direct Participation Summary screen to advise the Job
    Seeker Registration (JSR) process needs completion. Note: these
    activities should not be cancelled unless the corresponding job
    seeker claim has recently been rejected in which case they should be
    cancelled
-   JSR/UPD activities are non-cancellable and alert that further action
    is needed on a job seeker's record. A To Do Indicator (TDI) may be
    attached to a UPD activity and will identify what action is needed.
    The relevant workflow will need to be completed to action the
    JSR/UPD according to the TDI

If the customer does not require Job Seeker Registration, inactivate
their registration. Action via the Inactivate Job Seeker Registration
link in the Job seeker registration and provider referral information
tab within the Process Direct Participation Summary screen. This will
auto-complete the JSR/UPD activity.

JSR/UPD activities

The following activities apply to all job seekers receiving an income
support payment with mutual obligation requirements:

-   JSR/UPD with 'JSC' To Do Indicator (TDI) and 'JSCIREQ' keyword
    activities will be created when the job seeker has a Job Seeker
    Registration 'Active' (JSR/ACT) status, but does not have a Job
    Seeker Snapshot active on the record. In these circumstances the Job
    Seeker Snapshot must be completed with the job seeker
-   JSR/UPD with 'JSC' TDI and 'FEP' keyword activities will be created
    when the job seeker is receiving an income support payment that
    requires them to be registered as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)
    job seeker. The Job Seeker Snapshot must be completed as part of the
    FEP registration
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'ESAREFRQ' keyword activities are created
    when the job seeker requires a referral to an Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) based on the Job
    Seeker Snapshot result. If the ESAt/JCA is deferred with a pending
    medical evidence reason, the activity will not appear during the
    period of deferment, and will be recreated once this period has
    expired
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'ESATATT' keyword activities are created
    when a job seeker has been suspended because they failed to attend
    an ESAt appointment. Job seekers are sent a letter asking them to
    contact Services Australia to arrange a new ESAt appointment. No
    action is required by Service Officers until the job seeker contacts
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESP' TDI and 'ESPREF' keyword activities will be
    created when the job seeker's JSR and Job Seeker Snapshot are
    active, but they have not been connected with an Employment Services
    Provider
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESP' TDI and 'NSUS' keyword activities will be created
    when a job seeker requires re-engagement with their Employment
    Services Provider. This occurs when the job seeker's Employment
    Services Provider suspension period has expired. Workforce Australia
    Service providers or online will engage the job seeker directly post
    a suspension from their services. Services Australia is not required
    to take any action. In addition, an Action Item will be displayed on
    the Participation Summary screen. This Action Item is no longer
    required and actions can be ignored
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'D26' parameter and 'ESAREFRQ' keyword
    activities will be created when a Domestic Violence - Relationship
    Breakdown (D26) Exemption has expired and the job seeker is a
    principal carer or they live in a Community Development Program
    (CDP) region. The job seeker should be referred to an ESAt to assess
    if their current level of support with their Employment Services
    Provider is appropriate
-   JSR/UPD with 'RJC' TDI activities will be created when a job seeker
    lives in a CDP region and requires referral to a CDP provider
-   JSR/UPD with 'TW5' TDI and 'TTWREF' keyword activities will be
    created when a job seeker is eligible for a referral to a Workforce
    Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) provider and a provider is
    available in the job seeker's region

JSR/MFU and WAP/MFU activities

JSR/MFU (Manual Follow-up) and WAP/MFU activities are created to alert
that the job seeker may benefit from a referral to a program or
additional services. These activities must be completed manually or
cancelled (if appropriate):

JSR/MFU with 'AMEP/SEE' keyword activity will be created when a job
seeker has been identified as benefiting from a referral to an Adult
Migrant English Program (AMEP) or Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE) program when the Job Seeker Snapshot is run, and the Service
Officer confirms the referral is required

JSR/MFU with 'DES' keyword activity will be created when a job seeker's
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
report recommends a referral to a Disability Employment Services (DES)
provider

WAP/MFU with 'WAPDHSM' keyword activity is created to prompt Service
Officers to update the customer's Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX)
screen and negotiate a new Centrelink Managed Job Plan where a job
seeker is eligible for but does not currently have one of the following
approved activities recorded:

-   Part-time Work (PTW)
-   Self-Employment (SEL)
-   Paid Work and Self Employment (Combined) (PWS)
-   Study and Self Employment (Combined) (SSE)
-   Study and Paid Work (Combined) (SPW), or
-   Voluntary and Paid Work (Combined) (VPE)

The Resources page explains the hierarchy of JSR/UPD activities.

Related links

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Eligibility for Workforce Australia as a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP)

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job Seeker Snapshot

Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
flags

Actioning a pending Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) activity

Actioning automatic activities of a current Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) referral

Online Diary

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exits and suspensions from Workforce Australia or Community Development
Program (CDP)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Eligibility and registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO)/No
Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

Student to job seeker transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
