
Negotiating Job Plans 001-09100010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This process is impacted by the Coronavirus (COVID-19) response. See
Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

This document explains the steps required when a Service Officer
negotiates a Job Plan with a job seeker.

Job seekers required to agree to a Job Plan

A Job Plan is an Employment Pathway Plan or Individual Participation
Plan for the purpose of social security law.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements must agree to a Job Plan
to qualify for income support payments. A Job Plan records the
activities the job seeker will do to meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Note: from 4 December 2021, job seekers in the Online Employment Service
(OES) who are subject to RapidConnect will be required to complete a
career profile before they are presented with a job plan.

Job seekers are either Centrelink or Employment Services Provider
managed. Generally, the organisation responsible for the ongoing
management of the job seeker negotiates their Job Plan.

All job seekers with mutual obligation requirements must have a Job Plan
negotiated within:

-   4 business days of their first regular payment, or
-   within 14 days of a change of circumstance

To negotiate a Job Plan for a job seeker with mutual obligation
requirements, they must have an active Job Seeker Identification Number
(JSID) and 1 of the following registration types:

-   Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)
-   No Stream Services Referral Required (NSSRR)/No Remote Referral
    Required (NRRR) job seeker, or
-   Remote fully eligible

The Job Plan should be tailored to the job seeker's needs and
requirements. Activities are recorded in the mutual obligation
requirements section of the Job Plan. There must be at least 1
compulsory activity. The Job Plan must include all the activities the
job seeker is doing to fully meet their requirements.

A compulsory Job Plan must be negotiated for job seekers with mutual
obligation requirements except where the job seeker:

-   has a current temporary exemption from their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   is not receiving a payment with mutual obligation requirements

Centrelink managed job seekers

Centrelink manages job seekers who are able to fully meet their mutual
obligation requirements by participation in a Centrelink approved
activity.

Other job seekers are Centrelink managed because of their assessed
capacity to work or because they have been granted an exemption from
meeting mutual obligation requirements.

Centrelink managed job seekers are:

-   principal carers fully meeting requirements (through paid work,
    self-employment, study, or a combination)
-   mature age job seekers 55+(through paid work, self-employment,
    voluntary work, or a combination)
-   partial capacity to work (PCW) job seekers with less than 15hrs per
    week work capacity (Quarterly Participation Interviews)
-   assessed as having partial capacity to work (PCW) 15-29 hours per
    week (through paid work or self-employment)
-   assessed as having temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) of less
    than 15hrs per week work capacity (Quarterly Participation
    Interviews)
-   job seekers with an exemption from their mutual obligation
    requirements (noting they do not require a Job Plan)
-   people participating in New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) and
    not receiving the NEIS allowance in the 3 months following cessation
    of the allowance
-   principal carer parents participating in Defence Force Reserves
-   job seekers doing Youth Activities
-   most newly arrived refugees who are in the 13 week period post the
    end of their refugee exemption
-   any other job seeker with mutual obligation requirements who is not
    fully meeting requirements and has not been referred to Online
    Employment Services (OES) or an Employment Services Provider

The Participation Summary page and Job Plan Status page will display
whether there is a current Job Plan and if the job seeker is Centrelink
managed or provider managed.

Service Officers must identify where a provider managed job seeker
should be Centrelink managed, for example where they are fully meeting
their requirements through an activity or programme. The exception to
this is job seekers participating in a Disability Employment Services
(DES) program and doing paid work. See also: Paid work as an approved
activity.

Note: job seekers doing the PaTH Internship Programme who are fully
meeting their mutual obligation requirements will continue to be
provider managed while participating in the programme.

Options for negotiating Job Plans

Job Plans may be negotiated by suitably skilled Service Officers either
in person or over the phone where all necessary documentation and/or
information is available. Job seekers must formally agree with the Job
Plan either by signing a printed copy, or by using their [] online
account (not including the Centrelink app) to provide agreement. Job
Plans cannot be finalised by verbal agreement.

Some Centrelink managed job seekers signed up for Online Services who
are fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements can have their
Job Plan updated automatically when the activity end date is reached by
completing an Online Task. These job seekers then use the 'View and
Agree Job Plan' online service to approve their Job Plan.

[] If the Job Plan is negotiated via phone, the job seeker should access
their online account and finalise the plan while they are still on the
phone. It will be available immediately. If the job seeker does not have
an online account, mail them the Job Plan or they can go to a service
centre to sign it. Note: remote job seekers can post their signed Job
Plans.

The job seeker does not need to agree to the Job Plan immediately but
must agree to it within 28 days. The following timeframes apply:

-   2 days - reminder message for job seeker with an online account
-   14 days - reminder letter
-   28 days - payments suspend

The Resources page contains information about the 'View and Agree to Job
Plan' service.

Appropriateness of Job Plans

Services Australia is responsible for ensuring that Centrelink managed
job seekers have appropriate activities in their Job Plan.

An appropriate Job Plan must be negotiated with a job seeker by the
agency where:

-   their Job Plan is no longer current, for example, a job-seeker with
    voluntary work as their approved activity commences part- time work
-   any activity in the Centrelink negotiated Job Plan has expired or is
    more than 12 months old
-   the job seeker is now Centrelink managed as they have commenced an
    activity which will fully meet their mutual obligation requirements
-   the job seeker is returning to an income support payment, even if
    the activities in their new Job Plan are the same as they had during
    a previous period of payment

Some job seekers will have their approved part-time work (PTW) or
self-employment (SEL) activity auto-updated if they:

-   are a principal carer, and
-   are receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment Single, or
    Youth Allowance (job seeker), and
-   have declared in their last 2 consecutive fortnights that they have
    worked at least 30 hours each fortnight and earned income equal to
    or above the national minimum wage

A new Job Plan must still be negotiated to include the new approved
part-time work or self-employment activity. The Job Plan needs to
reflect the new dates on the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX)
screen.

Provider managed and Online Employment Services job seekers

The agency should only negotiate or update a Job Plan for a provider
managed or Online Employment Services (OES) job seeker where there are
valid reasons for doing so.

The Job Plan workflow will warn the Service Officer not to proceed
without consulting the provider. The Service Officer will be required to
select a reason from a drop down box to explain their reason for
proceeding. If the intention is to make these job seekers Centrelink
managed, this is the reason to be keyed in the workflow.

Apart from these valid reasons, the agency is not involved in making
decisions about mutual obligation requirements for provider managed/OES
job seekers. Service Officers should not offer an opinion on the
appropriateness of activities in a provider managed/OES job seeker's Job
Plan.

If a provider managed/OES job seeker enquires about the mutual
obligation requirements contained in their Job Plan or they require a
new Job Plan, refer them to their Employment Services Provider or the
Digital Services Contact Centre for OES job seekers.

If a provider managed job seeker wishes to lodge a complaint regarding
their provider or their mutual obligation requirements, refer the job
seeker to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Negotiating a Job Plan during claims processing

At new claim, where a job seeker's circumstances, for example, partial
capacity to work (PCW), or the activities they are already undertaking
mean they can be Centrelink managed, Service Officers should negotiate
Job Plans as part of the new claim finalisation process.

If a job seeker is proposing to do an activity that will fully meet
their requirements, or they cannot yet provide the required verification
at new claim, do the approval of their activity as soon as possible
after grant. In the meantime, the job seeker must be referred to an
Employment Services Provider and commence meeting the requirements of a
provider negotiated Job Plan. The job seeker will be provider managed
until Centrelink has the information and verification needed to approve
an activity that is fully meeting requirements.

Voluntary Job Plans

For job seekers without mutual obligation requirements, participating as
volunteers in Employment Services, their provider will need them to
enter into a Voluntary Job Plan to access their services.

They will not have any compulsory activities. However, Employment
Services Providers can exit job seekers if they are not meeting the
commitments in their Voluntary Job Plan or no longer wish to volunteer
for Employment Services.

Services Australia Service Officers may negotiate Voluntary Job Plans
for:

-   job seekers who wish to negotiate a Job Plan for the purpose of
    Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) and are
    exempt from mutual obligation requirements due to Special Family
    Circumstances
-   other people without mutual obligation requirements who require a
    Job Plan to qualify for ACCS (Transition to Work)
-   Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers paid under JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
    conditions, but who are not a Nominated Visa Holder (NVH) and
    subject to SpB mutual obligation requirements under policy

Voluntary Job Plans have no limit on the number of voluntary activities
that may be included. Compulsory activities must not be included in a
Voluntary Job Plan.

Note: the determination of what type of Job Plan is required (voluntary
or compulsory) is automatic, based on information provided from the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Full-time students

Full-time students will not normally be required to negotiate a Job
Plan.

The exception is Vulnerable Youth (Students) offered Stream C
assistance, who will negotiate a Job Plan with their jobactive
organisation. Vulnerable Youth (Students) in a designated Community
Development Program (CDP) region where there are no streams will
negotiate a Job Plan with their CDP provider.

The Resources page contains the Customer View 'Agree to a Job Plan'
Workflow attachment.

Related links

28 day review of Job Plans

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Approved activities for principal carers

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Approved activities for mature age customers

Approved activities for Job Plans

Community Development Program (CDP)

Defence Force Reserves as an approved activity

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

Paid work as an approved activity

Participation with jobactive

PaTH Internship Programme

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

Youth Activities as an approved activity

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Negotiating Job Plans for newly arrived refugees following the 'Refugee
in First 13 Weeks' (REF) exemption

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
