-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about the approved activities that will
satisfy mutual obligation requirements for principal carers.

Mutual obligation requirements for income support recipients

Principal carers of dependent children who are receiving JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker, Parenting Payment Single
(PPS) when their youngest child is 6 and over or Special Benefit (SpB)
need to meet part-time mutual obligation requirements, unless an
exemption is appropriate. They can fulfil their requirements by:

-   meeting the sufficient work test (undertaking paid work and/or
    self-employment)
-   looking for work
-   participating in other approved activities
-   a combination of suitable paid work and self-employment of at least
    30 hours per fortnight
-   approved study of at least 30 hours per fortnight, or
-   a combination of study and paid work (including self-employment) of
    at least 30 hours per fortnight

Job seekers can volunteer to undertake drug dependency treatments or
interventions which may count towards meeting their mutual obligation
and Annual Activity Requirements if they are provider managed.

Participation requirements

Parenting Payment (PP) customers who are participating in ParentsNext
have participation requirements.

Job search or approved activities

Principal carers with mutual obligation requirements need to undertake
job search and be connected with an Employment Services Provider unless
they are fully meeting their requirements through an approved activity
such as:

-   undertaking suitable paid work of at least 30 hours per fortnight
-   a combination of suitable paid work and self-employment of at least
    30 hours per fortnight
-   undertaking self-employment of at least 30 hours per fortnight
    (meeting the sufficient work)
-   approved study of at least 30 hours per fortnight, or
-   a combination of study and paid work (including self-employment) of
    at least 30 hours per fortnight

If a principal carer is meeting their requirements they may still
volunteer to be connected with an Employment Services Provider.
Customers should still have an active registration.

Voluntary work

Voluntary work can be approved by Services Australia for mature age (55
years and over) job seekers, including principal carers. Other principal
carers can only have voluntary work, or a combination of voluntary work
and paid work or study, approved by their provider. Where voluntary work
is approved by either the agency or a provider, the customer must remain
connected with their provider, still be available for suitable paid
work, and accept all referrals to job interviews.

Mature Age or reduced capacity to work

If the principal carer is also aged 55+ or has an assessed partial
capacity to work between 15-29 hours per week, they will be placed in
the principal carer participation category as it is more beneficial for
the customer. Special rules apply for Mature Aged customers.

Where a principal carer has an assessed partial capacity to work or
temporary reduced work capacity of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week, the job
seeker will be placed into the appropriate partial/temporary reduced
work capacity participation category as it is the most beneficial.

Principal carer fully meeting requirements

If a principal carer fully meeting their requirements through part-time
work, self-employment or study volunteers to participate with a
provider, they will be registered as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP),
have the Job Seeker Snapshot completed along with any subsequent JCA,
and be connected to an Employment Services Provider. The job seeker will
negotiate their Job Plan with their provider unless they are managed by
the agency.

The initial assessment of a principal carer's participation requirements
is conducted through a Compulsory Participation Interview when the
customer's youngest child reaches the age of 6 years.

Note: some Principal Carers have their approved part-time work (PTW)
activity automatically updated if the job seeker:

-   is a principal carer, and
-   is in receipt of JobSeeker Payment, Parenting Payment Single, or
    Youth Allowance (job seeker), and
-   has declared in their last 2 consecutive fortnights that they have
    worked at least 30 hours each fortnight and earned income that is
    equal to or above the national minimum wage

A new Job Plan must still be negotiated. The Job Plan needs to reflect
the new dates on the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

Approved activities during the Work Experience Phase

The Work Experience Phase is a requirement for job seekers with mutual
obligation requirements where a period of additional activity will be
negotiated. Work Experience is undertaken with the job seeker's provider
and can be satisfied through a range of activities. Work Experience
activities may be undertaken outside of the Work Experience Phase, where
the provider deems this to be of benefit to the customer's long term
employment prospects. If a job seeker commences the Work Experience
Phase, an activity will be chosen in negotiation with their provider.
There is a 6 week period for job seekers to decide on and engage in
their chosen activity from the time the Work Experience Phase commences.
The provider will manage the referrals, commencement and compliance of
the Work Experience Activity.

Allowable Breaks from employment activities

Principal carers who have approved activities of Part-time Work and
Study and Paid Work (Combined) may be subject to the Allowable Break
provisions over Christmas school holiday periods, if affected by
employer initiated temporary closures, or reduced hours/shifts.

Community Development Program (CDP)

If a job seeker lives in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider.

The Resources page contains a link to the Fair Work Commission website
containing information about the national minimum wage.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Financial suitability test for suitable work for principal carers

Principal carer of a dependent child

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers of dependent
children over the Christmas/New year period

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Community Development Program (CDP)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
