-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides details on processing Reporting Statements
(SU19).

Reporting via self service options is the preferred channel choice for
Services Australia. Verbal reporting is the next preferred channel, with
paper reporting by exception only.

Completing and lodging Reporting Statement Application for payment

The Reporting Statement Application for payment (SU19) is only to be
used by exception.

The Reporting Statement (SU19) allows Services Australia:

-   to check if the Centrelink managed job seeker is complying with
    their mutual obligation or participation requirements
-   to check that no notifiable events have occurred within the
    reporting period, and
-   informs the agency of the job seeker's or participant's own (and/or
    their partner's) income

If the job seeker or participant is completing their report using the
Reporting Statement Application for payment (SU19) form it must be
completed in pen and be signed and dated by the job seeker. Any change
of circumstances updated by the job seeker must be recorded on the job
seeker's record.

Reporting Statements for Variable reporters

The Reporting Statement itself covers the whole variable report period
and the reporting date. The Reporting Statement is issued as part of the
Multi Attachment Template (MAT) with a cover letter advising the
customers of their requirements to report changes in their circumstances
(for example, employment income) by the end of each fortnightly
entitlement period and not wait until the variable report due date. For
example, if a customer is a 4 weekly reporter, the Reporting Statement
will be for 12 weeks with the 3 due dates included. The Reporting
Statement - MAT cover letter will list 6 entitlement periods and the
dates the customer must notify Services Australia of any changes in
their circumstances which occurred in that particular entitlement
period.

Customers can view a summary of their due to report dates and reporting
periods in their online account. The online account will display all
reporting periods within 12 weeks of the date viewed.

Customers with mutual obligation or participation requirements who
report via self service prior to being placed on variable reporting may
also be exempt from personal lodgement requirements. See Personal
lodgement exemptions.

Reporting Statement structure

The Reporting Statement is structured as follows:

-   When to report block on the first page lists up to 6 entitlement
    periods and the day and date on which the customer must report for
    each period. The customer's payment is not issued unless they report
-   What to report information is directly under the When to report
    block on the first page of the Reporting Statement. The customer is
    given instruction on how to provide their employment income or
    mutual obligation requirements if applicable and what changes in
    circumstances they must declare
-   How to report information is at the bottom of the first page. It
    provides the telephone number and/or internet address for reporting
-   Changes you must tell us about block is on the second page of the
    Reporting Statement. It provides information regarding changes of
    circumstances which customers are required to notify Services
    Australia about, and confirms the reporting requirements regarding
    these changes

Questions on the Reporting Statement Application for payment (SU19)

Reporting via self service options is the preferred channel choice for
Services Australia, then verbal reporting, with paper reporting by
exception only.

The purpose of the Reporting Statement (SU19) is to establish
entitlement on an ongoing basis by asking relevant questions. The
following information is requested:

-   details of income paid during the reporting period
-   any changes in circumstances
-   if the customer has completed an approved activity
-   if the customer has been incapacitated and unable to work or study
-   attendance at training courses or approved activities, and
    confirmation any mutual obligation requirements or Participation
    requirements have been met (unless exemptions exist)

When the job seeker or participant completes their report on their
reporting day, they must answer all questions. Where the job seeker has
not answered a question regarding their circumstances, this question
needs to be followed up with the job seeker verbally and documented
prior to the processing of the form to ensure they have met their mutual
obligation or participation requirements.

Reporting Statement due date

A customer must report on their due to report date because the questions
in the Reporting Statement relate to the full fortnight period or the
relevant period for variable reporters.

This document outlines information on the postal or fax lodgement of a
Reporting Statement (SU19) form for customers who do not normally use
self service (online account, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or
phone) and refers to those customers who choose to lodge a SU19 form in
person for their payment to be generated and are normally required to
lodge in person, but who have been granted a temporary exemption from
reporting in person.

This document outlines information about the third party lodgement of
Reporting Statement (SU19) forms. It is relevant for all customers who
must lodge a Reporting Statement (SU19) form in person for their payment
to be generated, including Parenting Payment (PP) customers with
compulsory mutual obligation requirements.

Processing Reporting Statements

Use Recording and correcting employment income details to process the
Reporting Statement (SU19) in person or verbally via phone. Payment will
be issued (generally on the next working day) after the report has been
finalised. This includes variable lodgement.

Encourage the customer to use self service facilities to process their
application for payment when they present without their SU19. If the
customer refuses or is unable to use self service, the Service Officer
can take verbal declaration of income and confirmation of mutual
obligation or participation requirements from the customer.

Reporting options

[] Self service reporting is the preferred option for customers in
receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker),
Parenting Payment (PP) and Special Benefit (SpB) (under JSP conditions)
subject to mutual obligation or participation requirements.

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

Eligible for third party lodgement

Principal carers or customers with a Partial Capacity to Work may
authorise another person to lodge their Reporting Statement (SU19) form
on their behalf on a regular basis, where they are fully meeting
requirements, as set out in their Job Plan through:

-   part-time work
-   self-employment
-   studying full time, but they or their partner report employment
    income, or
-   having an exemption, but they or their partner report employment
    income

Note: consider the customer's capacity to report by one of the self
service options prior to granting approval for customers to use a third
party for reporting for payments

Third party lodgement process

If another person is lodging a Reporting Statement (SU19) form on their
behalf, the customer is required to attach a letter with the name of the
person lodging the form for them and explaining:

-   why they are unable to put their form in themselves, and
-   why they are getting someone else to do it for them

The form still needs to have all questions completed in pen, signed and
dated by the customer on their due to lodge date.

The customer is only required to provide the signed authorisation
documentation once. The customer or their partner is still required to
report their employment income according to the agreed frequency. The
customer should be advised that the initial letter needs to indicate
that this 'agent' will be lodging on their behalf on an ongoing basis.
On receipt of the initial Reporting Statement (SU19) form and
authorising letter record a Display On Access (DOA) DOC on the
customer's record with the 'Expiry Date' as either the date customer
stated on the authorisation document or the end date of their approved
activity or exemption, whichever is the earlier.

The Resources page contains a link to the Reporting Statement (SU19)
form.

Related links

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Reporting screens

Reporting overview

Employment income

Mutual obligation requirements

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Lodgement and processing arrangements for Reporting Statements when self
service reporting is unavailable

Reporting requirements when a job seeker compliance investigation is
outstanding

Self Service Access Facility (SSAF) for reporting employment income,
participation and change of circumstance details

Employment Services Provider reports job seeker commenced employment but
income not declared

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
