
Cancellation of payment after a compliance related suspension 001-10120100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy and processes that apply when a
payment is cancelled because a Community Development Program (CDP) job
seeker has failed to re-engage or contact their provider following
compliance action.

Job seeker failed to re-engage (CDR) cancellations

A CDP job seeker's participation payment will be cancelled CDR if they
do not comply with a reconnection or further reconnection within 29 days
of the requirement first being issued. This may be notified by Services
Australia or a CDP provider as a result of a Non-Attendance Report
(NAR).

The date of effect of the cancellation is usually the day after the date
paid to (DPT+1). However, if the CDP job seeker needs to attend a
re-engagement appointment for a reconnection or further reconnection,
the cancellation may be deferred until the next entitlement period end
date after the 29 days if:

-   the Online Diary displays an appointment outcome of No Result
    Entered (NRE). The cancellation is deferred to provide more time for
    the provider to record attendance for any re-engagement appointments
    the CDP job seeker was expected to attend during the entitlement
    period, or
-   the CDP job seeker is due to attend a re-engagement appointment
    after the 29 days. If the CDP job seeker does not attend this
    appointment, cancellation will be deferred to close of business on
    the day after the appointment

If both of the above apply, cancellation will occur on the later of the
2 dates: the next Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) or the day after
the appointment date.

Did not contact provider to re-engage (DCP) cancellations

A CDP job seeker's participation payment will be cancelled DCP if:

-   a Non-Attendance Report (NAR) has been submitted, and
-   the CDP job seeker fails to contact their CDP provider and agree to
    a reconnection appointment within 29 days of the start of the
    instalment period in which the NAR is received

The date of effect of the cancellation will be the later of:

-   the NAR incident date, or
-   the day after the date paid to (DLP+1)

CDP job seeker does not contact following suspension

If a 'DNA participation appointment' (APA) suspension has been applied
and the CDP job seeker does not contact Services Australia to accept the
reconnection requirement, the suspension will be maintained. Payment
will generally cancel DNL or FRP, but will be auto-cancelled after 13
weeks if still suspended.

If a 'Non-Attendance Report Received' (ANR) suspension has been applied
and the CDP job seeker does not contact their provider to discuss the
suspension and accept a reconnection requirement, the suspension will be
maintained until their payment is auto-cancelled DCP after 29 days.

Manual cancellation

While CDR and DCP cancellations should occur automatically in most
cases, these cancellation reasons can be manually recorded if necessary.

Manual cancellation may be required if:

-   the CDP job seeker has not attended a re-engagement appointment
    within 29 days, and the system did not cancel payment on the next
    EPED after the 29 days
-   an issue has occurred with the auto-cancellation, and manual
    processing is required. For example, manual NAR restoration or CDR
    cancellation reviews. For more information, see the Participation
    Compliance Manual Follow Up Review guide

CDP job seeker contact following CDR or DCP cancellation

If payment has been cancelled CDR or DCP, the CDP job seeker is deemed
to have lost qualification for their participation payment due to an
ongoing failure to meet their mutual obligation requirements.

-   Payment restoration is not appropriate where the cancellation has
    been correctly applied
-   To receive the payment again, the CDP job seeker will need to
    re-claim and re-test their eligibility

If they re-claim within 14 days of the cancellation date, the claim
start date must not be backdated to the date of cancellation. The claim
start date will need to be amended to the date of claim. In this case,
the start date of the claim will be the date the claim is lodged. For
more details, see Calculating the start day general rule.

Restoration after cancellation

Service Officers outside the Participation Solutions Team (PST) are not
to restore a record that has been cancelled CDR or DCP.

PST skilled service officers may restore a record following a CDR or DCP
cancellation if there is evidence to indicate the CDP job seeker:

contacted and/or attended a re-engagement appointment, but this was not
identified before the CDR or DCP cancellation due to:

-   incorrect or incomplete coding by Services Australia and/or CDP
    provider, or
-   a system issue or error. For example, delays in the transfer of
    information between the Department of Employment and Workplace
    Relations and Services Australia's IT systems

was experiencing a major personal crisis and had no capacity to comply
with any of their mutual obligation requirements in the 29 days. Note:
to restore a DCP cancellation, there would have to be significant
factors that made it unreasonable for the CDP job seeker to contact
their provider for the 29 days. If the CDP job seeker was able to
contact Services Australia, or tried to report during the period, it is
unlikely that restoration should occur

This evidence must also ensure that, despite an update made by a
provider to an Online Diary result, the original requirement has been
met or there is evidence the CDP job seeker no longer needs to meet the
original requirement.

If the CDP job seeker contacts and wants to request an explanation or
apply for a formal review of a CDR or DCP cancellation decision, see
Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - reviews and appeals.

Related links

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers with their requirements

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers

Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider

Finalising Community Development Program (CDP) re-engagement
requirements

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Participation Compliance Manual Follow Up Review guide

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
