
Career Transition Assistance (CTA) Program 001-18050900

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

This document provides information regarding the Career Transition
Assistance (CTA) Program.

On this Page:

CTA Program overview

The CTA Program is administered by the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment.

The CTA Program provides reskilling opportunities for job seekers aged
45 years and over who are registered with a jobactive provider.

The CTA Program is also available to Disability Support Pension (DSP)
recipients aged 45 years and over who volunteer to participate, and the
CTA activity will be included in their DSP Participation Plan by their
provider as a voluntary activity.

The CTA Program is not available:

-   in Community Development Program (CDP) designated areas,
-   to those participating with a Disability Employment Services (DES)
    provider,
-   to those participating in Transition to Work (TtW), or
-   to those participating in ParentsNext

The CTA Program consists of two separate phases:

-   Tailored Career Assistance (TCA) - is an intensive short course to
    build job seekers’ understanding of the labour market and teach
    resilience, and
-   Functional Digital Literacy (FDL) - is IT training

Participation in the program is not compulsory. The job seeker can
decline the provider's offer to place them in the program. If the job
seeker chooses to participate, the approved activity can only be
included in the Job Plan as a voluntary activity, and they will be
required to agree to other activities also being included in their Job
Plan.

An eligible job seeker can complete the CTA Program phases in any order
or concurrently.

The program was rolled out nationally from 1 July 2019.

There is no Approved Programme of Work Supplement (APWS) associated with
the CTA Program.

Where a job seeker contacts the agency requesting participation in the
CTA Program, the Service Officer should refer the job seeker to their
jobactive provider to discuss. If the job seeker is not already
connected to a jobactive provider, connect the job seeker and make the
referral. See Registering a customer as a job seeker.

Where a job seeker who has commenced in the CTA Program contacts the
agency requesting to withdraw from the program, the Service Officer
should refer the job seeker to their jobactive provider to discuss
exiting the program.

CTA Program eligibility

The CTA Program is administered by the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment and job seekers will need to discuss participation with
their jobactive provider, who will determine if they are eligible.

Participation in the CTA Program is for job seekers aged 45 years and
over and will be included in their Job Plan by their provider as a
voluntary activity.

CTA Program participation

Job seekers aged 45 years and older with mutual obligation requirements
can choose to participate in the CTA Program and will have the CTA
Program approved activity added to their Job Plan as a voluntary
activity by their provider.

Job seekers who do not have mutual obligation requirements (including
those with a current exemption), can volunteer to participate in the CTA
Program and will be referred to a jobactive provider for assessment. See
Registering a customer as a job seeker.

Both phases of the CTA Program are approved activities and job seekers
with mutual obligation requirements can partially meet their
requirements, regardless of whether they are participating in one phase,
or both phases concurrently.

This means the job seeker will be required to undertake other approved
activities in conjunction with the CTA Program to fully meet their
mutual obligation requirements. The jobactive provider will negotiate a
Job Plan with the job seeker, and will include other activities to
ensure the job seeker is fully meeting their requirements.

The Resources page contains information on the Career Transition
Assistance (CTA) Program, a link to the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment jobactive help page, and Career Transition Assistance

Related links

Approved activities for Job Plans

Approved activities for principal carers

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
