
Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) 001-02090010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document explains the process for assessing eligibility for Skills
for Education and Employment (SEE). SEE aims to assist job seekers aged
15 years or more who have low/lower levels of language, literacy,
numeracy and digital literacy. There are no restrictions on how many
times a job seeker can participate in the program, but they may be
subject to waiting periods before becoming eligible again. Other
customers who want to participate in SEE can be registered as a
volunteer job seeker for the purpose of a SEE referral.

SEE eligibility criteria

To be eligible for a referral to SEE, a customer must be:

-   of working age (between 15 years and Age Pension age), and
-   registered, or willing to be registered, with Services Australia or
    an Australian Government employment service. This includes customers
    who are not receiving an income support payment (volunteer job
    seekers), and
-   deemed suitable for training, without any barriers that would
    prevent successful participation, and
-   either an Australian citizen, or permanent resident, or have working
    rights in Australia

Note: the Services Australia system does not currently support referrals
to SEE for all the above criteria.

Currently Services Australia cannot refer:

customers who are not in receipt of an eligible income support payment.
Eligible income support payments are:

-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Youth Allowance (job seeker)
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Parenting Payment (single or partnered)
-   Special Benefit, or

customers who are aged 65 years and over, regardless of whether they are
in receipt of an eligible income support payment, or

customers aged 15-Age Pension age and not in receipt of any income
support payment

Job seekers are not eligible to be referred to SEE when they:

-   are participating in the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS), or
-   are participating in the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), or
-   have recently completed or been exited from SEE within 12 weeks of
    the new referral date. or
-   do not hold an eligible visa

Once eligibility has been established and the job seeker has commenced
in SEE, a change in eligibility does not prevent the job seeker from
continuing and completing training that has been commenced.

Adult Migrant English Program and SEE

Job seekers cannot participate in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
and SEE at the same time.

When assessing a job seeker's English language and literacy skills as
part of the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI), Service
Officers must ensure that the job seeker has tested their eligibility
for AMEP before considering a referral to other literacy or numeracy
programs, including SEE. Service Officers must record this advice in a
DOC.

AMEP focusses on delivering English language training to eligible
migrants and humanitarian refugees to assist with their settlement in
Australia.

SEE training is available to any job seeker who has low language,
literacy, numeracy or digital literacy and can be delivered as part of a
Vocational Education and Training (VET) course.

A job seeker who is eligible for both programs can be referred to SEE
while participating in AMEP but it is the job seeker's choice whether
they continue in AMEP or move to SEE. If they choose to move into SEE,
the job seeker is exited from AMEP automatically. It is preferable that
a job seeker attains their English language goals in AMEP, before they
move to SEE, to ensure they are not at a language disadvantage in SEE.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Home Affairs
website page about visas, a link to the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment website page about SEE and additional information about
who is eligible for SEE depending on circumstances and/or current
activities.

Related links

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

RapidConnect

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Employment services for visa holders

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
