
Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work 001-04030050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in determining if a
customer is eligible for independent status for Youth Allowance (YA) on
the basis of having a partial capacity to work.

Assessment of independence

YA (job seeker) may be considered independent when they are assessed as
having a partial capacity to work as determined by an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt). The customer will be eligible for
independent status only for the period they are assessed as having a
partial capacity to work.

Note: this assessment of independence does not apply to YA
(students/Australian Apprentices) or Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers. They may test their qualification for independence under one
of the other categories for independence.

Reviews of independence

Once a customer is assessed as independent under this criterion, they
are monitored through reviews to assess their continuing eligibility for
independent status. A review can be initiated manually or automatically
(for example, an automatic review will be created if there is a change
to their work capacity as identified by an ESAt).

YA customers who are independent are not subject to assessment under the
Parental Means Tests. However, if they are still living at home they
will be paid as having Accommodated Independent status.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Reviews of independence for Youth Allowance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
