-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process YA (job seeker) claims in Process
Direct. This includes online claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Claiming YA (jobseeker)

Claims for YA (job seeker) JSP can be lodged by:

-   [A self service option is available for customers: Placed under
    section headings or general content where self service options are
    available.]completing an online claim
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Intent to claim for Vulnerable Customers

Customers are considered to be vulnerable if they experienced a
vulnerable circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and
this was the reason they were unable to submit their claim on the
contact date. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Early claims

Customers can start an early claim for YA (job seeker) up to 13 weeks
before the first day of eligibility. For the day they become qualified,
the customer must provide their:

-   bank account balances
-   employment separation details, and
-   any other income

If an early claim lodgement is accepted, the start date is the first day
the customer becomes qualified for the payment. See Early claims.

YA (job seeker) claim following a DSP Medical Risk Based Review

Disability Service Officers initiate a YA (job seeker) claim when
completing the Service Offer Interview.

Do not unassign these activities.

Reassessment of YA (job seeker) claims

A customer can apply for a formal review of the decision to reject their
claim at any time.

If they apply more than 13 weeks after the rejection notice was given,
the payment or concession may be affected by the date of effect rules.
See Customer initiated review of decisions. A new claim will be required
for reviews lodged more than 13 weeks after the rejection letter was
sent.

No additional evidence or information is required before an application
for a formal review can be made.

If a customer applies for a formal review, record the application.

Make sure all outstanding documents have been supplied before
re-indexing the original claim.

See Request to reassess a rejected claim when YA (job seeker) claim is
rejected for:

-   not supplying documents (FSD)
-   not lodging or reporting on time (DNL, FRP)
-   Proof of Identity (POI)

If the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the rejection letter
was sent, they will need to make a new claim for YA (job seeker).

Processing claims in Process Direct

Use Process Direct to review the YA (job seeker) claim information and
to process the claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the YA (job seeker) claim has
been submitted online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer or their
    correspondence nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a YA claim activity
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request and make referrals

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) claims

UTLAH assessments may be:

-   conducted by a Services Australia social worker
-   completed by the Over 18 UTLAH (O18) team, or
-   automatically re-applied by the system

If an UTLAH assessment is in progress, do not reject the claim FSD
(failed to supply documents). If it is not already held, place the claim
on hold pending the outcome of the UTLAH assessment.

Pre-population of claim responses in the Job Seeker Snapshot

Responses to some questions in the Youth Allowance (job seeker) claim
will be used to pre-populate similar questions in the Job Seeker
Snapshot. The job seeker will have the opportunity to review the
responses, either online or staff assisted and make changes where
required.

RapidConnect

During the Participation interview Job seekers who are subject to
RapidConnect requirements are advised of their requirements or exemption
to RapidConnect.

Job seekers referred to Workforce Australia Online for individuals are
required to agree to a job plan.

Job seekers referred to a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider or other specialist provider will have an initial appointment
booked during the Participation Interview. Attending this first provider
appointment is known as the job seeker's RapidConnect requirement.

In most cases, meeting RapidConnect requirements will determine the
start date of the job seeker's income support payment. This is subject
to job seekers meeting any waiting periods and qualification
requirements.

YA (job seeker) new claims and re-indexed claims must have the
Participation Interview completed and a RapidConnect determination. For
more information, see RapidConnect.

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements apply to all job seekers receiving
participation payments including Youth Allowance (job seeker), unless
exempt.

Mutual obligation requirements are designed to ensure that unemployed
people receiving activity tested income support payments are actively
looking for work and are participating in activities that will help them
into employment.

Job seekers will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they:

enter into a Job Plan, if required, with Services Australia or an
Employment Services Provider without unreasonable delay

fully comply with the terms of the Job Plan, and either:

-   actively seek and are willing to undertake suitable paid work
-   undertake suitable paid work, or
-   participate in some other approved training, program or course which
    is likely to improve their employment prospects

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

A job seeker who is unable to meet their mutual obligation requirements,
in certain circumstances may be eligible for an exemption. For more
information, see Mutual obligation requirements exemptions.

Negotiating a Job Plan during claims processing

Some jobseekers may meet the requirements to have their job plan managed
by Centrelink.

For jobseekers that meet this criteria, staff should negotiate the Job
Plan as part of the new claim finalisation process.

For eligibility criteria and coding, see Negotiating Centrelink Managed
Job Plans.

The Resources page contains a link to Process Direct resources, a link
to mySupport, common screens for YA claims and Q888 text for inviting
principal carers to check for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Principal carer of a dependent child

Process Direct

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker)

Transfer to Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) from another payment

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Waiting periods for income support payments

Withdrawal of claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment new claim processing
interactions

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
