
Assessing independence when a customer is self-supporting through full-time paid employment 001-04060040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in determining if a
customer is eligible for independent status for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY or Disability Support Pension (DSP) on the basis of being
self-supporting through paid employment.

Students undertaking full time study

For assessing independence through part time work or earnings for YA or
ABSTUDY students from regional and remote areas, see Assessing
independence for full time or concessional study load students from
regional and remote areas under the self-supporting through employment
criterion.

For assessing independence through approved agricultural work for YA or
ABSTUDY students undertaking full time study, or an approved
concessional study load in an approved course, see Assessing
independence when a student has undertaken approved agricultural work.

Self-supporting criteria

YA and ABSTUDY customers who are independent are not subject to
assessment under the Parental Means Test. Independent DSP customers
receive a higher rate of payment than dependent DSP customers.

A YA, ABSTUDY or DSP customer is considered independent if they have
supported themselves through full-time paid employment for at least 18
months within any 2 year period. This 2 year period does not have to be
since leaving secondary school. Full-time employment is defined as
having worked for at least 30 hours per week throughout the 18 months.
Where the work has not consistently been at least 30 hours per week the
hours of work can be averaged over periods of a maximum of 13 weeks.

A DSP customer is also considered independent if they have supported
themselves through part time paid employment of at least 15 hours per
week for at least 2 years since last leaving secondary school. They are
also considered independent if they have supported themselves through
paid work with cumulative earnings of at least 75% of the Wage Level A
of the National Training Wage schedule included in a modern award in an
18 month period since last leaving secondary school.

Paid employment includes periods:

-   of overseas employment
-   of paid leave
-   of unpaid leave due to employer shut down that are outside the
    control of the young person (for example, mandatory Christmas
    shutdown)
-   undertaking a full-time apprenticeship or traineeship
-   receiving workers compensation and the customer can demonstrate they
    are still connected to their employment
-   receiving Community Development Program (CDP) wages

Defining earned income

Income includes:

-   income earned through self-employment
-   income earned while overseas
-   fringe benefits
-   Defence Force Reserves
-   insurance payments paid specifically to cover lost earnings
-   paid leave
-   studentships
-   board and lodging paid in lieu of income from employment

Note: Where the customer has received overseas income, the foreign
income must be converted to Australian Dollars (AUD). The exchange rate
for each of the months worked must be applied when converting to AUD.

Income from JobKeeper payment or Training Allowances such as the Skills
for Education and Employment program should not be included as earned
income.

COVID-19 concession period for YA and ABSTUDY customers

A COVID-19 concession period may apply for YA and ABSTUDY customers:

-   applying for the self-supporting independence criteria, and
-   impacted by COVID-19 between 25 March to 24 September 2020

Note: these changes will apply to YA or ABSTUDY claims made between 1
January 2021 and 24 September 2022, or claims lodged prior to 1 January
2021, but have not yet been determined before 1 January 2021.

Evidence requirements for YA or ABSTUDY customers

Where a YA or ABSTUDY customer has indicated in their online claim they
are independent under the self-supporting criterion, they will be asked
to enter their employment details. This includes their employer/s, hours
worked and income earned. Based on that information, the system will
determine if the customer has worked enough hours to be considered
independent. These customers may not need to provide evidence such as
payslips or payroll reports to verify their employment history.
Customers do not require evidence to have the COVID-19 concession period
applied to their claim. Periods outside the COVID-19 concession period
still require sufficient evidence to confirm the customer meets
independence and retain the same evidence requirements. When a customer
claims for YA online as a full-time student, the online claim responses
will automatically determine which students are required to provide
evidence.

Where the customer is presented with a task at Next Steps in their
online claim, they must provide one or more of the following:

-   Payslips
-   Payroll report
-   Payment summaries
-   Letter from an employer (preferably on company letterhead)

Permanent independence criteria

Once a customer has been assessed as independent based on self-support
through paid work, they retain it. If the YA or ABSTUDY customer has
been granted independence under this criteria and returns to the
parental home, they will still be considered independent, but will
receive the at home rate as an accommodated independent person. There is
no requirement for the continuity of payment in order to retain their
independence.

Ways the customer can claim Independence

YA and ABSTUDY

Depending on how the YA or ABSTUDY customer has provided information,
check the:

-   Independence questions on the online claim
-   Independence questions on the paper claim for Youth Allowance
    (SY001) or ABSTUDY (SY019)
-   Independence questions in an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool for secondary school, or
-   'DL' screen and documents scanned to the customer's record

DSP

-   On the Claim for Disability Support Pension (SA466), Claim for
    Disability Support Pension for a Terminal Illness (SA494) or
    Disability Support Claim at Age 16 (SA439) check the customer's
    response to the independence questions to confirm if they are
    independent through full-time work
-   The preferred method to assess independence is to use the DSP New
    Claim and Service Update Assessment script

Safety net for disadvantaged customers

There is also a safety net provision for young people claiming or
receiving YA who have an education or employment disadvantage. To
qualify as independent under this criteria, the person must meet all the
following:

-   be at least 18 years old
-   have had full-time employment of at least 30 hours per week for a
    period of at least 12 months, or for periods that total at least 12
    months
-   not be living at the home of either or both of their parents
-   be specially disadvantaged with respect to education or employment
    Note: see below for specially disadvantaged
-   not be receiving financial support, whether directly or indirectly,
    from their parent(s) or from another person who is acting as their
    guardian on a long-term basis

Specially disadvantaged refers to:

education:

-   for a student - a person who has not completed Year 12 or the
    equivalent
-   for a job seeker - a person who has not completed Year 12 (or
    equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher

employment:

-   a person whose personal circumstances and labour market skills make
    it difficult for them to find a job, for example, a person who is
    classified as 'at high risk' on the Job Seeker Classification
    Instrument (JSCI) is considered to be specially disadvantaged with
    respect to employment

This criterion is reviewable if the customer's circumstances change.

Note: the special safety net criterion does not apply to ABSTUDY.

An ABSTUDY customer may also be considered independent if they have
participated in the workforce for 3 out of the last 4 years.

Checking work history

[] All customers are able to access the check independence through work
history service via the Services Australia website. The online tool asks
the customer a series of questions, including work details and creates a
Results page advising them of the potential outcome.

Authenticated customers can access the evidence calculator within the
'Check independence through work history' option via their online
account.

The Resources page contains the Independence Assessment Tool attachment,
a link to the Services Australia website, employment scenarios and links
to relevant claim forms.

Related links

The Parental Means Test

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

ABSTUDY customer is independent through workforce participation

Assessing independence for full time or concessional study load students
from regional and remote areas under the self-supporting through
employment criterion

Assessing independence when a student has undertaken approved
agricultural work

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent
child

Assessing independence when a customer is an orphan

Assessing independence when a customer is a refugee

Assessing independence when a customer is in State Care

Assessing independence when a customer's parents cannot exercise
responsibilities

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Reviews of independence for Youth Allowance

Check independence through work history online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
