
Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) 001-02330010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines and explains Services Australia ESAt request
procedures.

When an ESAt referral may be required

Job seekers may be referred to an ESAt by either Services Australia or
Workforce Australia providers, Community Development Program (CDP) and
Disability Employment Services (DES).

Service Officers will generally need to consider requesting an ESAt
where:

-   the Job Seeker Snapshot flags that an ESAt may be required
-   a job seeker has medical evidence and requires an assessment of
    their work capacity
-   an assessment for Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is required
-   exceptional circumstances exist
-   a job seeker or Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer wishes to
    volunteer for employment services
-   DSP customers under 35 years of age who after a Disability Medical
    Assessment (DMA), need an ESAt to confirm their work capacity
-   a customer has had their DSP claim rejected and the Medical
    Assessment Team (MAT) recommend a review of work capacity and/or
    employment services referrals
-   a customer is temporarily not able to work or study and does not
    have a job or study to return to

If possible, a request for an ESAt should be made at the point when the
requirement for further assessment is identified.

Note: a request for a medical ESAt referral should not be made until all
available medical evidence has been scanned and attached to the record.

Job Seeker Snapshot flags that an ESAt may be required

A trigger for an ESAt does not necessarily mean that an ESAt needs to be
requested.

See Actioning a pending Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) activity for more information.

Job seeker has medical evidence with permanent condition(s) and requires assessment of work capacity

If a job seeker lodges medical evidence indicating 1 or more permanent
conditions exist, an ESAt may be needed to assess work capacity. In
these cases, Service Officers should check whether a current and valid
ESAt exists before making a request for an ESAt.

If an ESAt already exists, another ESAt should only be requested if
there is a new permanent condition (not previously assessed) or the
condition has deteriorated and this is likely to result in a change in
work capacity or a change in the level of employment support required.

Note: job seekers do not require an ESAt to assess whether a temporary
incapacity exemption can be granted or extended. This includes where
there is a temporary exacerbation of a previously assessed permanent
condition.

A request for a medical ESAt referral cannot be made until the customer
has provided all available medical evidence and this has been scanned
and attached to the record.

The Verification of Medical Conditions (SU684) form can be used as
evidence of medical condition(s) for an ESAt.

An assessment for Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is required

Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker, full-time students and Australian
Apprentices) customers and ABSTUDY (full-time students and Australian
Apprentices receiving Living Allowance), under 22 years old and with an
assessed partial capacity to work (PCW), will generally be entitled to
receive YDS.

Customers who wish to test their eligibility for YDS will require an
ESAt.

These customers must first be registered Job Seeker Registration Only
(JSRO).

Note: Special Benefit (SpB) customers are not eligible for YDS.

Exceptional circumstances exist

In very specific circumstances, Services Officers may request an ESAt
for job seekers in Workforce Australia without first updating the Job
Seeker Snapshot. This request reason is used for non-disclosed barriers
relating to a sudden and significant change in behaviour, such as:

-   erratic or psychotic behaviour, or
-   aggressive behaviour, irrespective of an incident report being
    lodged

DSP customer wishes to volunteer for employment services

A Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer can access employment
assistance. Depending on their circumstances, they may be able to access
employment services, including Workforce Australia, Disability
Employment Services (DES) and Community Development Program (CDP).

See Referring a DSP customer volunteering for employment assistance for
an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) for more information.

Medical Assessment Team (MAT) recommendation

Customers who have had their DSP claim rejected could have the MAT
recommend a review of work capacity and/or employment services
referrals.

DSP Participation customers aged under 35

Customers who are under 35 and have no work capacity recorded but have a
recent Disability Support Pension (DSP) Volunteer Assessment (less than
2 years old) with a baseline and with intervention work capacity of 8+
hours per week do not need an ESAt. A request for the Level 2 Policy
Help Desk to record a manual Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) to update the
Work Capacity Details (WC) screen can be made using the Level 2 Policy
Help Desks - Online Query Form. The Resources page contains a link to
the Online Query Form.

Customers who are under 35 and have no work capacity recorded and no
current assessment may have a long history of sustained work or study,
which clearly demonstrates that their work capacity would be 8+ hours
per week. These customers will be referred for a DSP Under 35 ESAt as a
file assessment with details of the continuous work or study recorded in
the Supporting documentation field.

A referral for back-scanning must be requested when there is no relevant
medical information in the electronic Medical Information File Envelope
(eMIFE) for a customer who is under 35. If there is no current and
relevant medical evidence available after the back-scanning request this
is to be noted in the Supporting documentation field and the referral
actioned.

Temporarily unable to work or study

An ESAt may be needed to assess the customer's work capacity if the
customer does not have a job or study to return to.

An ESAt will:

-   determine if the customer has a temporary reduced work capacity or a
    partial capacity to work
-   assist to determine whether an exemption for mutual obligation
    requirements, or modified mutual obligation requirements should
    apply

A Verification of medical condition(s) (SU684) form will usually be
sufficient medical evidence to request an ESAt.

Check if there is already a current and valid assessment of the
customer's work capacity on the customer's record before making a
request.

Exceptions

ESAt requests originating from Northern Australia and the Legal Services
Team will continue to be made by those teams. These teams are to follow
the process for requesting an ESAt.

Medical evidence

Medical evidence, for the purposes of determining partial capacity to
work (PCW), is required to contain diagnosis by a medical practitioner
of a condition that gives rise to the impairment as well as information
about the functional impact of the impairment diagnosis, prognosis, and
treatment of a medical condition. The 1 exception is for diagnosis of an
intellectual disability where evidence from a psychologist only is
required.

Current medical evidence is generally medical information provided by a
medical practitioner within the past 2 years.

Relevant medical evidence is a document that contains details about the
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of a medical condition.

Note: discretion should be used as medical evidence older than 2 years
may still be current and relevant depending on the diagnosis - for
example, for intellectual disability.

Type of appointment

Telephone assessment is the primary mode of assessment for all ESAts.

In exceptional circumstances, where a Service Officer believes it is in
the customer's best interest to attend a face-to-face ESAt, contact the
local Assessment Services team to discuss.

If a medical condition (i.e. hearing) requires a face-to-face ESAt
please ensure this is coded in the Medical Conditions screen.

An ESAt can be conducted as a walk-in, with agreement from the Assessor,
if the Service Officer believes there may be difficulties completing the
referral as a booked appointment, such as for vulnerable customers with
a history of non-attendance at appointments.

Where a customer is unable to attend a telephone assessment, an ESAt may
be completed as a File Assessment as per the below ESAt as a file
assessment guidelines.

ESAt as a file assessment

Telephone assessment is the primary mode of assessment.

A file assessment should only be conducted when it results in no
surprises for the customer and no reputational risk to the Agency. File
assessments should be considered on a case by case basis by Assessment
Services.

A file assessment should not occur if there is insufficient information
available to the assessor to make a reasonable determination of the
customer's work capacity, barriers and referral options.

The Resources page contains contact details, useful intranet links and
scenarios for ESAt.

Related links

Actioning a pending Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) activity

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Inconsistencies in an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report

Reviews and appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or
cancellation decisions

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
