
Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency 001-10040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines special considerations when managing job seeker
compliance for job seekers affected by a natural disaster, declared
emergency or assisting with a recovery effort through a registered
organisation. Note: arrangements for specific events may differ.

Job seeker affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

Service Officers assisting job seekers with outstanding compliance
action are expected to display an appropriate level of sensitivity and
discretion when a job seeker has been significantly affected by a
natural disaster or declared emergency and/or are assisting with a
recovery effort through a registered organisation.

A similar level of sensitivity is required when a region has been
affected but a formal declaration has not yet been made.

Capacity to comply with compulsory requirements affected

Job seekers, including ParentsNext participants, are required to meet
compulsory requirements in return for receiving a participation payment.

The effect of the natural disaster or declared emergency on the job
seeker's capacity to meet their compulsory requirements, including the
requirement for prior contact of an inability to attend, must be
considered. An exemption from mutual obligation requirements should be
considered.

Job seeker circumstances that are likely to have an ongoing impact on
the job seeker's capacity to comply must be included on the
Circumstances Impacting Compliance screen. This helps the provider
identify appropriate interventions or services to address recognised
circumstances impacting compliance, and ensures these are given
appropriate consideration when negotiating compulsory requirements or if
non-compliance occurs. For more information, see Circumstances impacting
capacity to comply with compulsory requirement.

Outstanding compliance action

If the job seeker is unable to participate in a compliance
investigation, Capability Assessment, Comprehensive Compliance
Assessment (CCA) or a Compliance Activity, the effect of the
disaster/emergency will need to be considered on a case-by-case basis.

When a Capability Assessment or CCA is outstanding, job seekers must be
referred to the Participation Solutions Team (PST). If the Capability
Assessment or CCA cannot be completed at initial contact due to the
natural disaster or declared emergency, the contact trigger may be
temporarily lifted by a PST-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD).

The impact of local conditions and the impact this had on the job
seeker's capacity to comply, including capacity to make prior contact,
must be considered as part of a compliance investigation. Priority
should be given to finalising compliance investigations for active
mutual obligation failures. Job seekers are unable to finalise reporting
while these failures are active.

Hardship provisions

When payment is cancelled due to persistent mutual obligation failures,
an unemployment failure or work refusal failure, a post-cancellation
preclusion period prevents job seekers who reclaim from immediately
returning to payment. Waiver and hardship provisions do not apply during
this period. Consider referral to external support services and social
work crisis intervention.

When a job seeker is managed under the Job Seeker Compliance Model:

-   eligibility for payment under Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP)
    hardship provisions must be assessed, either when making a decision
    to apply a UNPP, or as soon as an affected job seeker contacts
-   a serious failure period can be waived if the job seeker agrees to
    participate in a Compliance Activity. Serious failure hardship
    provisions are available when a job seeker does not have the
    capacity to participate in any Compliance Activity and meets the
    serious failure hardship provisions, and
-   has capacity to participate in a Compliance Activity but is unable
    to due to the impacts of the disaster/emergency (for example,
    provider closed), consideration should be given to booking a
    Compliance Activity appointment at the first suitable time

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website help
in an emergency page, emergency management events page and contact
details for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Model

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions during disasters

Social work service referral

Referral to external support services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
