
Customer with an illness, injury or disability volunteers for employment services 001-02230010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a job seeker with an illness,
injury or disability contacts Services Australia seeking employment
services.

Customer volunteers for employment assistance

The decision to work, or participate in employment services, is
voluntary for job seekers receiving payments that do not have mutual
obligation requirements or compulsory Participation Requirements for DSP
recipients.

Services Australia will encourage people with a disability to register
with employment services when they have the capacity to do so in order
to help customers achieve greater self-reliance and to maximise their
capacity to participate.

To be eligible for employment services a job seeker must have a current
and valid assessment with an employment services referral
recommendation.

Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot is run for customers who wish to engage in
employment services. Where an additional assessment is required because
of responses to some weighted Job Seeker Snapshot questions then a Job
Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is
triggered. The customer is referred for an ESAt where there is no
current and valid assessment of the customer's work capacity.

Current and valid assessment exists

Customers who have a current and valid assessment will generally be
referred by the Assessor to the most appropriate Employment Services
Provider based on the recommendations of the existing report. Services
Australia in limited circumstances may action the referral to the
appropriate Employment Service Provider if the assessor has not actioned
the referral at the time of the assessment. The referral could be to a
Disability Employment Services (DES) or Workforce Australia. Customers
located in a Department of Employment and Workplace Relations remote
area are referred to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider.

Referral to ESAt

Where the customer is referred for an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt), the Assessor will complete a holistic assessment of the
customer's capacity to work and identify appropriate interventions and
referrals. Generally, the Assessor will directly refer the customer to
the most appropriate service as part of the assessment. The customer may
be referred to an Employment Services Provider for specific services
based on their Job Seeker Snapshot and referral recommendation. See
Request an Employment Service Assessment (ESAt).

Referral to DES

A job seeker with an illness, injury or disability usually has to be
receiving an income support payment to be eligible for Disability
Employment Services (DES). For exceptions and further information, see
Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES).

Customers in receipt of Disability Support Pension

For customers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP) who do not have
participation requirements, an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
must be conducted using a DSP Volunteer referral code to assess the most
appropriate services. This process does not affect DSP income support
payments and does not lead to a review of the person's pension
entitlement. Customers receiving DSP who do have participation
requirements must be referred for an ESAt using a DSP Participation
(DSPU) referral code.

Related links

Booking an Interpreter for an appointment

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Employment assistance for people with disabilities

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Community Development Program (CDP)

Assessment Services

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Work Assist

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
