-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about customers participating in the
Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP). Generally, customers are required
to attend the nominated AMEP provider for assessment, referral and
commencement of tuition. The Services Australia system will be
automatically updated via external system transactions when this occurs.

Identifying eligibility for AMEP

Service Officers can identify job seekers who are eligible for AMEP
during the Participation Interview process. Job seekers are identified
as having low or nil English language proficiency through their
responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot questions.

Following the Job Seeker Snapshot, Service Officers should ensure that
the job seeker has tested their eligibility for AMEP before being
considered for referral to other literacy or numeracy programs including
Skills for Education and Employment (SEE). Service Officers should
record this advice to job seekers in a DOC.

Youth Allowance job seekers, under 22 years of age identified as
potentially eligible for AMEP following the Participation Interview,
will be exempt from RapidConnect.

Other eligibility for AMEP

Customers that are not job seekers may participate in AMEP. These
customers, including Parenting Payment (PP) customers, do not require a
job seeker registration or Job Seeker Snapshot to participate in AMEP.

A list of AMEP providers is available via a link on the Resources page.
Service Officers should select one AMEP provider from the list of AMEP
providers in the customer’s local area, provide contact details to the
customer and advise them to contact the provider directly. Providers
will code the AMEP referral and all other details.

Some Services Australia staff can code a referral to AMEP in limited
cases and require special access to do so. See Item 3 in Table 2 on the
Resources page of Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP),
for manual recording.

The Resources page contains a link to AMEP information for job seekers
in other languages.

AMEP referrals, placements and outcomes, are displayed on the customer’s
record via automated data transfers. Service Officers must check the
Referrals Summary screen for the participation status of AMEP.

AMEP information on the customer’s record

Department of Home Affairs AMEP records are automatically linked with
Centrelink customer records using the AMEP Identified (ARM Id). In
limited cases, some Services Australia staff can undertake manual action
to delete the AMEP referral from a customer’s record due to incorrect
linking of the ARM Id.

AMEP referral, participation and the level of achievement in a
Certificate in Spoken and Written English (CSWE) (if available) are also
displayed.

The Resources page contains link to the Department of Home Affairs
website and a list of AMEP providers that are available.

Related links

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

English programs for migrants

Refugee Activities (RAC) as an approved activity

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
