
Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers 001-10040040

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

This document outlines guidelines for managing outstanding compliance
action when a job seeker, including a ParentsNext participant, has been
imprisoned.

Outstanding compliance action

The job seeker compliance system is the policy framework that is used
when a job seeker, including a ParentsNext participant, fails to meet
compulsory requirements.

Two different job seeker compliance systems are used to manage job
seeker compliance:

-   The Targeted Compliance Framework applies to most job seekers,
    including job seekers who receive employment services from a
    jobactive or Disability Employment Services (DES) provider and
    ParentsNext participants
-   The Job Seeker Compliance Model applies to Community Development
    Program (CDP) participants

A person who is imprisoned is no longer eligible for payment and
therefore also not required to comply with compulsory requirements from
the date of imprisonment. Generally, outstanding compliance is
automatically finalised when imprisonment is recorded, however, this may
occasionally require manual intervention.

Outstanding compliance action includes:

-   Participation suspensions that are applied when a job seeker doesn't
    meet their compulsory requirements
-   Capability Assessments (Targeted Compliance Framework only)
-   Outstanding compliance investigations
-   Comprehensive Compliance Assessments (CCAs) (Job Seeker Compliance
    Model only)

Preventing non-compliance events being reported for imprisoned job seekers

When a non-compliance event occurs, providers report this to Services
Australia electronically. In some cases, Services Australia may also
generate compliance investigations.

Both the Employment Services System (ESS) and the Services Australia
system run an automatic validation process to help prevent compliance
action being generated when it is not 'legislatively valid'.

The Services Australia automatic validation process will not accept a
non-compliance event being reported if payment has already been
suspended or cancelled due to imprisonment on either the compliance
event date or the date the report is received.

This means when there is outstanding compliance action at the time a
prison admission is processed, it is due to a non-compliance event that:

-   occurred prior to imprisonment, or
-   was reported before payment has been suspended or cancelled due to
    imprisonment

Participation suspension outstanding when job seeker imprisoned

Both job seeker compliance systems use participation suspensions to
re-engage job seekers with their provider and their compulsory
requirements. Participation suspensions are automatically applied when
an electronic transaction is received from the job seeker's provider.

In most cases, an outstanding participation suspension does not prevent
a prison admission being recorded, and payment being suspended or
cancelled due to imprisonment. Once the imprisonment suspension or
cancellation is complete, the participation suspension is automatically
finalised by background processing.

Occasionally, an error advising a participation suspension is preventing
the imprisonment suspension from being finalised occurs. When this
occurs, manual intervention is required.

-   Prison Liaison Officers can finalise a 'DNA participation
    appointment or activity' (APA) for an imprisoned job seeker
-   Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers who have
    a WNPPD security resource finalise all other participation
    suspensions

Capability Assessments, compliance investigations and CCAs outstanding when job seeker imprisoned

When a job seeker has been imprisoned, outstanding Capability
Assessments, compliance investigations and Comprehensive Compliance
Assessments (CCAs) are not held pending return to payment.

Capability Assessments, CCAs and compliance investigations that have not
been started are automatically finalised by the system, after the Prison
Liaison Officer suspends or cancels payment due to imprisonment and
clears the record.

When a started compliance investigation is not automatically finalised
by background processing, manual intervention by a Participation
Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer with a WNPPD security
resource is required.

Returning to payment after imprisonment

When a job seeker returns to payment after imprisonment, review the job
seeker's circumstances that will have an ongoing or adhoc impact on
their capacity to comply via the Circumstances Impacting Compliance
screen. Where the job seeker has been imprisoned for:

less than 14 days, a Job seeker in transition category is appropriate

14 days or more, and evidence such as prison release papers have been
provided:

-   record a Recent Prison Release category, and
-   review circumstances affecting capacity to comply with compulsory
    requirement

Key messages must be communicated about what is expected of the job
seeker and the consequences for failing to comply with compulsory
requirements.

Depending on the job seeker compliance system that applies, the job
seeker's payments may also be affected.

Related links

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Circumstances affecting capacity to comply with compulsory requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Model

Rejecting a compliance action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
