
Jobactive/Community Development Programme (CDP) registration inactivated and cancellation of income support in error 001-02070040

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines what occurs when a jobactive/Community
Development Programme (CDP) registration is inactivated and income
support is cancelled in error. This can be due to the provider notifying
Services Australia that a job seeker has been placed in full-time
ongoing work, but the job seeker states that the work is only
casual/part-time, or they have not commenced work.

Employment verification

If the job seeker contacts, either by telephone to a Smart Centre or in
person at a Service Centre, the case can be actioned immediately by the
Service Officer (SO) liaising directly with the provider or the
employer. The SO must verify if the job seeker has commenced employment
and whether this is full-time.

Definition of full-time work

Full-time work is defined in Social Security Law as paid work of at
least 35 hours per week, or a lesser period, if the hours worked per
week constitute the normal number of hours per week for that industry.

Note: in determining whether the 'Employment Income Nil Rate Period' can
be applied, the definition of 'full-time ongoing work' is where the work
is likely to last for longer than 12 weeks.

Payment restoration

If it is verified that the job seeker has not been employed in full-time
ongoing work, payment should be restored, if it was suspended or
cancelled within the last 13 weeks. Any arrears owing should be
calculated and paid.

If a job seeker has been suspended YBS as a result of a provider error,
payment can be restored. The date of restoration depends on whether they
contact within 13 weeks of being notified of the decision.

If the job seeker has been cancelled YBS or YBE after 26 weeks
suspension, payment cannot be restored. These customers will have to
reclaim an income support payment. If they disagree with the decision,
they can ask for a review.

The Resources page contains a link to a matrix, which outlines common
scenarios and provides a guide for coding or correcting records.

Related links

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (job seeker), Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
and Special Benefit (SpB)

Employment income nil rate period

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) cancellations, suspensions and restorations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
