
Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment 001-19051505

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a customer is transferred from
another payment to JSP. They may become qualified for JSP, or JSP may be
identified as more appropriate payment for them.

On this Page:

Requirement for claim

A claim must be lodged for JSP, except where a customer loses
eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) due to age and is
transferring to JSP.

Transfer process

The customer will need to: [] contact Services Australia and complete an
online claim. Note: a correspondence nominee (NOC/NOB) can submit a JSP
online claim on behalf of their principal

If the customer cannot lodge an online claim the Service Officer will
need to:

-   run the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow
-   obtain identity confirmation documents as required

Customers with no major changes who are transferring from another
payment will have fewer questions in their online claim.

Customers with working credits or a Student Income Bank (SIB) in the
last 12 months may be eligible to transfer or restore their balance.

Payments eligible for a streamlined claim

Customers currently in receipt of the following payments may be eligible
to use the JSP Streamlined claim.

-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (student only)
-   Parenting Payment Single (before their youngest child turns 8)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (before their youngest child turns 6)

Bereavement period

Customers receiving a bereavement payment for a deceased child or care
receiver will not have payments cancelled until the 14 week bereavement
period has ceased.

Previous employment and earnings

If a customer left work or was terminated from a job in the last 12
months, check whether:

-   they declared earnings and/or ceasing work
-   an income maintenance period (IMP) should apply, for example where
    their previous income support payment was not IMP affected

If they did not advise earnings or ceasing work, an Employment
Separation Certificate (SU1) must be requested to assess the reason for
leaving work and if an IMP should apply.

If they became unemployed due to a voluntary act or misconduct, a
compliance investigation may be required before granting payment.

Transfer date

If a claim for JSP is lodged:

-   within 14 days of their benefit or pension ceasing, the transfer
    date will also be the start date for JSP
-   more than 14 days after the cessation date, the start date is the
    date they lodged the claim

This period may be extended if the customer, a person they care for, or
their partner is suffering from an illness or incapacity that prevents
them from lodging a claim within 14 days of their transfer date. The JSP
start date may be the transfer date if the claim is received within 13
weeks of the transfer date or as soon as the illness or incapacity
ceases.

Automatic transfer from YA (job seeker) to JSP due to age

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers who turn 22 years of age will
automatically transfer to JSP from the date they turn 22 if their YA
payments are current.

If a YA job seeker with a partial capacity to work was studying
full-time when they turned 22, they would be able to continue their
study full-time on JSP for the remaining period of that course.

Transfer from DSP to JSP

Customers may transfer to JSP if their Disability Support Pension (DSP)
is suspended due to the starting work.

They may no longer have a continuing inability to work, or a partial
capacity to work. These customers may be deemed to be unemployed and
thus an eligible job seeker if:

-   the work is suitable work (taking into account their capacity to
    work), as determined by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   they work less than 70 hours per fortnight, and
-   they earn less than the allowance income test

Transfer via a streamlined claim

A streamlined claim is offered to some customers when they are losing
qualification for their previous payment.

Eligible customers will be offered a 'task' on the home page of their
online account, allowing them to advise that they wish to claim JSP. The
task is variable according to the payment type. It is available from up
to 28 days before qualification for their current payment ends, up until
the date they lose qualification.

All streamlined claims can be processed while the customer is still in
receipt of their current payment and before the customer’s booked
Student to Jobseeker or Participation Appointment. The customer’s
benefit status will display as JSP/PND RapidConnect.

Customers on the following payments may be eligible to access this
service:

-   Austudy (Student) - 'Confirm course end date' task
-   Youth Allowance (Student) - 'Confirm course end date' task
-   Parenting Payment - 'Your payment is ending' task

Eligibility criteria to access this service include:

-   current or Current Zero Rate (CZR) on 1 of the above payments
-   meets JSP age eligibility requirements on the date they will lose
    qualification for the current payment
-   does not have a JSP claim commenced/submitted, and
-   can access their Centrelink online account

Customers transferring from a student payment must:

-   be within 28 days before their recorded Student End Date (SED)
-   not have an outstanding study details Manual Follow Up (MFU)
    activity on their record

Customers transferring from Parenting Payment must:

be within 28 days before their youngest Parenting Payment (PP) child's
birthdate, where the child is turning:

-   6 years for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP), or
-   8 years for Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

not be in a bereavement period for a child

Appointments

The customer will book a participation appointment, through the
streamlined claim task, as required. The appointment types are:

-   Student to Job seeker Transfer (SJT) for customers transferring from
    a student payment
-   Participation Transfer Appointment - PTT for customers transferring
    from PP

Note: the appointment must be booked using the online task. It cannot be
booked by Service Officers. Appointment times will only be available to
be booked after their current payment ends. The Participation Interview
workflow cannot be conducted while the customer is receiving Parenting
Payment.

Parenting Payment ‘Your payment is ending’ task requires:

PPP customers claiming JSP to:

-   book a Participation Interview phone appointment from their child’s
    birth date + 1, and
-   submit the simplified JSP claim

PPS customers claiming JSP to:

-   book a Participation Interview phone appointment from their child’s
    birth date + 1, and
-   submit the simplified JSP claim

PP customers who do not meet JSP age eligibility requirements on their
youngest child's birthdate are still presented with the task, however
they will be directed to the Payment and Service Finder to assist them
in identifying the most appropriate payment for their circumstances.

Payment delivery day

When there is a transfer to JSP without a break from another payment,
the same fortnight end-date is maintained but the day they receive
payment may change.

RapidConnect and Payability

Job seeker's subject to RapidConnect have 14 days from the date they are
advised of their RapidConnect requirements at the Participation
Interview to attend the appointment with their Employment Services
Provider. The day of the Participation Interview is counted as Day Zero,
with Day One being the following day.

In most cases, attendance at the first provider appointment is used to
determine the start date of the job seeker's income support payment,
subject to any waiting periods and qualification requirements being met.

There are a number of factors that may impact the RapidConnect
payability start date, refer to Calculating the start day general rule
for further information. The RapidConnect payability start date is
displayed on the NSS Continuity dates (NCD) page.

If after 29 days the job seeker has not attended their initial
appointment the claim will be automatically rejected.

Pension Education Supplement (PES)

Customers getting PES while receiving Parenting Payment Single (PPS) or
Disability Support Pension (DSP) retain qualification to PES for the
duration of their current course.

JSP (single principal carer) qualifies as a PES attracting income
support payment. This means that those PPS or DSP customers who transfer
to JSP (single principal carer) can continue to qualify for PES at any
time. See Initial contact with students claiming PES and ABSTUDY PES.

PES, ABSTUDY PES and AIC PES payments are cancelled temporarily for
customers transferring from a qualifying payment to Jobseeker Payment. A
manual cancellation is needed due to a system limitation and is followed
by a restoration, once the YA or JSP claim has been finalised. See,
Cancellation of, or changes to qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES.

'With child' and 'higher rate' of JSP

Single customers with a dependent child in their care are entitled to
the 'with child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared
care.

Single JSP customers who have been assessed as a principal carer are
entitled to the 'with child' rate of JSP as well as assessment under a
separate JSP single principal carer allowance income test.

Customers may be entitled to the 'higher rate' of JSP for single
principal carers if they have 1 of the following exemptions from mutual
obligation requirements:

-   a registered and active foster carer
-   providing home schooling for their children
-   facilitating distance education for their children
-   caring for a large family (where the customer is the principal carer
    of at least 1 child under 16 years of age and a total of 4 or more
    dependent children and secondary pupil children from 16 to 19 years
    of age)
-   caring for a child when the customer is a relative (other than a
    parent), as directed by a Parenting Order made through the Family
    Court

The Resources page contains transfer scenarios and a link to Office
Locator.

Related links

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Identity Confirmation

RapidConnect

Student to job seeker transfers

Working Credit

Early claims

Briefing Interviews when youngest child is 5 years and 9 months Service
Update for Parenting Payment

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Principal carer of a dependent child

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
