
Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent child 001-04060030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) customer may be considered independent if they have, or
have had, a dependent child. This determines the correct rate of payment
to be paid.

Verification of dependent child

A customer is considered independent if they have, or at some time have
had, a natural, legally adopted or relationship child and the child
is/was wholly or substantially dependent on the customer or the
customer's partner.

Verification of parenthood or adoption is not sufficient in its own
right to grant independence under this criteria. The customer must also
demonstrate that the child has been wholly or substantially dependent on
the customer or the customer's partner.

For the purpose of establishing independence, a natural child includes a
child who was adopted out, or died immediately after birth, or a
stillborn child for whom Newborn Supplement (NBS), Newborn Upfront
Payment (NBU), Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
was paid, in which case a death certificate is sufficient evidence.

Customers will be required to provide evidence of the child's birth or
adoption in the form of a birth certificate, adoption papers or a
previous Family Tax Benefit (FTB) record. Note: a person may have
received FTB payments for a child who was temporarily in their care,
this does not make them automatically independent.

For the purposes of establishing independence for YA, a step parent is
excluded from gaining independence due to having/have had a dependent
child, unless they adopt the child. The Resources page contains
examples.

Automatic assessments of independence

Certain YA customers, under 22 years of age, may have their independence
automatically assessed within their online claim.

Where information already available recorded on the customer's file
indicates the customer is independent due to having, or having had a
dependent child in their care, the appropriate coding will be
pre-populated when processing their claim.

In these situations, the customer is not required to supply further
information and the Parental Income Details (MOD JY) will not be
requested at the Next Steps page.

Parental Means Test

If a YA customer is considered independent, they are not subject to the
Parental Means Tests.

Disadvantaged independent students

Some independent students, who are disadvantaged by personal
circumstances, may also be qualified to receive Relocation Scholarship
(RS). The Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility procedure explains
additional coding requirements for independent students, who are
disadvantaged by personal circumstances to pay Relocation Scholarship
correctly.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains an example and links to forms.

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

ABSTUDY customer has, or has had, a dependent child

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Making an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
