
Not meeting points target or job search requirements 001-10070110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes that apply when a job seeker does
not meet their monthly points target or job search requirement. This
type of non-compliance event cannot be reported by a ParentsNext
provider.

On this page:

Monthly points target and job search requirements

Job seekers who are receiving a participation payment are required to
actively seek and be willing to accept any offers of suitable work.

For job seekers with mutual obligation requirements, the Job Plan will
record what the job seeker must do to satisfy those requirements under
social security law.

Workforce Australia Job Plans include a Points Based Activation System
(PBAS) requirement which will require job seekers to meet a specified
monthly points target and, in most cases, also a minimum job search
requirement. The monthly points target and minimum job search
requirement will be set by the provider and should be based on a
participant's individual circumstances and local labour market.

Community Development Program (CDP) and Disability Employment Services
(DES) Job Plans cannot contain a requirement to meet a monthly points
target. Where appropriate, CDP and DES Job Plans include a requirement
to undertake and report a specified number of job searches each month.
The inclusion of job search requirements in a CDP Job Plan is dependent
on the strength of the local labour market.

Providers are responsible for notifying job seekers of the points target
and/or job search requirement that applies to them, and for setting the
monthly target for that requirement. Job seekers with queries or
concerns about the contents of their job plan, points target or minimum
job search requirement are to be referred back to the Provider for
assistance.

Requirement to meet a monthly points target

The monthly points target only applies to job seekers who have a
Workforce Australia provider, including Workforce Australia Online.

The job seeker's Job Plan will specify that the job seeker must meet
their monthly points target. It will not include the number of points
the job seeker is required to get or the number of job search efforts
required. The points target can be achieved through a variety of
work-related activities, such as:

-   applying for a job
-   going for a job interview
-   accepting a job offer
-   doing paid or voluntary work, or
-   participating in Mandatory Activation Point activities

The Workforce Australia provider can tailor a job seeker's monthly
points target in consultation with the job seeker based on:

-   where they live (local labour market)
-   the job seeker's personal circumstances (such as caring
    responsibilities or assessed capacity)

The monthly points target is displayed on the job seeker's homepage in
their Workforce Australia account.

The job seeker must record on their points reporting page the activities
they do to accrue points. Job seekers who cannot regularly access their
homepage will be notified of their points, negotiate the tasks they
participate in and record the completion of those tasks with their
Provider.

Job seekers can also bank points. This occurs when a job seeker exceeds
their monthly points target in the reporting period, including meeting
their minimum job search requirement in full. The excess points can be
carried over into the next reporting period (up to a maximum of 50% of
the total points target), reducing the number of points required to be
met in the next monthly points period.

For more information about monthly points targets see Applying mutual
obligation requirements.

Compulsory job search requirements

A compulsory job search requirement includes the:

-   number of job searches that must be undertaken each month, and
-   the date each month the job seeker is required to provide evidence
    they have met this requirement

When setting the number of compulsory job searches the job seeker is
required to do per month, the provider considers:

-   social security law
-   guidelines provided by the Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment
-   the job seeker's circumstances and assessed capacity, and
-   the strength of the local labour market (this is particularly
    relevant in CDP regions)

For job seekers with Workforce Australia, including Workforce Australia
Online, their minimum job search requirement is displayed on their
Workforce Australia homepage. They must record their job search efforts
in the Workforce Australia online account. They cannot meet their
monthly points target unless they also meet their minimum job search for
the same period.

For all other job seekers, their provider is responsible for notifying
them how and when they are to report their job search efforts to them.
Job seekers are required to provide evidence they have met their job
search requirement to their provider by the due date. If the date falls
on a weekend or public holiday, job seekers will have until close of
business the following working day.

Acting on a job referral or opportunity

All job seekers are required to act on a job referral or job
opportunity.

Specific job referrals or opportunities the job seeker is required to
act on are notified by their provider. Notification includes the
timeframe in which the job seeker is required to act on the specific job
referral or opportunity.

Workforce Australia job seekers: Points Targets and Points Reporting Period

Job seekers in Workforce Australia (including Workforce Australia
Online) will be required to meet a monthly points target when in receipt
of a participation payment.

By default, a job seeker’s standard points target will be set at 100
points. Only Providers or the Digital Services Contact Centre (DSCC)
will have the capacity to tailor the points target in consultation with
the job seeker.

As part of their points’ target, job seekers will generally need to
complete a minimum job search requirement of five job searches each
month. It will not be possible for job seekers with a minimum job search
requirement to meet their points target if they do not meet their
minimum job search requirements for the same points period.

Only Providers or the DSCC in consultation with the job seeker will have
the capacity to adjust the minimum job search requirement.

The Department of Education, Skills and Employment expect Providers to
consider the each job seeker’s personal circumstances and local labour
market in setting tailored points targets and job search requirements.

A Workforce Australia job seeker's monthly points target and accrued
points are displayed on their homepage in their Workforce Australia
account. Job seekers accrue points towards their monthly points target
by participating in tasks selected and recorded through their Homepage.
Job seekers with digital literacy limitations will be required to
discuss their options for available tasks and report their completed
tasks to their Provider so that these may be recorded. Points for
recorded tasks will be applied automatically, regardless of if they are
recorded by the job seeker online or with assistance from the Provider.

Workforce Australia job seekers: Failing to meet monthly points target

If a job seeker fails to meet their monthly points target a mutual
obligation failure is generated. The job seeker will need to discuss the
failure with their provider.

Failing to meet a job search requirement

Providers are responsible for monitoring compliance with job search
efforts to ensure the job seeker has satisfactorily met their job search
requirement, and for monitoring compliance with job referrals.

Unsatisfactory job search efforts include:

-   failing to provide evidence the required number of job searches has
    been undertaken by close of business on the due date
-   looking for work in too narrow a field
-   falsifying job search efforts
-   failing to act on a referral from a provider to a specific job, or
-   submitting poor quality job applications

When job search efforts are unsatisfactory, the provider uses the
applicable job seeker compliance system to re-engage the job seeker and
manage the non-compliance event.

Job seekers with Workforce Australia, including those in Workforce
Australia Online, who do not meet their minimum job search requirement
will not be able to meet their monthly points target and will incur a
mutual obligation failure for not meeting their points target.

All other job seekers who do not meet their minimum job search
requirement will incur a mutual obligation failure for not meeting their
job search requirement.

Job seekers having difficulty meeting their monthly points target or job search requirement

If a job seeker is having difficulties in meeting their monthly points
target or job search requirement, or following up a specific job
referral or opportunity the provider has notified, they must contact
their provider to discuss this as soon as possible.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a connection failure

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Suitable/unsuitable work

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
