
Negotiating Job Plans for incapacitated persons 001-09100040

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document refers to the negotiation of a Job Plan by a Service
Officer for incapacitated job seekers with mutual obligation
requirements when a medical certificate is lodged.

Determining suitable items to include in the job seeker’s mutual obligation requirements

As part of the Online Participation Workflow a customer's job readiness
and capability to look for and accept work will be determined.

Where a Job Seeker Snapshot triggers an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt), due to Personal Factors, Disability or Special Needs, a referral
for an ESAt is required unless a current and valid assessment of the
customer's work capacity is available. An ESAt referral is also required
to assess a partial capacity to work or in certain circumstances where a
medical certificate is lodged.

The Job Plan sets out the agreed requirements the job seeker is required
to undertake to meet their mutual obligation requirements. The Job Plan
may be negotiated by Services Australia for Centrelink managed job
seekers or Employment Services Providers.

Recording activities referred by the Assessor

Where a referral for an ESAt has been made, the Assessor can make
referrals for the customer but will not complete the Job Plan with the
customer. Appropriate requirements that the customer may be referred to
will be identified in the ESAt report.

These requirements will be negotiated by the Employment Services
Provider if the job seeker is provider managed or by Services Australia
if the job seeker is Centrelink managed.

Negotiating a Job Plan

When negotiating a Job Plan, a Service Officer will need to take into
consideration the work capacity of the job seeker.

This is contained in the ESAt report.

An incapacitated job seeker with a temporary exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements is unable to negotiate a Job Plan with the
agency; however they may enter into a voluntary Job Plan with a provider
if they volunteer for services during the period of their Temporary
Incapacity exemption.

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers who are granted a temporary exemption from the requirements
due to illness or injury can be required to:

-   Attend an interview with a Service Officer
-   Undergo a compulsory ESAt
-   Agree to a Job Plan when the Temporary Incapacity exemption ceases.
    The Service Officer has a significant role in ensuring that the job
    seeker's Job Plan is targeted at increasing participation by timely
    referral of a job seeker to an Employment Services Provider if
    required

Exemption not granted

Job seekers are not granted a Temporary Incapacity exemption from their
mutual obligation requirements if they:

-   have capacity for work of 8 or more hours per week at or above the
    relevant minimum wage in a job they could be reasonably expected to
    do (that is, they are required to satisfy their mutual obligation
    requirements), or
-   are incapacitated for all work, but they have the ability to
    undertake a suitable requirement

These job seekers can be required to:

-   Attend an interview with the Service Officer
-   Agree to a Job Plan with either Services Australia or their provider
-   Participate in any programs or requirements to which they have been
    referred

Note: psychiatric, psychological or medical treatment can only be a
compulsory requirement if the job seeker agrees to it being included in
their Job Plan.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Assessment Services

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
