
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the selection or allocation of a
Workforce Australia provider for a job seeker.

Workforce Australia provider referrals

When a job seeker registration is completed, eligible job seekers will
be selected to participate in Workforce Australia Online for individuals
(unless they are already connected to a Workforce Australia Services
Provider), to access the assistance available through Workforce
Australia. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR)
may determine that a provider is more suitable for the job seeker and
require Services Australia to refer them onto the provider at
commencement. The job seeker will remain with online or provider:

-   for the duration of their unemployment
-   until Workforce Australia Online deem a provider is more suitable
-   until the Workforce Australia provider no longer has a contract, or
-   they reach the maximum time they are allowed with Workforce
    Australia Online or one Workforce Australia provider

Job seekers referred to Workforce Australia Online will remain with the
online service until DEWR deem it appropriate to refer them to a
Workforce Australia provider. Job seekers who are referred to Workforce
Australia Online who have low levels of language, literacy, low digital
literacy or no access to a computer and/or the internet, can request a
transfer to a provider:

-   via their Workforce Australia online account, or
-   by contacting the Digital Services Contact Centre and specifically
    requesting a transfer

This procedure covers the selection or allocation part of the referral
process.

The Workforce Australia referral process is not complete until:

-   the initial appointment is booked with the provider, or
-   they have been selected for online employment services

In cases where a job seeker has not been referred to Workforce Australia
Online:

-   referral to a provider must be done on the day the Participation
    Interview is conducted, and
-   the provider appointment booked within 2 working days, unless the
    customer is exempt from the process

Where there are no appointments within 2 workings days, an appointment
must be made as soon as possible within 14 days.

Job seekers participating in the online employment service:

-   are not required to attend a RapidConnect appointment with a
    provider
-   will meet their RapidConnect obligation by agreeing to their Job
    Plan online

RapidConnect

Eligible job seekers will be identified as RapidConnect job seekers
during the Participation Interview. All customers claiming JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job seekers) will be subject to
RapidConnect conditions, unless they meet one of the exemption reasons.

All Service Officers must run the Participation Interview for any job
seeker who is claiming JSP or YA (job seeker).

Currently, Parenting Payment (PP) customers with mutual obligation
requirements are not subject to RapidConnect payability conditions.
However, they are required to be referred to Workforce Australia and
have the initial appointment booked.

PP customers without mutual obligation requirements are not required to
be referred to Workforce Australia, but they can volunteer to do so.

Refusal to satisfy mutual obligation requirements

A job seeker must be willing to satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements to qualify for payment. A job seeker should have their
claim rejected or payment cancelled if they advise they do not intend to
meet their requirements, including being registered as a job seeker or
referred to an employment services provider.

Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider referrals and other programs

If a customer is potentially suitable for other programs, this will be
identified during the:

-   Participation Interview, or
-   subsequent interview for job seekers who are eligible to be
    registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEPs), or
-   Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) when the Job Seeker Snapshot is
    conducted

If the job seeker is eligible, and assessed as suitable for Disability
Employment Services (DES), referral to Workforce Australia is not
required at this time. All job seekers registering for employment
services are referred to a provider. Incapacitated job seekers, whose
incapacity end date is more than 6 weeks in the future, cannot be
referred to Workforce Australia.

Details of deferred referral can be viewed via the Participation Summary
screen.

Note: where available, TtW referrals have priority over Workforce
Australia Provider Services. Job seekers identified as eligible for
Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) must not be referred to
Workforce Australia Provider Services. If TtW is available and offered
in the Online Diary, job seekers must be referred. However, job seekers
can insist on a referral to Workforce Australia Provider Services.

Voluntary referral to Workforce Australia

A Volunteer registration may be offered when a job seeker meets the
eligibility criteria for registration as a Volunteer.

For details, refer to Eligibility for Employment Services as a
volunteer.

Provider referral at the end of deferred referral or exemption period

If the customer has a deferred referral or is exempt, a letter is sent
asking the job seeker to contact the agency to arrange referral to a
provider at the end of the:

-   deferred referral, or
-   mutual obligation requirements exemption period

If the job seeker does not respond to the letter, the system will:

-   attempt to book an appointment with Services Australia to discuss a
    referral to a provider
-   create a manual follow up activity on the customer's record if the
    system cannot auto book an appointment

Service Officers should contact job seekers with these manual follow-up
activities to make the provider referral.

Allowable break and re-registration with Workforce Australia, including Workforce Australia Online for Individuals

The duration of the allowable break for job seekers is 13 weeks.

If a job seeker is re-registering, the time between the date of
inactivation and the date they contact to re-register can affect the
referral process:

-   If a job seeker re-registers within the allowable break, up to 13
    weeks, the initial registration date will be retained. They will be
    reconnected to the same provider that they were attending prior to
    the inactivation of the registration. Services Australia does not
    have to book an appointment with the provider and the job seeker
    will have continued access
-   For job seekers re-registering more than 13 weeks after the date of
    inactivation, a new registration date is recorded and the job seeker
    must go through the entire registration and referral process

Change of address and Workforce Australia

If a job seeker has moved to a new location and their provider services
in the new area, they will be allocated to the same provider in their
new area.

If the original provider does not service the new area, the job seeker
will be randomly allocated a new provider.

When a job seeker moves to a DEWR designated remote area, they are
referred to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider.

If the job seeker has moved to a new area, but remains linked to their
previous provider, further investigation is required.

For further details, see Job seeker change of address.

Job seekers already connected to Workforce Australia claiming for JSP/YA (job seeker)

A job seeker will not require a Workforce Australia appointment upon
claiming for income support payment and will be automatically exempt
from RapidConnect. This applies when a job seeker is claiming for JSP or
YA and they are:

-   registered as an active job seeker
-   connected to Workforce Australia, and
-   current in or suspended from Employment Provider Services

An existing volunteer job seeker who is now claiming JSP or YA will have
their registration change to Fully Eligible Participant (FEP). These job
seekers are assessed under the RapidConnect provision and will need to
have a RapidConnect appointment booked with their provider.

Errors with Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider selection and appointments

If a selection and appointment is created in error, Services Australia
cannot change it.

If the Service Officer selected the wrong provider, they must advise the
job seeker to contact their provider or the DEWR National Customer
Service Line (NCSL) for job seekers. See the Resources page for a link
to the website and useful contact information containing contact phone
numbers.

'Job Seeker not eligible for program' system message

When registering an existing or new job seeker, the message 'Job seeker
is not eligible for the program' may present. This may happen when
trying to connect the job seeker to a provider after making the
RapidConnect or referral determination.

This message is not a system fault.

It presents when Service Officers:

-   attempt to refer to a Workforce Australia provider before other
    required actions are completed, or
-   create an incorrect referral type

The actions required may include:

Non new claims

-   completion of the correct job seeker registration type. For example,
    Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)
-   the need to complete the Job Seeker Snapshot
-   referral to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   withdrawal of a pending ESAt referral (where appropriate) before
    referring to a Workforce Australia provider
-   referral to a Disability Employment Services (DES) provider as per
    the latest, current and valid ESAt recommendation
-   referral to the correct Employment Service. For example, ‘Workforce
    Australia Transition to Work’ rather than ‘Workforce Australia
    Services’

New claims

-   determination of the RapidConnect requirement
-   manual exemption of the RapidConnect requirement

See Table 3 on the Process page for assistance on resolving the Job
seeker not eligible for program error.

Community Development Program (CDP)

There is only one CDP provider per remote area, job seekers in these
areas will not have a choice of providers.

The Resources page contains links to the contact details and website for
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations and a list of
reasons for choosing a provider with no immediate appointments.

Related links

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their Workforce
Australia provider

Employment Services Providers

Online Diary

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

RapidConnect

Assessing reasonable notice

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Self-Employment Assistance

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Reconnect

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Voluntary Work as an approved activity

Job seeker change of address

Community Development Program (CDP)

Participation with Workforce Australia

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)

Job Seeker Snapshot

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
