
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referrals made by Employment Services Providers 001-02230040

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
referrals made by Employment Services Providers and the role of Services
Australia with making referrals on behalf of providers.

Employment Services Providers

A job seeker may approach a provider directly to access their services.
These can include:

-   Workforce Australia
-   Disability Employment Services (DES)
-   Community Development Program (CDP)

In most circumstances a job seeker does not have to be receiving, or
eligible to receive, an income support payment to access Workforce
Australia assistance. A job seeker must be receiving, or be eligible to
receive, income support payments to access Disability Employment
Services, except in some specific circumstances. The provider will
identify if an ESAt is required to determine if the customer is eligible
for their services.

Providers may be required to contact Services Australia to gather
additional information. This may include whether the job seeker is
currently in receipt of income support.

Direct referral for ESAt by Employment Services Provider

Employment Services Providers, such as Workforce Australia, DES and CDP
providers have access to the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment's Employment Services System (ESS).

All of these providers can refer a customer directly to an ESAt in the
following circumstances:

-   Workforce Australia - there are no restrictions on when a provider
    can refer a customer for an ESAt
-   DES Programme Review - In most cases the Programme Review is done by
    requesting an ESAt for the customer. The DES Provider will complete
    a Programme Summary Report prior to the ESAt being conducted.
    Assessors can view the DES Programme Summary report in electronic
    form

Medical evidence required for ESAt

When making an ESAt referral it is the responsibility of the Employment
Services Provider to inform the job seeker that they need to upload
medical evidence prior to referral for an ESAt. Providers are required
to ensure medical evidence is uploaded prior to requesting an ESAt.

When a referral is made for an ESAt it is the responsibility of the
referrer to inform the job seeker of the possible implications if
medical evidence for an ESAt is not provided. This may mean:

-   the request for an ESAt may be rejected if there are no personal
    factors or special needs indicated
-   the customer's medical conditions are not taken into account when
    determining hours of work capacity and participation requirements.
    In this situation the Assessor can only assess the customer's work
    capacity as being 30+ hours a week
-   the customer is unable to access the most appropriate service, such
    as Disability Employment Services (DES), or access to the most
    appropriate service may be delayed
-   the customer may not be able to access the most appropriate rate for
    their income support payment or some social security concessions

Related links

Employment assistance for people with disabilities

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Assessment Services

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Release of information to Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
