
Actioning a pending Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity 001-02330050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage a pending Job Seeker Snapshot due
to an ESAt referral being flagged. This is a JSR/UPD activity with a
keyword of ESAREFRQ, and the Job Seeker Snapshot status will remain
pending, awaiting a decision about the requirement for an ESAt.

Options for managing the ESAt flag

An ESAt flag activity is generated when a job seeker's responses to
questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot indicate that further assessment
may be required. As a general principle, the ESAt flag should only
remain when there is a strong need to assess a customer's capacity to
work or connections to support. If there has not been a significant
change in a customer's circumstances, an ESAt is likely not required.
The Job Seeker Snapshot status will be pending until a decision is made
regarding an ESAt referral.

The ESAt activity should be finalised within 14 days of the completion
of the Job Seeker Snapshot using 1 of the following options:

-   Copy an existing ESAt or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
-   Withdraw the ESAt flag
-   Defer the booking of an ESAt appointment
-   Booking of an ESAt appointment by Assessment Services
-   Cancel the ESAt activity

Copying an existing ESAt/JCA

Copying an existing ESAt or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) will allow a
pending Job Seeker Snapshot to be completed.

An existing ESAt or JCA may be copied and reapplied when the person is
in Community Development Program (CDP), Workforce Australia Services or
Disability Employment Service (DES) and medical conditions disclosed in
the latest Job Seeker Snapshot were assessed in the previous ESAt/JCA.

A person may still be referred for an ESAt if there is evidence that a
previously assessed medical condition is deteriorating and requires
significant reconsideration.

Service Officers should consult with a Senior Service Officer (SSO) if
they are not sure about whether to use this function.

Withdrawing an ESAt flag

An ESAt flag should be withdrawn when:

-   the ESAt was flagged for medical reasons only and required medical
    evidence cannot or has not been supplied within 14 days of
    completing the Job Seeker Snapshot
-   the ESAt was flagged for medical reasons and medical evidence
    supplied indicates that all medical conditions are temporary and
    expected to resolve within 13 weeks
-   the jobseeker is exempt from mutual obligation requirements for more
    than 13 weeks, for example exempt due to serious illness
-   the identified barriers will not have a significant impact on their
    ability to work or participate in other activities

The Resources page contains scenarios when a service officer may
determine that an ESAt flag can be withdrawn. Service Officers should
consult with a Senior Service Officer (SSO) if they are not sure about
whether to use this function.

A Job Seeker Snapshot initiated ESAt flag should not be withdrawn simply
because the customer does not want to attend an ESAt. If the customer is
in receipt of a payment with mutual obligation requirements and their
Job Seeker Snapshot responses indicate that an ESAt referral is
required, then the customer cannot choose to decline a referral.

Following withdrawal of the ESAt flag the Job Seeker Snapshot status
should become active, and the job seeker must be immediately referred
(if not already connected) to the recommended service, in accordance
with their Job Seeker Snapshot outcomes.

Deferring the ESAt referral

An ESAt referral may be deferred for a maximum of 13 weeks when the job
seeker:

-   is a refugee in their first 12 weeks in Australia
-   is exempt from mutual obligation requirements. A deferment should
    not exceed the end date of the exemption
-   has a payment that is suspended (not yet cancelled) because they are
    imprisoned or overseas
-   has an income support start date in the future because of an Income
    Maintenance Period (IMP) or Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) and
    the job seeker does not wish to volunteer for referral to an ESAt
    during the waiting period
-   is subject to an 8 week non-payment period, due to a serious or
    repeated failure

The ESAREFRQ activity will be finalised if the referral to the Assessor
is deferred. The Job Seeker Snapshot status will remain pending during
the period of deferment. Once the deferment period has expired the
ESAREFRQ activity will reappear on the job seeker record to indicate the
need for further action.

Booking an ESAt

ESAt appointments are booked by the Assessment Services and Smart
Centres Co-ordination Branch. An ESAt request should only be made after
considering whether it is more appropriate to:

-   copy and reapply the existing ESAt or JCA,
-   withdraw the flag, or
-   defer the ESAt request

If an ESAt is still needed, an ESAt request should be made when an
assessment is likely to result in a change to the job seeker's:

-   work capacity, for example the person has a long term (2 years or
    more) medical condition not previously assessed by ESAt or JCA
    (medical evidence must be available prior to booking). Please note
    that if a customer already has a 15-22 work capacity with
    intervention, a new medical condition may not change this outcome,
    or
-   recommended referral, for example the job seeker has non-medical
    barriers and may move from Workforce Australia Online to Workforce
    Australia Employment Services Provider. If there is a significant
    change in the diagnosed medical conditions, they may require a
    higher level of support, for example moving from DES - Disability
    Management Service (DMS) to DES - Employment Support Service (ESS)

The JSR/UPD ESAREFRQ activity will be completed when Assessment Services
book an appointment through the Online Diary. When the report is
submitted by the Assessor the current ESAt flag will be finalised, and
the job seeker's Job Seeker Snapshot will change from pending to active.

Cancelling an ESAt activity

The ESAt activity should be cancelled when the person does not have
mutual obligation requirements and is not seeking a referral to
employment assistance. Service Officers should, in Customer First:

-   manually cancel the ESAREFQ activity
-   go to Assessment Results (AR) screen, select and cancel or complete
    the activity
-   deactivate job seeker registration

The Resources page contains a set of scenarios for when a senior staff
member may determine that an ESAt can be withdrawn, and links to the
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Service desk Online
Incident Reporting Form.

Related links

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
