
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what staff need to do when an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) report is submitted by the Assessor.

Submitted reports

ESAt reports are created in the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations system and are submitted to Services Australia electronically
via a link for validation and acceptance. Information in the ESAt report
(depending on the referral reason) is used to determine eligibility for
income support and appropriate mutual obligation requirements for job
seekers receiving a payment.

The ESAt report (depending on the referral reason) will contain the
Assessor's recommendations about a job seeker's work capacity,
appropriate interventions, recommended referrals to employment
assistance programs, risks of non-compliance ratings and circumstances
impacting compliance if required.

Where the report:

-   does pass validation, the Services Australia system identifies if
    ESAt follow up actions are required. Where no other actions are
    required, the report will automatically complete and populate the
    relevant information on the customer's record
-   does not pass validation, the report is flagged for manual checking.
    The report is checked and any issues or disagreements with the
    recommendations made by the Assessor are resolved

An automatic activity is generated if the report is not submitted by the
assessor within 14 days of the ESAt appointment. This acts as a prompt
to follow up with the Assessor to discuss any possible delay, if the
reasons for the delay are not already evident from available information
on the job seeker's record.

Accepted reports (status remains submitted)

Once an ESAt report has been accepted by Services Australia, it will be
automatically attached to the customer's Electronic Medical Information
File Envelope (e-MIFE).

A Display on Access (DOA) DOC titled ESAt Outcome will display on the
Document List (DL) screen.

The Medical condition (MC) and Work capacity (WC) screens will be coded
as part of the acceptance with the information from the ESAt report
scanned to Document Tools.

The status of the ESAt in the Employment Services or Job Capacity
Assessment referral information workflow will remain as submitted until
the finalisation process runs. The status of the report will not display
as accepted in this workflow.

Manually checking the report

The manual check requires staff to read the report to make sure it is
complete, consistent and correct. Consider the following:

-   There is sufficient information for participation in mutual
    obligation requirements or to determine appropriate assistance
-   The verified medical conditions are all listed as detailed on the
    medical evidence and the assessment of a condition as likely to
    persist for less than 2 years or likely to persist for more than 2
    years
-   The report includes recommended referral to employment assistance
    services, or a valid reason why no referrals are recommended
-   The Assessor has actioned recommended referrals where appropriate,
    or stated a valid reason why the referral is not actioned
-   Inappropriate or prejudicial information is not included in the
    report
-   There are no references to payment type recommendations

ESAt reports for customers aged under 22 need to be manually accepted:

-   to assess eligibility for independence due to Partial Capacity to
    Work
-   to assess eligibility for Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)
-   for the work capacity to be applied to the job seeker's record
-   for medical conditions to be recorded on the claimant's record
-   to pay Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   before another ESAt can be booked

Note: if the ESAt report is for a customer who meets medical and other
eligibility requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP) (upgraded
ESAt) and currently does not have a claim for DSP, the report will also
need to be manually accepted and the person invited to claim DSP.

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced.
The new Tables are used to assess a customer's medical eligibility for
all DSP claims lodged on or after this date. See The Impairment Tables.

Submitted ESAt reports that have not been actioned (accepted)

Where an ESAt report has not been accepted within 14 days (remains as
submitted), and an NSS/JCA activity is outstanding on the Activity List
(AL) screen, the report should be accepted by a staff member with the
necessary capability and capacity as soon as possible.

Returning the report after it has been accepted

If the staff member initially accepts an ESAt report but later decides
that it should not have been accepted due to an error and the report
status is:

still 'submitted', return the report to the Assessor for amendment. This
action should only be done if the change to Impairment Ratings or work
capacity is likely to have an impact on the customer's:

-   mutual obligation or
-   Participation requirements or
-   payment eligibility

'finalised', re-refer the job seeker for an ESAt (possibly a file
assessment) if there could be an effect on the determination of:

-   hours of work capacity and
-   referral to a Program of Support

The Resources page contains an example of when an Employment Service
Assessment (ESAt) is upgraded, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) and
contact details for Assessment Services. It also contains a link to a
new Level 2 Helpdesk enquiry form.

Related links

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Understanding Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Overriding Medical Conditions and Work Capacity recommendations in a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Using an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine
payment type

Actioning automatic activities of a current Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) referral

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
