
Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA) (Incapacitated) 001-03020060

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the claim process when a customer claims
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker) and they
cannot satisfy their mutual obligation requirements because they have a
temporary incapacity. It includes where the customer cannot attend their
normal work or study because they have a temporary incapacity.

On this Page:

Temporarily not able to work or study

Current customers who are full time students

Different rules apply. See:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) students or Australian Apprentice becomes
    incapacitated
-   Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated
-   Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
    incapacitated

Customers lodging a claim

Customers may be eligible for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA) (job Seeker) (Incapacitated) if they:

-   are unemployed and have a temporary incapacity for work, or
-   have work, or are studying, but are unable to do so because they
    have a temporary medical condition, illness or injury

If the customer advises they:

have a job to return to:

-   employer details will be needed in their claim, including any leave
    payments they have, or will receive
-   verification from the employer is not required unless there are
    concerns with the information provided in the claim

are intending to return to study, they will be required to provide
details of study in the claim

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements due to incapacity

JSP and YA (job seeker) customers must satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements in order to receive their payment.

A temporary exemption from mutual obligation requirements can be granted
where:

-   the customer is incapacitated for less than two years, and
-   is unable to do any suitable work or study, that is, their work or
    study capacity is less than 8 hours per week

This includes customers with a serious illness who may require extended
period(s) of exemption.

Customers will need to provide approved medical evidence to be granted
an exemption from mutual obligations. This is usually a Centrelink
Medical Certificate (SU415) or a SU683 lodged through the Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) system. Services Australia can then
determine the impact of the customer's medical condition on their
capacity to participate in work or other suitable activities. The
Service Officer makes the decision whether to grant a temporary
incapacity exemption.

A referral to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) may be needed.
Customers who have a job or study to return to are not referred for an
ESAt.

Information on the medical certificate needs to be checked carefully,
particularly the diagnosis, prognosis and treatment section:

-   For information about granting temporary incapacity exemption for
    customers undertaking a drug or alcohol rehabilitation programme,
    see Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from
    mutual obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity
-   The customer may be eligible for a temporary incapacity exemption
    for a serious illness.

A temporary exemption from mutual obligation requirements applies for
the period of the customer's incapacity. When the incapacity exemption
ends, the customer will either:

-   return to their work or study, or
-   enter into a Job Plan with Services Australia or their Employment
    Services Provider

Customers who advise they are unable to do any suitable work or study
for 2 years or longer may be eligible for:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP). If the medical evidence indicates
    that they have a terminal illness they may be manifestly eligible
    for DSP, and
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional) while
    their DSP claim is being assessed

Customers with a work capacity of at least 8 and less than 30 hours per
week may have modified mutual obligation requirements.

Referral for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

An Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) may be needed to assess the
customer's work capacity if the customer does not have a job or study to
return to.

An ESAt will:

-   determine if the customer has a temporary reduced work capacity or a
    partial capacity to work
-   assist to determine whether an exemption for mutual obligation
    requirements, or modified mutual obligation requirements should
    apply

A Verification of medical condition(s) (SU684) form will usually be
sufficient medical evidence for an ESAt referral.

Check if there is already a current and valid assessment of the
customer's work capacity on the customer's record before making a
referral.

The new claim process

[] The customer can complete an online claim for JobSeeker Payment or
Youth Allowance (job seeker) using their Centrelink online account where
they have an active self-service registration. A correspondence nominee
can also submit a job seeker online claim on behalf of their principal.

The online claim will ask the customer if they have an injury, illness
or a disability. If they answer yes, the customer will be advised to
lodge a medical certificate and encouraged to use Upload documents. If
the customer is not able to use Upload documents, they should lodge the
medical evidence at their local service centre to be scanned onto their
record.

If the customer is unable or unwilling to claim online, Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC) can be used for JSP and YA claims. The ACC is
completed by Service Officers at the customers local service centre.

If the customer advices they are incapacitated for all work when they
lodge their claim:

-   Register the customer as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job
    seeker
-   Run the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
-   The customer will not be referred to a provider
-   Advise the customer they will need to provide an approved medical
    certificate, if they wish to seek a temporary incapacity exemption

Medical evidence not provided

Customer who have a job or study to return to must lodge medical
evidence in the claim. Qualification for the payment cannot be
determined without it.

Customers with an incapacity who do not have a job or study to return to
should be encouraged to lodge medical evidence. It is needed to assess
backdating the start date and/or mutual obligation requirements.

Backdating provisions

If granting JSP or YA (incapacitated), backdating provisions can apply
when calculating the start day.

Related links

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Assessment Services

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements - temporary incapacity

Negotiating Job Plans for incapacitated persons

Calculating the start day - incapacitated customer

Youth Allowance (YA) Student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
