-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides historical information about the National Work
Experience Programme (NWEP), including the objectives of participation
in the programme and who was eligible to participate. The NWEP sought to
increase the work experience and employment opportunities available for
job seekers.

Cessation of the National Work Experience Programme

Following a government announcement, from 1 July 2022 providers ceased
making referrals to the National Work Experience Programme (NWEP). NWEP
ceased from 1 October 2022, as announced in the Federal Budget on 25
October 2022.

Objective of National Work Experience Programme

The objectives of NWEP were to address barriers to employer demand by
providing opportunities for job seekers that increased their chances of
obtaining sustainable employment.

Participation in the National Work Experience Programme

Job seekers on JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Special
Benefit (SpB) and Parenting Payment both Partnered and Single were
eligible.

Job seekers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), who were under
the age of 35, were also able to participate in some circumstances.

Services Australia's Role

The agency's role was:

-   enable job seekers to receive an approved programme of work
    supplement of $20.80 per fortnight on top of their income support
    payment
-   provide basic information about the programme to job seekers who
    were interested, and advise them they needed to contact their
    Provider for further information and referral to the programme, and
-   implement appropriate compliance measures where necessary

Provider's Role

Workforce Australia Employment Service Providers and DES providers were
responsible for job seeker participation in NWEP. Providers were able to
place job seekers in up to four weeks unpaid work experience, for up to
25 hours per week or at their assessed capacity, where there was
potential for short term or ongoing paid employment.

While job seekers were undertaking NWEP, depending on the number of
hours per week they were doing, they may have been required to continue
undertaking job search activities.

Job Plan

Participants in NWEP were required to negotiate a Job Plan with
Workforce Australia or a Disability Employment Services provider.

Failure to comply with a compulsory activity in job plan

A mutual obligation failure was committed where a Job Plan included
participation in NWEP as a compulsory activity and the job seeker:

-   failed to attend the NWEP activity
-   had unauthorised absences from their NWEP activity
-   failed to complete the required number of hours, or
-   engaged in misconduct (disruptive or uncooperative behaviour) while
    attending a NWEP activity

A participation suspension prompted the job seeker to contact their
provider. The provider had responsibility for notifying appropriate
reconnection requirements, and determined when the conditions had been
met to lift the payment suspension. If the job seeker did not have a
valid reason for the mutual obligation failure a demerit or financial
penalty may also have applied, depending on which Targeted Compliance
Framework zone applied.

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Non-attendance or inappropriate conduct in a compulsory activity

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Approved Program of Work Supplement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
