
Employment Services Providers 001-02060000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure when referring a job seeker to an
Employment Services Provider.

Referral to Employment Service Providers

Service Officers may refer job seekers to an Employment Services
Provider. Employment Services Provider is a generic term that covers a
range of organisations, including jobactive, Intensive
Support-Transition to Work (TtW), Disability Employment Services (DES)
and Community Development Program (CDP). This topic provides information
on Services Australia role in the referral process.

Selecting a provider at New Claim

Job seekers will select or be automatically allocated a provider
including Online Employment Services during their initial contact with
the agency. If the job seeker is subject to RapidConnect and not
referred to Online Employment Services, they must be referred to an
available appointment within 2 days. If there are no available
appointments, they can select from providers who have appointments
available within 14 working days.

The Participation Interview is used to complete the Job Seeker
Classification Instrument (JSCI) (when required) and refer job seekers
to an Employment Services Provider.

Job seekers who don't have a preference for a provider are randomly
allocated one from those in the local area. Job seekers can ask to
exclude certain providers from the random allocation process.

Note: there is only one CDP provider per remote area, job seekers in
these areas will not have a choice of providers.

Referral to jobactive online employment service

Most job seekers are referred to Online Employment Service (OES), with
selection and referral being undertaken by the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment during the Participation Interview. Selected job
seekers do not require a referral to a jobactive provider, but instead
manage their obligations through the Online Employment Service website.

New Employment Services Model Pilot

From 1 July 2019, all Stream A job seekers in 2 designated pilot areas
are selected by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment to
participate in the New Employment Services Model (ESM) Pilot. The ESM
pilot will continue until the New Employment Services Model is
implemented in July 2022.

The role of Services Australia in OES and ESM is to explain to the job
seeker that they:

have been selected for the OES and ESM and are required to register with
the jobactive website via myGov

must agree to a Job Plan in order to meet their RapidConnect
requirements

will not be required to attend face to face appointments with a
jobactive provider

can contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment to
discuss:

-   their participation
-   issues accessing the jobactive website
-   agreeing to the Job Plan, or
-   exiting from the OES/pilot

Job seekers will agree to a Job Plan, develop or upload a resume, a
career profile and other relevant information and report mutual
obligation activities (principally job search) via the online jobactive
employment service. If at any time a job seeker needs to be transferred
to a jobactive provider, the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment will refer the job seeker.

Services Australia's role in selecting a jobactive provider

It is the agency's role to give the customer unbiased information about
providers to assist them with their choice of provider. The agency can
give the following information to assist customers in choosing an
Employment Services Provider:

-   the names of available providers
-   provider locations
-   provider appointment availability
-   the Star Rating if available (for DES providers only)

Initial appointment

At the initial appointment with the provider, the job seeker and the
provider discuss job search requirements and complete a vocational
profile and a resume. In most circumstances, an Employment Services
Provider will negotiate a Job Plan with the job seeker at this
appointment.

jobactive

jobactive organisations provide job seekers a range of tailored
services, according to their circumstances and needs. A job seeker
registering for services will be referred to a provider who will deliver
or broker all appropriate services available during the customer's
period of registration.

The outcome of the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI), or an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if conducted, will determine the
level of service (or stream) the job seeker will receive from jobactive.

Job seekers identified as eligible for TtW should not be referred to
jobactive.

Community Development Program (CDP)

When a job seeker lives in a Department of Education, Skills and
Employment designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider.

There is only one CDP provider per remote area, job seekers in these
areas do not have a choice of providers.

Disability Employment Services (DES)

Disability Employment Services (DES) offers 2 programs to help people
whose disability, injury or health condition is their primary barrier to
finding and maintaining employment. The participant will be in either
Disability Employment Services - Disability Management Service (DES-DMS)
or Disability Employment Services - Employment Support Service
(DES-ESS), depending on their level of need and their eligibility for
Program Services:

Disability Employment Services - Disability Management Service (DES-DMS)

-   provides services to job seekers with temporary or permanent
    disability, injury, or health conditions who require the assistance
    of a disability employment service and who may require flexible
    ongoing support but are not expected to need regular long-term
    support in the workplace: and

Disability Employment Services - Employment Support Service (DES-ESS):

-   provides services to job seekers with permanent disability and who
    are assessed as needing regular long-term ongoing support in the
    workplace

DES is funded by the Department of Social Services (DSS).

See Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES) for
further information regarding the referral process.

The Star Rating system (DES only)

The Star Rating system, where available, measures the success of a DES
provider in finding jobs for job seekers. The highest rating is five and
the lowest is a rating of one. New providers may have a nil rating and
as such, the rating in these instances does not indicate poor
performance of the provider - this should be taken into account when
explaining ratings to customers. If the customer is a RapidConnect
customer, the system will only display the list of providers with
immediate appointments and will not display their full status.

Note: The star rating system for jobactive providers ceased 1 June 2021.

Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW)

The Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW) Service is for young
people 15- 24 years of age who are not in education or employment and
are at high risk of long term unemployment. Participants will be given
pre-employment assistance by a TtW provider to prepare them for work, an
apprenticeship, a traineeship, or further education. Eligibility is
determined by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment ICT
system.

TtW services are provided by Employment Service Providers that operate
separately to jobactive, Disability Employment Services, and Community
Development Program. A job seeker eligible for TtW must not be referred
to jobactive.

Breakdown in relationship with provider

If the job seeker believes they can receive a better service elsewhere,
they should talk to their current or proposed provider. Job seekers may
be transferred by agreement if the losing and gaining providers agree to
the transfer. A request for transfer may also be lodged electronically
by a job seeker via their Personal Page on the jobactive website, see
Resources for a link.

If a job seeker advises Services Australia that they refuse to engage
with their jobactive provider due to a breakdown in relationship with
their Employment Service Provider, the job seeker must be advised to
contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment Customer
Service Line, See Resources for a link. This includes situations where
the job seeker has been exited from their provider due to threatening,
aggressive, or violent behaviour and there is a Job Seeker Incident
Report (JSIR) recorded, and they wish to discuss the exit or referral to
another provider.

CDP job seekers cannot generally transfer between providers unless they
move to another region, however these job seekers may also be referred
to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment National Customer
Service Line (NCSL), See the Resources page for a link, where they have
reported a breakdown in the relationship with their provider.

Participant Initiated Transfer (DES only)

Once the participant commences DES, they are able to use a Participant
Initiated Transfer at any time. Participants can use these transfers up
to 5 times over a 2 year period.

Participants should contact the National Customer Service Line to help
to make this change. They will not be asked to provide a reason for
wanting to change DES provider.

If the participant exhausts their 5 initiated transfers, or do not wish
to use their initiated transfers, they can still transfer using a
Transfer by Agreement but only after ESAt is finalised.

The Resources page contains a link to the jobactive website and contact
details for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Contents

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

Online Diary

Inactivating job seekers registration for volunteer Employment Services
job seekers

Employment Services Providers and referral to other participation
programs (complementary referrals)

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

6 month activity requirement

Related links

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) referrals

Community Development Program (CDP)

RapidConnect

Change of circumstances while receiving services from an Employment
Services Provider

Disclosing information to third parties

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW)

Participation with jobactive

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive
organisation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
