-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the job seeker compliance policy and procedures
that apply when assessing a job seeker's non-attendance at a job
interview and situations during a job interview where a job seeker
intentionally behaves in a manner that results in an offer of employment
not being made.

Where 'job seeker' is referenced, this includes Community Development
Program (CDP) participants.

Requirement to attend and act appropriately in job interviews

Job seekers receiving a participation payment are expected to attend all
job interviews their provider has arranged or they have secured for
themselves. When attending a job interview, job seekers are expected to
present and conduct themselves, speak and behave in a way that gives
them the best opportunity to secure employment.

Where the provider arranges the job interview, the provider has
responsibility for ensuring the job seeker receives proper notification
and reasonable notice. The provider also has responsibility for
monitoring the job seeker's attendance and contacting the job seeker
where they have been advised of inappropriate behaviour during the job
interview.

Where a job seeker fails to attend a job interview or behaves
inappropriately this is managed using the relevant job seeker compliance
system.

Note: participation requirements for ParentsNext participants do not
include requirements to look for work.

Investigating failure to attend a job interview

PST staff responsible for investigating non-attendance at a job
interview must consider whether the:

-   job (on offer at the job interview) was suitable/unsuitable work for
    the job seeker
-   job seeker was given reasonable notice to attend the job interview
-   job seeker had a reasonable excuse for non-attendance

An assessment that the job seeker gave prior notice for non-attendance
at a job interview (or that a reasonable excuse existed for not doing
so) is not required by legislation for a determination to be made.
Although, staff may consider whether the job seeker's contact prior to
the job interview is relevant in establishing the job seeker's intent to
comply and this may add weight to the evidence they provide.

Investigating inappropriate presentation or conduct at a job interview

PST staff responsible for investigating inappropriate presentation or
conduct at a job interview that resulted in an offer of employment not
being made, must be satisfied there is sufficient evidence to conclude
the job seeker's behaviour was deliberate.

This type of behaviour may include:

-   dressing in a way that is clearly inappropriate for the interview
-   displaying an obvious lack of interest in the job on offer, for
    example, a lack of responsiveness to the employer's questions or
    explanation about the job on offer
-   using inappropriate language
-   rudeness or verbal abuse
-   any other offensive or inappropriate behaviour at the interview

Circumstances not within the job seeker's control such as excessive
nervousness, poor language or verbal skills or a limited wardrobe cannot
be considered as deliberate misbehaviour. It must also have been
reasonably foreseeable that the behaviour would result in an offer of
employment not being made.

The investigation should include:

-   determining the job (on offer at the job interview) was
    suitable/unsuitable work for the job seeker
-   checking that comments included by the provider when reporting the
    non-compliance give a clear and sufficiently accurate account of the
    job seeker's actual conduct at the job interview (presentation,
    statements or behaviour)
-   where required, contacting the employer to ensure the account given
    by the provider can be confirmed

Job interview related compliance event occurring on the weekend

Where the job seeker fails to attend or satisfactorily participate in a
job interview that was scheduled for a weekend, the compliance action
depends on the job seeker compliance system they are managed under.

-   Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, the failure event date will
    be the date the job interview was scheduled
-   Under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework, the system will not allow
    a No Show, No Pay investigation to be generated where the incident
    date in on a weekend. In these cases, providers will submit a
    Participation Report with an incident date equal to the Monday
    following the weekend in which the incident occurred

Managing non-compliance with job interview requirements - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, when a job seeker does not
attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview a mutual
obligation failure has been committed.

Following a mutual obligation failure reported by the job seeker's
provider, participation payments are not payable until the job seeker
contacts their provider and meets reconnection requirements notified by
their provider.

Participation payments are cancelled if the reconnection requirement is
not met within 4 weeks.

Job seekers in the warning zone will fast track to the next assessment
(either a Capability Interview or Capability Assessment) if the provider
is not satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for failing to attend
or satisfactorily participate in a job interview.

Job seekers in the financial penalty zone will incur a financial penalty
unless:

-   on contact with the job seeker to discuss the failure, their
    provider closes the Non-Compliance Report (NCR) because they are
    satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for not attending the
    job interview or the behaviour was not within the job seeker’s
    control, or
-   the job seeker satisfies Services Australia during a compliance
    investigation that they had a reasonable excuse for non-attendance,
    the job was not considered suitable work or the behaviour was not
    within their control

Managing non-compliance with job interview requirements - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework, when a CDP participant does
not attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview a No Show,
No Pay failure has been committed.

A No Show, No Pay failure is generated for investigation by Services
Australia when a provider submits a Participation Report. Participation
Solutions Team (PST) staff are responsible for investigating the
incident and determining whether a No Show, No Pay failure has occurred.

Consequence of a No Show, No Pay failure

If applied, a No Show, No Pay failure will result in a No Show, No Pay
penalty for the day the non-compliance occurred.

Applied No Show, No Pay failures contribute to a pattern of persistent
non-compliance for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA). An
automatic CCA will be generated based on the number of No Show, No Pay
failures applied in a serious failure assessment period. When a decision
is made that a CDP participant has been persistently non-compliant, a
serious failure may be applied.

The Resources page contains the text to be used in the Q062 letter sent
to a job seeker who has a No Show, No Pay employment related failure
occurring on a weekend.

Related links

Targeted Compliance FrameworkTargeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance FrameworkRe-engaging job
seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance FrameworkMutual
obligation failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellationsTargeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and
payment cancellations

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a No Show, No Pay FailureInvestigating a No Show, No Pay
Failure

Assessing reasonable notice

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

No Show, No Pay failure penaltiesNo Show, No Pay failure penalties

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
