-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances where a Disability Support
Pension (DSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) customer is considered independent
when they are in State care and are not living with their parents.

State care

For the purposes of independent status, a young person is in State care
if they are not living with a parent and:

-   they are in the guardianship, care or custody of a court, a
    minister, or a department of either the Australian, State or
    Territory Government
-   there is a current direction from a court, minister or department
    placing the person in the guardianship, care or custody of someone
    (for example, a foster parent) who is not the person's parent, or
-   the person stopped being in one of the situations described above
    only because of their age

A young person under a court, ministerial or departmental order or
direction is considered to be in State care regardless of their legal
guardianship status.

Assessing independence

A young person in State care is considered to be independent regardless
of whether they have a foster parent or legal guardian. For the purposes
of determining independence, a parent is defined as a natural parent of
the young person or a person who has legally adopted the young person.

There is no independent criterion for an ABSTUDY customer in State care.
An ABSTUDY customer in this circumstance may be considered independent
under Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH).

This assessment of independence applies to DSP customers 16 or 17 years
of age. This is not required for DSP customers between 18 and 20 years
of age, as they are considered independent when living away from the
parental home for any reason.

Youth Allowance (YA)

Independent YA customers are not subject to assessment under the
Parental Means Tests. An independent YA customer may be paid YA from 15
years of age, unless:

-   they are under the minimum school leaving age for the State or
    Territory in which they reside, or
-   they do not have a formal exemption from attending school

YA customers under 15 years of age or under the school leaving age may
need to be assessed for Special Benefit (SpB).

Supported vs unsupported State care

Support from the State or Territory does not affect a customer's
independent status, but does affect the rate of YA. Where the State or
Territory is providing a foster allowance or other support for their
upkeep (for example, free accommodation, food, clothing, utilities,
etc.), the customer will be paid the 'State care or ward - supported
rate' (that is, the at home rate for YA). See:

-   References for a link to this Policy, and
-   Resources for examples

Where the State or Territory is not providing any benefit for the
customer or providing support for their upkeep, the customer will be
eligible for the 'unsupported State care rate' (that is, the away from
home rate for YA).

The organisation providing the care to the customer can still receive
Government funding. The customer is in 'unsupported State care' when the
funding is not being provided for their direct upkeep and support.

Note: this does not affect the rate of DSP. If a DSP customer is
considered independent due to being in State care (supported or
unsupported), they are eligible for the higher rate. For further
information, see Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability
Support Pension customers under 21 years.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is available to:

-   DSP customers who are 20 years of age and under, or
-   YA and ABSTUDY customers who are 21 years of age and under, and
-   have a partial capacity to work or study of less than 30 hours per
    week as assessed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job
    Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Relocation Scholarship

Some independent students who are disadvantaged by personal
circumstances may also be qualified to receive Relocation Scholarship.
Additional coding is required to pay Relocation Scholarship correctly
for independent students who are disadvantaged by personal
circumstances. See Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms, examples of
acceptable and unacceptable evidence, approved text for Q888 letter and
a list of State/Territory welfare agencies.

Related links

Rate of Youth Allowance (YA) when customer is in State care

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
