
Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims 001-19051507

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process JSP claims. This includes online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Claiming JSP

Claims for JSP can be lodged by:

-   [] completing an online claim
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Straight Through Processing

Straight Through Processing (STP) is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed against criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process some claims automatically if they meet the
following:

-   Identity is confirmed
-   Residency requirements met
-   Tax file number recorded
-   Employment status requirements met
-   No change in known relationship details
-   No change in known children details
-   No bereavement
-   No incapacity
-   Homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent
-   Liquid assets below $5,500 for single customers or $11,000 for
    partnered customers or single customers with dependent children
-   Claim results in a grant outcome

If a customer requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the STP decision, when running the script enter logon ID as the Decision
Maker and customer's local service centre.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Processing claims in Process Direct

Use Process Direct to review the JSP claim information and to process
the claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the JSP claim has been
submitted online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer or their
    correspondence nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a JSP claim activity
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information and
    make referrals

Streamlined claims

A streamlined claim is offered to some customers transferring to JSP
from another payment.

JSP claim following a DSP Medical Risk Based Review

Disability Service Officers initiate a JSP claim when completing the
Service Offer Interview (SOI).

Staff must not unassign these activities.

Reassessment of JSP claims

A customer may apply for a formal review of the decision to reject their
claim at any time. If they apply more than 13 weeks after the rejection
notice was given, payment or concession may be affected by date of
effect rules. See Customer initiated review of decisions.

No additional evidence or information is required before an application
for a formal review can be made.

If a customer applies for a formal review, record the application.

If JSP was rejected, see:

-   not supplying documents (FSD)
-   not lodging or reporting on time (DNL, FRP)
-   Proof of identity (POI). See Request to reassess a rejected claim

If the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the rejection letter
was sent, they must claim JSP.

Early claims

Customers can start an early claim for JSP up to 13 weeks before the
first day of eligibility. For the day they become qualified, the
customer must provide their:

-   bank account balances
-   employment separation details, and
-   any other income

If an early claim lodgement is accepted, the start date is the first day
the customer becomes qualified for the payment. See Early claims.

Pre-population of claim responses in the Job Seeker Snapshot

Responses to some questions in the JSP claim will be used to
pre-populate similar questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot. The job
seeker will have the opportunity to review responses, either online or
staff assisted and make changes where required.

Intent to claim for vulnerable customers

Customers are considered to be vulnerable if they experienced a
vulnerable circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and
this was the reason they were unable to submit their claim on the
contact date. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

RapidConnect

Job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect requirements are advised of
their requirements or exemption to RapidConnect during their
Participation Interview.

Job seekers who are referred to Workforce Australia Online for
Individuals are required to agree to a job plan.

Job seekers who are referred to a Workforce Australia Employment
Services Provider or other specialist provider will have an initial
appointment booked during the Participation Interview. Attending the
first provider appointment is known as the job seeker's RapidConnect
requirement.

In most cases, meeting RapidConnect requirements will determine the
start date of the job seeker's income support payment. This is subject
to job seekers meeting any waiting periods and qualification
requirements.

JSP new claims and re-indexed claims must have the Participation
Interview completed and a RapidConnect determination. For more
information, see RapidConnect.

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements apply to all job seekers receiving
participation payments including JSP, unless exempt.

Mutual obligation requirements are designed to ensure unemployed people
receiving activity tested income support payments are actively looking
for work and are participating in activities that will help them into
employment.

Job seekers will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they:

enter into a Job Plan, if required, with Services Australia or an
Employment Services Provider without unreasonable delay

fully comply with the terms of the Job Plan, and

either:

-   actively seek and are willing to undertake suitable paid work
-   undertake suitable paid work, or
-   participate in some other approved training, program or course which
    is likely to improve their employment prospects

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

A job seeker who is unable to meet their mutual obligation requirements,
in certain circumstances, may be eligible for an exemption.

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements exemptions.

The Resources page contains a link to Process Direct resources and a
list of common screens for JSP claims. It also contains approved text
for Q888 letters sent to principal carers who may be eligible to claim
Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Early claims

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Exempt income and assets for Centrelink payments

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Principal carer of a dependent child

Process Direct

Rapid Connect

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Transfers to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Waiting periods for income support payments

Withdrawal of claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB and income support payment new claim processing
interactions)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Shared care for social security payments

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
