-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the system process that checks if a Job Plan has
been negotiated for Centrelink managed job seekers.

Job Plan review timeframes

A Job Plan review will be automatically created for Centrelink managed
job seekers in one of the following circumstances:

-   when a job seeker is granted an income support payment with mutual
    obligation requirements
-   at the end of any waiting periods a job seeker is serving after
    being granted an income support payment with mutual obligation
    requirements
-   the date a job seeker on Parenting Payment (Single) becomes subject
    to mutual obligation requirements, or
-   when the Job Plan has been sent to a job seeker's online account and
    they still do not have an approved Job Plan after four days

This review will mature in 14 calendar days. A request to contact letter
is issued advising the job seeker to contact Services Australia within
14 days to negotiate a Job Plan if the following circumstances apply on
day 14:

-   does not have a Job Plan
-   is not exempt from their mutual obligation requirements, and
-   is not a Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker with a
    pending Plan

Note: this review process and subsequent suspension functionality does
not apply to provider managed job seekers.

Suspension of payment

Centrelink managed job seekers will be suspended if they have not
negotiated a Job Plan within 14 days of the date the request to contact
was sent. This effectively provides Service Officers and job seekers
with 28 days to agree to a Job Plan.

If the payment is suspended, a DOC will be recorded on the job seekers
record.

The payment suspension will be for failing to respond to correspondence.
This is restorable, but a Job Plan must be negotiated on restoration.

Job seekers are able to go online and restore their payment by
completing the outstanding 'agree to Job Plan' task in their online
account.

Failed online tasks will convert to a work item that will be allocated
to a Service Officer to contact the job seeker. Review notes on the job
seeker's record, to assist staff will be viewable in Process Direct or
Customer First.

Negotiating a Job Plan

Under the Services Australia and Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations (DEWR) Bilateral Management Arrangements (BMA), a Job Plan
should be negotiated for Centrelink managed job seekers within 4 days of
the job seeker receiving their first regular payment.

Job seekers with a pending Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Job seekers yet to be referred to an Employment Service Provider, who
have a pending JobSeeker Snapshot status, display as Centrelink managed.
These job seekers have no mutual obligation or participation
requirements until their:

-   capacity to participate is assessed, and
-   ESAt/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) recommendations are accepted

A job plan cannot be negotiated until the job seekers ESAt
recommendations are accepted. However, the job plan review process and
subsequent suspension functionality will still occur if a job plan has
not been negotiated within 28 days of the job seeker becoming subject to
mutual obligations.

If a job seeker with a pending ESAt has their payment suspended because
they failed to contact (after being sent a request to contact letter),
restore their payment. The job plan review cycle will only occur once
for job seekers with a pending ESAt. The system will not invoke further
suspensions in subsequent 28 day periods, if an ESAt has not been
completed.

If the requirement to attend an ESAt is withdrawn, the job seeker will
be referred to an Employment Services Provider. They will need to:

agree to a job plan online if referred to Workforce Australia Online

have a job plan negotiated by a:

-   Workforce Australia provider, if referred to Workforce Australia
    Provider Services
-   Community Development Provider (CDP), if living in a remote area and
    referred to CDP

The Resources page contains a table on the notes available to Service
Officers when a job seeker completes online tasks but the result is not
successful and receipt messages returned to job seeker when actioning an
online task.

Related Links

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
