
New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) 001-02100000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on the New Enterprise Incentive
Scheme (NEIS).The application and assessment process and NEIS payments.

NEIS overview

The New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) of Training and Assistance.
The programme aims to help eligible job seekers start and run their own
small businesses by providing:

-   accredited small business training
-   business advice, and
-   mentoring for up to 52 weeks

If eligible, NEIS Allowance may be paid for up to 39 weeks.

NEIS is administered by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment and is delivered by specialist providers who have expertise
in small business planning and development. Participation in NEIS is
considered to be an approved activity for all payments with mutual
obligation requirements.

NEIS enquiry by job seeker

Job seekers contact Services Australia regarding NEIS participation. If
the job seeker is already connected to an employment services provider,
the Service Officer should refer them to their jobactive or Disability
Employment Services (DES) provider for information.

Job seekers who are not in receipt of an income support payment with
mutual obligation requirements can directly enquire and register with a
NEIS provider in their local area. Job seekers can search for NEIS
providers in their area on the jobactive website.

Pre NEIS activities

Prospective NEIS participants can undertake the 'Exploring Being My Own
Boss' workshop to experience what is involved in running their own small
business. These two-week workshops (25 hours per week) are delivered by
NEIS providers.

Additionally, 'Complementary Placements' provide work experience
placements to job seekers who complete an 'Exploring Being My Own Boss'
workshop and who:

-   are registered with a jobactive or DES provider, and
-   meet the eligibility for an existing approved activity (for example,
    the National Work Experience Programme)

Job seekers who wish to access these activities should be advised to
discuss this with their provider.

Information about NEIS Training

NEIS Training is delivered by Registered Training Organisations (RTOs)
and helps job seekers achieve a nationally accredited qualification.
Depending on the type of small business the job seeker is planning, the
NEIS provider will refer them to either a:

-   Certificate III in Micro-Business Operations, or
-   Certificate IV in New Small Business
-   During the training, the job seeker will develop a NEIS Business
    Plan. NEIS Allowance is not paid to the job seeker during the 13
    weeks of NEIS Training (also known as NEIS pre-training) and they
    will remain eligible for any income support payment they were
    previously receiving

NEIS Training is an approved full-time activity and meets the short
course guidelines for the Education Entry Payment (EdEP). The EdEP
assists participants with the up-front costs of education and training.
See the Process page Table 1 for further information on coding
requirements.

Information about NEIS Assistance

Business mentoring and support is an essential component of NEIS.
Participants will receive business mentoring ('NEIS Assistance') during
the first year of the operation of their business. Participants will
also receive advice about organisational, financial and marketing issues
to support the development of their business.

Participants can receive NEIS Allowance for the first 39 weeks of
business operation during this mentoring (NEIS Assistance) phase. The
amount of NEIS Allowance payable will not be affected by income from the
job seeker's NEIS business.

The NEIS provider is able to arrange additional mentoring and support
for Streams B, C or Indigenous Australian job seekers where they
consider it to be appropriate.

NEIS eligibility

To be eligible for NEIS job seekers must satisfy all of the following
criteria:

-   not undertaking employment, education or training
-   are able to work in Australia
-   not an overseas visitor on a working holiday or an overseas student
    studying in Australia
-   be at least 18 years of age at the time of commencing NEIS
    Assistance
-   be available to participate in NEIS Training and work full-time in
    their proposed business (or fewer hours for those with an assessed
    Partial Work Capacity, reduced work participation requirements, or
    those who are volunteers to Employment Services)
-   not be an undischarged bankrupt
-   not have previously received NEIS Assistance for a similar business
-   not have previously received NEIS Assistance in the past year
-   not be already operating a proposed business on a commercial basis

Job seekers must also meet a range of NEIS Business Eligibility
criteria. These are assessed by the NEIS Provider once the job seeker
has been referred for an initial interview.

Note: Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers cannot participate
in NEIS. CDP was previously known as the Remote Jobs and Communities
Programme (RJCP).

Business eligibility

To be eligible for NEIS, a proposed business must satisfy all of the
following:

-   be independent, lawful and capable of withstanding public scrutiny
-   be assessed as commercially viable by a NEIS Panel Member (NPM)
-   not currently operating on a commercial basis
-   not compete directly with an existing business unless an unsatisfied
    demand for the product or service can be shown
-   not involve the purchase or take-over of an existing business
-   be structured so that the job seeker will have and maintain a
    controlling interest over the NEIS business while participating in
    the program

Participation in NEIS

Most NEIS participants transfer from their income support payment to
NEIS Allowance when they commence in NEIS, after they complete NEIS
pre-training.

Certain job seekers may be entitled to a higher rate of income support
than that paid under NEIS Allowance, for example:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers who
    are single with a dependent child
-   JSP, SpB and Youth Allowance (YA) single principal carers with long
    term automatic exemptions
-   JSP and SpB job seekers aged 60 and over, who have been in receipt
    of an income support payment for more than 9 continuous months, and
-   JSP and SpB job seekers who are assessed as either 'Illness
    Separated', 'Respite Care Couple' or 'Partner in gaol'

These job seekers, if they have no affecting income, should be eligible
to continue to receive a partial rate of their income support payment on
top of their NEIS Allowance after the dollar for dollar reduction. The
partial rate paid by Services Australia should be paid as a manual rate
and is subject to the income and assets test. If these job seekers also
receive employment income, they may be eligible for Working Credit.

Customers in receipt of:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Age Pension
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Partner Service Pension, or
-   War Widow(er) Pension

can elect to remain on their income support payment while participating
in NEIS, up to the maximum of 52 weeks, providing all other
pension/payment and NEIS eligibility criteria are met. Alternatively,
they may elect to receive the NEIS Allowance and a partial rate of their
income support payment.

NEIS rental assistance is available for up to 26 weeks if eligible.

NEIS recipients who do not receive an income support payment may be
eligible for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

NEIS and Disability Employment Services (DES)

Job seekers may concurrently participate in DES and NEIS. Once a job
seeker is participating with DES, the job seeker may be referred by
their DES provider to participate in NEIS.

Participating in NEIS or DES satisfies the mutual obligation
requirements for income support payments. Participants will still be
required to report regularly to Services Australia to receive payment if
they are job seekers, or have variable earnings to declare fortnightly.
Any business income must be declared and assessed as normal.

Rate of NEIS Allowance

The amount of NEIS Allowance paid is equivalent to the 'single, 22 and
over, with no children' rate of JSP. NEIS Allowance reduces income
support on a dollar for dollar basis, meaning NEIS participants are
usually no longer entitled to their income support payment.

Note: job seekers receiving NEIS Allowance cannot obtain early release
of superannuation. NEIS Allowance is specifically excluded by this
legislation. Queries regarding this should be referred to Department of
Education, Skills and Employment Services National Customer Service
Line.

Eligibility for income support after NEIS allowance ceases

The maximum period that NEIS Allowance is payable to a NEIS participant
is 39 weeks. Job seekers complete 52 weeks of NEIS participation, even
though the NEIS Allowance ceases after 39 weeks.

As a result, these customers may contact the agency to test their
eligibility for an income support payment for the remaining 13 weeks of
NEIS Assistance. Provided these job seekers meet all other eligibility
requirements, participation in NEIS assistance does not preclude them
from income support.

Participation in NEIS fully satisfies mutual obligation requirements for
payments such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP). This means the job seeker will
not be referred to a provider at new claim, because they are already
connected to a NEIS provider and not eligible for other employment
services.

See the Process page for coding procedures where a NEIS participant
contacts the agency to claim an income support payment, or to have their
rate of payment restored to full rate, following the cessation of their
NEIS Allowance after 39 weeks. Note: the NEIS participant will be
prompted by their provider to supply their NEIS Allowance cessation
letter as evidence.

NEIS participants who were receiving JSP or Youth Allowance (YA) and
whose payment was reduced or cancelled due to receiving the NEIS
Allowance, will receive an advice from Department of Education, Skills
and Employment to verify that their NEIS Allowance has ceased. Where a
JSP or YA customer re-applies for payment after 39 weeks, Service
Officers will need to manually zero the NEIS Allowance on the Other
Government Payments (OGP) screen, and end any manual rate overrides that
existed to continue partial rate payments during the 39 weeks of NEIS
Allowance.

NEIS participants who were previously receiving AGE, CP, PPS or DSP and
whose rate was reduced by NEIS Allowance, will have this automatically
zeroed on the OGP screen at 39 weeks. Service Officers will not have to
manually zero NEIS Allowance for these customers as part of a new claim
or to restore payment back to full rate.

The Resources page has information on the extension of NEIS
pre-training, a link to jobactive and the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment New Enterprise Incentive Scheme homepage.

Related links

Working Credit

Approved activities for principal carers

Self-employment as an approved activity

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Approved activities for Job Plans

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Commencement of a new business or purchase of a business enterprise

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
