
Assessing independence when a customer is a refugee 001-04060060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the criteria for a refugee Youth Allowance (YA)
customer to be assessed as independent.

Independence criteria

YA independence cannot be granted to a refugee young person if they
have:

-   a parent/s living in Australia, or
-   a person upon whom they are largely dependent on a long term basis

This criteria does not apply to refugee young people who:

-   are largely cared for by their guardian or relative on a long term
    basis. Note: the duration of care refers and applies to their time
    in Australia only
-   live with their parent/s and wish to apply for YA independence under
    different circumstances. For example, self-supporting or
    Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH). Such claims should be assessed
    under those criteria

While there is no set time frame for long-term dependency, the following
questions will help staff determine a reasonable time frame:

-   How long has the customer been in the country and who have they
    lived with in that period
-   What is the nature of the relationship between the customer and the
    person/s they have lived with since arriving in the country
-   How long does the person intend to care for the customer Note:
    explain payment options and implications. For example, Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) verses YA independence
-   Has anyone received FTB payments for the customer prior to the
    customer claiming YA

Refugee visa

For staff assessing YA claims, verification that the customer has a
refugee visa must already be recorded on the customer's record, or
picked up via the Department of Home Affairs link. Centrelink
International Services (CIS) will be able to assist if required.

Parent status

A verbal statement from the customer advising they do not have a parent
in Australia and do not have a person on whom they are largely dependent
must be recorded in a separate DOC. Ensure FTB and Maternity Allowance
(MAT) screens contain information consistent with the statement. Where
there is any doubt about the information that the customer is advising
verbally, then staff must request evidence from the customer and hand
the claim off to the Centrelink Service Centre.

Independence and age

YA customers who are independent are not subject to assessment under the
Parental Means Tests and may be paid YA from aged 15 years, unless they
are under the school leaving age for the State or Territory in which
they live and do not have a formal exemption from attending school.

If the customer is under 15 years or the school leaving age, they may
qualify for Special Benefit under Unable to Live at Home (UTLAH) or
refugee provisions.

This assessment of independence also applies to refugee DSP customers
aged 16 or 17 years. This is not required for DSP customers aged between
18 and 20 years as they are considered independent when living away from
the parental home for any reason.

The Resources page contains links to online estimators and relevant
claim forms.

Related links

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
