
Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment cancellations 001-18030209

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the financial penalties that apply following a
mutual obligation failure, work refusal failure or unemployment failure.

Mutual obligation failure penalties

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties are applied
where a job seeker, including a ParentsNext participant, has
persistently committed mutual obligation failures. Job seekers are
considered to have persistently committed mutual obligation failures if
they have incurred sufficient demerits to enter the financial penalty
zone, their requirements have been determined as appropriate during a
Capability Assessment and a subsequent mutual obligation failure is
committed without reasonable excuse.

Escalating financial penalties and payment cancellation for mutual
obligation failures in the financial penalty zone, send a strong message
that consistently and deliberately failing to meet requirements is not
acceptable.

A penalty count is used to determine the financial penalty applicable.
The penalty is calculated based on the penalties which have already been
applied in the current failure group:

-   first financial penalty results is a 50% payment reduction for the
    payment period
-   second financial penalty results is a 100% payment reduction for the
    payment period
-   third financial penalty results in payment cancellation and a
    post-cancellation non payment period

Note: work refusal failures and unemployment failures committed while a
job seeker is in the financial penalty zone are not included in the
penalty count.

Where payment is cancelled as a result of a third financial penalty and
a participation payment is re-claimed within 3 active months, the job
seeker will return to the financial penalty zone. A new failure group
commences for the purpose of calculating the penalty count, that is, a
subsequent first mutual obligation failure after re-commencement of
payment will result in a 50% payment reduction, a second a 100% payment
reduction, etc.

Payments affected by a financial penalty for a mutual obligation failure

Financial penalties for mutual obligation failures affect the total
amount of participation payment that is payable after application of the
income test, including supplementary payments included in the rate, of:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Parenting Payment (Single), or
-   Special Benefit (SpB)

The amount of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payable to the job seeker or
their partner, including Rent Assistance (RA) paid with FTB, is not
affected by the financial penalty.

Generally, a penalty for a mutual obligation failure will affect the
instalment period in which the mutual obligation failure was committed.
Where payment has already been released for this instalment period, the
rate reduction will be calculated against, and deducted from, or the
cancellation applied to the next available instalment period.

Effect of changes to the penalty count

A penalty count for a failure group may change as a result of a mutual
obligation failure being revoked as a result of:

-   retrospective payment cancellation with a date of effect prior to
    the failure event date
-   retrospective exemption from compulsory requirements covering the
    period of the failure event date
-   a favourable outcome returned for a review of decision to apply a
    financial penalty sought within 13 weeks of being notified of the
    decision to apply a financial penalty

While these decisions may affect the penalty count for other financial
penalties applied within the group, it will not affect the penalty count
for financial penalties in other failure groups. This policy protects
job seekers from the potential rippling effect that could cause a
non-compliance cancellation being retrospectively applied.

Non-compliance cancellation

A non-compliance cancellation may occur as a result of:

-   failure to re-engage within 4 weeks of a reconnection requirement
    being notified for a work refusal failure or mutual obligation
    failure
-   a work refusal failure
-   an unemployment failure committed while the job seeker was in
    receipt of a participation payment
-   a third financial penalty applied for a mutual obligation failure
    that occurred in the financial penalty zone

Post-cancellation non-payment period

When a non-compliance cancellation is applied, the job seeker enters a
post-cancellation non-payment period is:

-   4 weeks for a third mutual obligation failure or work refusal
    failure
-   generally 4 weeks for an unemployment failure, 6 weeks where an
    unemployment failure related to a relocation job

During this period a participation payment is not payable. There are no
waiver provisions for job seekers in financial hardship during this
period, however the job seeker will maintain concession card and benefit
rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) eligibility.

At the end of, or during, the post-cancellation non-payment period, job
seekers may reclaim payment. They may be subject to RapidConnect. The
start date of a return to payment will be affected by the
post-cancellation non-payment period. Job seeker generally return to the
zone they were in prior to the non-compliance cancellation.

The Resources page contains scenarios about financial penalties and
payment cancellations.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures

Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation

Fully compliant job seekers returning to the green zone

Referral to external support services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
