
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a volunteer job seeker's registration can be
inactivated.

Volunteer job seekers

A volunteer job seeker is a job seeker who is not subject to mutual
obligation requirements. All volunteer job seekers are referred to
Workforce Australia Online employment services.

Volunteer job seekers can access Workforce Australia Online services
indefinitely.

A volunteer registration will inactivate automatically if a job seeker
does not use their online account for 12 months. However, at any time,
volunteers may tell the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
(DEWR) or Services Australia they no longer wish to participate.

If a volunteer job seeker advises that they no longer wish to be
registered as looking for work, they can have their job seeker
registration inactivated manually. This may be due to a number of
circumstances such as commencing work or study, or no longer actively
pursuing employment.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements cannot have their
registration manually inactivated by Services Australia.

Job seeker registration status following a change of circumstances

A change in circumstances may result in a job seeker losing eligibility
to access Workforce Australia services as a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP) job seeker. However, this will not result in automatic
inactivation of the job seeker registration. Where a job seeker loses
FEP eligibility the job seeker registration remains active and the job
seeker is automatically referred to Workforce Australia Services as a
volunteer.

Example: a Job Seeker Payment (JSP) recipient would lose eligibility to
access services as a FEP job seeker when they transfer to Age Pension,
but would remain job seeker active and can access Workforce Australia
Online for volunteer services.

A different process applies to Disability Employment Services (DES)
participants. Provided their change in circumstances does not result in
a loss of eligibility, DES participants will remain connected to their
provider and can continue participating in a voluntary capacity.

Example: a JSP recipient participating in DES to meet their mutual
obligation requirements who transfers to Disability Support Pension
(DSP) can continue to voluntarily participate in DES.

Inactivate the registration of job seekers

Services Australia can manually inactivate a volunteer job seeker
registration.

Tell job seekers volunteering in Workforce Australia Online employment
services, who request inactivation, to contact Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations (DEWR). DEWR may approve a short suspension from
employment services, if they decide this is more suitable than an
inactivation based on the job seeker's circumstances.

Parenting Payment (PP) customers

Job seekers receiving Parenting Payment and are not subject to mutual
obligation requirements should be advised that as a volunteer they can
access Workforce Australia Online as a volunteer indefinitely. The
Service Officer can however, inactivate the job seeker.

Mature age, principal carers and partial capacity to work

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are 55 years of age
and over, are required to remain connected with a Workforce Australia,
and cannot have their job seeker registration inactivated by Services
Australia. However, if they are fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, their employment services may be suspended by Department
of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) or by their provider and
they will not be required to attend ongoing interviews with the
provider. Job seekers who are 55 years of age and over are obliged to
accept any offer of suitable paid work (either full-time or an increase
in hours) and all referrals to job interviews.

Disability Employment Services (DES)

Services Australia cannot inactivate job seeker registration for
customers volunteering in DES. DES volunteers who no longer wish to
participate in employment services should be advised to contact their
DES provider, who will record an Exit.

Community Development Programme (CDP)

CDP Centrelink managed job seekers can voluntarily participate in the
Community Development Programme (CDP). As each remote area has only one
provider, the job seeker should be advised to contact their CDP provider
to discuss cancelling their registration.

Re-registration

If a customer's job seeker registration has been inactivated and the job
seeker wishes to be re-registered, Service Officers should advise the
job seeker to access their Workforce Australia Online account via myGov
or the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR). If
assistance is required, Service Officers should register the job seeker
via the Job Seeker Registration workflow.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport and contact details for
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR).

Related links

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
