
Self employment 001-02010060

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how staff can assist customers with information
about self employment, and how it can be assessed as an approved
activity for a job seeker to meet their mutual obligation requirements.

Starting a business

Customers and job seekers can access information about starting a
business from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment website
or state and territory agencies. Training information about small
business courses can be accessed from organisations such as TAFE.

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

The New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) assists eligible job seekers
to establish and run new commercially viable businesses. Job seekers who
are registered jobactive or a Disability Employment Services (DES)
providers and who have a suitable business idea, may be referred by
their provider or DES to participate in NEIS for specialist small
business services and training. See Referring a job seeker to Disability
Employment Services (DES) for further information.

If participating in NEIS, and the job seeker has an idea for a viable
business and they participate in NEIS, they will begin by undertaking
training in small business management and business plan development.

Self employment and mutual obligation requirements

JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seekers), Parenting
Payment (PP) customers with mutual obligation requirements and certain
Special Benefit (SpB) customers are required to be actively looking for
work, or taking reasonable steps to undertake suitable training or other
activities which assist them to return to employment.

Job seekers may be able to have self employment approved as an activity
to meet their mutual obligation requirements and have it included in
their Job Plan.

A job seeker's business income and hours of work will be assessed as
part of meeting reporting and participation obligations.

The Resources page contains further information for customers to
investigate different aspects of self employment.

Related links

Self-employment as an approved activity

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

Approved activities for Job Plans

Assessing sole trader income

Community Development Program (CDP)

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
