
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to job seeker compliance
arrangements which may apply to job seekers in receipt of a
participation payment who do not meet their compulsory requirements.

Key objective

The job seeker compliance system is aimed at encouraging job seekers to
meet their compulsory mutual obligation requirements which may include
looking for work and participating in approved activities. The
compliance system helps in reinforcing expectations with job seekers who
are not looking for work and meeting compulsory requirements through the
application of financial penalties. At the same time, job seekers who
have a good reason for not meeting their requirements are not penalised.

Key principles

There are 2 different job seeker compliance systems used to manage
non-compliance with compulsory requirements. They are the:

-   Targeted Compliance Framework, and
-   Job Seeker Compliance Framework

The following key principles underpin both systems:

-   job seekers are expected to remain actively engaged with employment
    services and to participate to the full extent of their capacity and
    capability to help ensure the earliest possible entry (or re-entry)
    to the workforce
-   non-genuine job seekers who deliberately avoid meeting requirements
    will incur financial penalties

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job seekers managed under this compliance system include those who
receive services from Workforce Australia, Workforce Australia Online
and Disability Employment Services (DES).

The Targeted Compliance Framework has a strong emphasis on personal
responsibility. Job seekers negotiate compulsory requirements with their
Employment Services Provider. They are encouraged to disclose any
personal circumstances that may impact their ability to comply (for
example, when negotiating their Job/Participation Plan) to help ensure
requirements are appropriate and achievable. They are expected to
maintain contact with their provider, engage to their full capacity and
record their own attendance at requirements, including activities.

Job seekers who do not meet a compulsory requirement in their job plan
or fail to enter into a job plan, commit a mutual obligation failure. A
mutual obligation failure means that participation payments are not
payable until the job seeker complies with a re-engagement requirement
notified by their provider.

All job seekers subject to the Targeted Compliance Framework will start
in the green zone with zero demerits. A job seeker will accrue a demerit
if they commit a mutual obligation failure without a valid reason,
moving to the warning zone. Providers are fully responsible for managing
demerits.

To ensure that job seekers have the capability to meet compulsory
requirements, accrual of:

-   three demerit points in 6 active months triggers a Capability
    Interview conducted by the provider, and
-   five demerit points in 6 active months triggers a Capability
    Assessment conducted by Services Australia

Job seekers move into the financial penalty zone if both a Capability
Interview and a Capability Assessment find the job seeker's current Job
or Participation Plan is appropriate. In this zone, fortnightly payments
are dependent on full compliance with compulsory requirements. Those who
continue to be non-compliant once they have moved to the financial
penalty zone will incur a financial penalty, or payment cancellation
with a 4 week wait to receive payments if they reapply.

Job seekers who refuse suitable employment without reasonable excuse
commit a work refusal failure. A job seeker who voluntarily leaves
suitable employment without a reasonable excuse or is dismissed due to
misconduct commits an unemployment failure. Payment is cancelled and
customers have a 4 week, or in some cases 6 week, wait to receive
payments if they reapply. This applies regardless of the zone the job
seeker is in at the time.

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

The Job Seeker Compliance Framework applies to declared program
participants who are receiving a participation payment. Declared program
participants are all job seekers in the Community Development Program
(CDP).

Providers have responsibility for monitoring job seeker engagement with
mutual obligation requirements.

CDP providers manage attendance at provider appointments and are
responsible for actioning Non-Attendance Reports (NAR), including
notifying reconnection requirements, and recording appropriate outcomes
in the Online Diary in a timely manner.

Providers submit a Participation Report or Provider Attendance Report
where they consider investigation of a non-compliance event by Services
Australia is required.

Services Australia has responsibility for making decisions under Social
Security legislation relating to non-compliance. This means that, once
reported by the CDP provider, Services Australia is responsible for
determining whether a connection failure, non-attendance failure,
reconnection failure, No Show, No Pay failure, or serious failure has
occurred, or an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) will be applied.
Services Australia also conduct Comprehensive Compliance Assessments
(CCA) where a pattern of non-compliance has emerged, before a decision
is made to apply a serious failure for persistent non-compliance.

Roles and responsibilities

The effectiveness of both job seeker compliance systems is reliant on
providers and Services Australia working together to keep job seekers
actively engaged.

This means applying compliance policy with consistency and fairness by:

-   delivering strong, consistent messages about the importance of
    complying with mutual obligation requirements at every participation
    contact
-   re-engaging job seekers with their requirements as quickly as
    possible
-   making evidence-based decisions that apply compliance and other
    relevant policies and legislation consistently

Transferring between compliance systems

Job seekers will transition between job seeker compliance systems if
they change residential address and either commence in, or cease to
participate in the Community Development Program (CDP).

For information on the impact a jobseeker's change of address has on
outstanding compliance action or suspensions, see Job seeker change of
address.

Note: it may take a number of hours for a change in address to trigger a
transfer to a new provider. The transfer can be delayed if the record is
locked by staff or customers.

Contents

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Conducting compliance investigations

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Participation Compliance Hub

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Related links

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Mutual obligation requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
