
Finalising Community Development Program (CDP) re-engagement requirements 001-10090050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers finalise outstanding
re-engagement requirements for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers.

Reconnection or further reconnection requirement

If a CDP job seeker has been notified of a reconnection or further
reconnection requirement, a reconnection failure and reconnection
failure penalty period may apply if the CDP job seeker does not comply
with the requirement.

A reconnection or further reconnection requirement is not finalised
until:

-   the CDP job seeker meets the requirement, or
-   the Services Australia or the CDP provider determines the CDP job
    seeker no longer needs to meet the requirement

The action required to finalise a reconnection or further reconnection
requirement depends on the type of requirement. The requirement will
either be automatically finalised or it may need to be manually
finalised by a Service Officer.

Automatic payment cancellation for non-compliance

If a CDP job seeker does not comply with a reconnection or further
reconnection requirement within 29 days of the requirement first being
issued their participation payment will be cancelled 'Customer failed to
re-engage' (CDR) and cannot be restored. To receive payment again the
job seeker will need to lodge a claim. The claim start date should not
be backdated to the date of cancellation even where it is lodged within
14 days of the 'CDR' cancellation.

CDP provider re-engagement appointments

If a CDP job seeker has been notified of a requirement to attend a
re-engagement appointment with their CDP provider, the provider is
responsible for:

-   recording the appointment outcome in the Online Diary as soon as
    possible after the appointment time. For re-engagement appointments
    scheduled for waiver of a serious failure, a DNAI or DNEP result
    will trigger the re-application of the serious failure penalty
-   where the CDP job seeker has not attended, attempting to contact the
    CDP job seeker and considering if compliance action is appropriate
-   where the appointment was scheduled as a result of a NAR, and the
    CDP job seeker has attended, finalising the NAR

Services Australia's role is to establish contact with the CDP job
seeker and investigate any resulting failure.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations.

Related links

Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) participants

Reconnection failure penalties

Cancellation of payment after a compliance related suspension

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
