
Implementing Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT second review) partial stay orders 001-10130030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for implementing AAT partial stay
orders.

Payment Pending Review

Job Seeker Compliance Framework appeals to the AAT (AAT second review)
are not covered in the Payment Pending Review (PPR) legislative
instrument. This means that, unless the AAT has issued a stay order
against the imposition of the penalty prior to the AAT second review, it
is not appropriate to code or allow PPR for appeals to the AAT (AAT
second review) relating to Unemployment Non-Payment Periods (UNPP) or
serious failure penalty periods.

Full stay orders

AAT stay orders issued for an entire UNPP or serious failure penalty
period are referred to as full stay orders. Full stay orders are
implemented by a Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service
Officer (WNPPD).

Partial stay orders

Stay orders issued for part of the UNPP or serious failure penalty
period are referred to as partial stay orders and are implemented by a
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD).

Where the decision is made to reapply the UNPP or serious failure, care
should be taken to ensure the job seeker only serves a non-payment
period for the amount of time the AAT had granted the partial stay
order. If the AAT granted a partial stay order for 6 weeks, the job
seekers would have already served a 2 week UNPP or serious failure
penalty period (arrears would not have been paid for 2 weeks).
Therefore, if the decision is made to apply the UNPP or serious failure
penalty period, the end date should be manually adjusted so that the job
seeker only serves the remaining 6 weeks of the penalty.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Workload Management
Team.

Related links

Payment Pending Review (PPR) of decision to apply a penalty for
non-compliance

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Implementing the outcome of a failure review or appeal

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Serious failure penalties

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Manually adjusting non-payment period start and end dates

Priority explanation or formal review of a decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
