
Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice 001-10040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Participation Solutions
Team (PST) skilled Service Officers investigating compliance actions
when the job seeker or ParentsNext participant disputes being notified
of a mutual obligation requirement.

Requirement for appropriate and reasonable notice

Job seekers in receipt of a participation payment are required to comply
with compulsory requirements when given appropriate and reasonable
notice. A request to comply with a requirement can be issued by Services
Australia, an Employment Services Provider or ParentsNext provider.

It is a legislative requirement that all job seekers and ParentsNext
participants receive appropriate and reasonable notice of a requirement
they are compelled to undertake, such as an appointment or activity
included within their Job Plan or Participation Plan. When a
non-compliance event is reported, the notice issued by the provider is
automatically linked to the report.

As part of a compliance investigation, PST skilled Service Officers must
consider if the job seeker received appropriate and reasonable notice.

A financial penalty for a mutual obligation failure cannot be applied if
the job seeker did not receive appropriate notification.

Services Australia will only consider appropriate and reasonable notice
to determine whether a Non Attendance Report (NAR) was valid if:

-   a review of a decision to automatically suspend or cancel payment
    due to the NAR is being undertaken, and
-   the job seeker disputes notification

A NAR is invalid if notification of the requirement did not include all
the required elements, or the notice was not reasonable.

A connection, non-attendance, reconnection or No Show, No Pay failure
has not occurred if notification of the requirement did not include all
the required elements or the notice was not reasonable.

Requirement to attend compulsory appointment

Under Social Security Law, job seekers must receive appropriate notice
of a requirement to attend an appointment. This notice must include the
date, time, location of the appointment and the consequences for failing
to attend or failing to advise of an inability to attend.

The notice can be delivered verbally or in writing (via the job seeker's
Job / Participation Plan, Activity Diary/Calendar - supplementary
notification details, letter or email).

Providers have access to scripted support in their system when verbal
notification is used.

Reasonable notice

Reasonable notice requires that a job seeker is given sufficient time
to:

-   receive notice of a requirement, and
-   make the necessary arrangements to comply with the requirement

The policy relating to timeframes that are considered reasonable varies
depending on how the notice is issued.

Requirement to attend compulsory activities

The requirement to participate in a compulsory activity must be included
in the Job Plan/Participation Plan.

Job seekers subject to the Targeted Compliance Framework are also
required to record their own attendance at compulsory requirements
unless other arrangements have been agreed with their provider.

Reminder notices

Job seekers may receive secondary or reminder notifications. For
example, when an appointment or activity is booked in the Calendar or
Online Diary, an automatic reminder SMS may be sent to eligible job
seekers the day before the appointment. These act as a reminder only and
supports previous notification/s issued.

Non-receipt of mail

The Acts Interpretation Act 1901 states that if a letter is correctly
addressed and posted, it is deemed to have been given to the job seeker
when it would normally be delivered by post. If a record exists that a
letter was posted to the correct address, it is deemed to have been
delivered.

Note: deemed delivery does not necessarily mean the job seeker received
the letter, therefore the legislative provisions do not override the
reasonable excuse provisions.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the
Participation Obligations helpdesk.

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Non-compliance events

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
