-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how some or all of a serious failure period may
be waived if the Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker agrees
to attend a waiver re-engagement appointment with their CDP provider.
Serious failures may be incurred by CDP job seekers who either refuse or
fail to accept suitable employment, or are persistently non-compliant.

Requesting a waiver

A serious failure period imposed under the Job Seeker Compliance
Framework can be partially or fully waived if the CDP job seeker agrees
to re-engage with their provider. The serious failure decision maker
must discuss this option with the CDP job seeker at the time a serious
failure is applied.

When a CDP job seeker contacts Services Australia to advise they would
like to pursue this option, they should be referred to the Participation
Solutions Team (PST) to assess and record the waiver in the
Participation Compliance workflow. If appropriate, the PST will also
arrange a waiver re-engagement appointment with the job seeker's CDP
provider.

Assessing the waiver

The Participation Solutions Team (PST) is responsible for assessing
serious failure waivers. This includes confirming:

-   the CDP job seeker is prepared to attend a waiver re-engagement
    appointment with their provider
-   the CDP job seeker has capacity to attend the re-engagement
    appointment. If the CDP job seeker is exempt at the time of the
    re-engagement appointment, consider if the CDP job seeker would be
    eligible for a serious failure hardship waiver instead
-   the date the waiver should take effect. The waiver will generally
    take effect from the date the CDP job seeker requests the waiver. An
    earlier date would generally only be appropriate if the CDP job
    seeker was previously unable to attend a waiver re-engagement
    appointment for the same serious failure period due to an extreme
    event

Before assessing the waiver, it is important to consider any other
action the CDP job seeker is taking in relation to the serious failure
decision. If the CDP job seeker is seeking an Authorised Review Officer
(ARO) Review or an Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) first review of
the serious failure decision, a waiver must not be recorded until the
outcome of the review is known. This will allow the CDP job seeker to
receive Payment Pending Review (PPR).

Recording the waiver

After confirming the serious failure period can be waived, the
Participation Solutions Team (PST) is responsible for:

-   determining if the serious failure period should be conditionally or
    permanently waived
-   recording the waiver in the Participation Compliance workflow
-   booking a waiver re-engagement appointment (for conditionally waived
    serious failure periods only)

When a waiver is recorded in the Participation Compliance workflow, the
serious failure period will cease and the CDP job seeker's payment will
recommence from the date the PST determined the waiver should take
effect.

Conditional and permanent waivers

A serious failure waiver is granted on the condition the CDP job seeker
attends the re-engagement appointment with their provider. A waiver
recorded under these circumstances is a conditional waiver. If the CDP
job seeker does not attend the appointment, the serious failure period
will be reinstated.

If the CDP job seeker attends the re-engagement appointment, the serious
failure period is permanently waived. It is also possible to manually
record a permanent waiver if a suitable re-engagement appointment cannot
be arranged, the job seeker is no longer a CDP job seeker due to a
change in address or the CDP job seeker negotiated a re-engagement
appointment before they requested the waiver. After a serious failure
period is permanently waived, no further action can be taken to
reinstate the serious failure period and under no circumstances should
staff manually book a re-engagement appointment.

However, if a waiver is conditionally waived, and the CDP job seeker
does not attend their waiver re-engagement appointment, the provider
will record an appointment result, which will result in Services
Australia's system automatically reinstating the serious failure period.

Roles and responsibilities

All staff are responsible for referring CDP job seekers who contact to
have payment reinstated during a serious failure period to the
Participation Solutions Team (PST) so serious failure waiver provisions
can be assessed.

PST Service Officers with WNPPD security resource are responsible for:

-   assessing the waiver and recording it in the Compliance
    Investigation workflow, and
-   where the waiver is conditionally waived, booking a waiver
    re-engagement appointment with the CDP job seeker's provider

The Resources page contains a link to the Waiver Re-engagement Report
form. This form may be used in scenarios when a serious failure is
permanently waived because the CDP job seeker was not able to attend the
waiver re-engagement appointment as there was no appointment available
and contact with the provider was unsuccessful.

Related links

Refusing or failing to accept a suitable job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Serious failure penalties

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not
attended

Serious failure hardship provisions

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements- review and appeals

Job Seeker Compliance Framework waiver and hardship provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
