
Capability Assessments 001-18030203

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Urgent - Please read Network News Update (NNU) - Problems with
Capability Assessment (10875)

This document outlines information for conducting Capability Assessments
under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Capability Assessment

Capability Assessments are an important component of the Targeted
Compliance Framework. They ensure financial penalties are appropriately
targeted to job seekers who are repeatedly and deliberately
non-compliant and also serve as a protection mechanism for vulnerable
job seekers.

Capability Assessments are an evidence based review conducted by a
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD),
building on the most recent Capability Interview conducted by the job
seeker's provider. The Capability Assessment uses information on the job
seekers record and should be finalised at their initial point of contact
where possible. If appropriate, the job seeker can be asked to provide
evidence of their circumstances.

It is an opportunity to ensure the requirements in a job seeker's Job
Plan are achievable and appropriate to their circumstances.

During the Capability Assessment, a PST-skilled Service Officer will:

-   give the job seeker an opportunity to disclose any new circumstances
    and how they impact their ability to meet their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   allow the job seeker to explain the impact of known circumstances
    already identified on their record, particularly if they have
    changed in their severity or how frequently they impact their
    ability to meet their mutual obligation requirements, and
-   consider if the compulsory requirements in their current Job Plan
    are appropriate for their assessed capacity and their circumstances

An outcome of capable from the Capability Assessment moves the job
seeker into the financial penalty zone. This means financial penalties
will apply for any future mutual obligation failures without a
reasonable excuse.

When a Capability Assessment is required

A Capability Assessment is triggered when a Capability Interview has
found the job seeker was capable of meeting their compulsory
requirements, and:

-   a total of 5 demerits are accrued in 6 active months, or
-   the job seeker is fast tracked for non-attendance or inappropriate
    behaviour at a job interview, or they have not acted on a job
    referral, or
-   when the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR)
    (ESSweb 2.0) triggers an assessment is required

The provider notifies the job seeker of their reconnection requirement
to have a Capability Assessment completed by Services Australia.

The provider also notifies the job seeker their payment will remain
suspended, until the reconnection requirement of the Capability
Assessment is completed. If the reconnection requirement to have a
Capability Assessment is not met within 4 weeks the job seeker's
participation payments are automatically cancelled.

Additional non-compliance while a Capability Assessment is outstanding

While a Capability Assessment is outstanding, further demerit accrual
stops until it has been completed. The job seeker is eligible for
payments again once the Capability Assessment is completed and all other
outstanding reconnection requirements have been met.

Contact with Services Australia for a Capability Assessment

Job seekers should be referred to the Participation Solutions Team (PST)
so the Capability Assessment can be completed.

Where possible, the Capability Assessment should be completed the day
the job seeker contacts. In limited situations, the participation
suspension may be lifted by the PST, but only when there is a valid
reason to do so.

Conducting a Capability Assessment

PST-skilled Service Officers with a WNPPD security resource are
responsible for conducting Capability Assessments.

In conducting this assessment, PST-skilled Service Officers can draw on
the skills of Senior Service Officers (SO5s), PST-skilled social workers
or other specialists such as Indigenous Cultural Consultants and
Multicultural Services Officers.

Capability Assessment outcomes

The job seeker will enter the financial penalty zone when the outcome of
the Capability Assessment is capable.

This means the job seeker:

-   is getting the correct level of service for the assessed capacity
-   does not require an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   is capable of meeting the requirements included in their current Job
    Plan, and
-   has a Job Plan which does not contain any errors

Once deemed capable and in the financial penalty zone, any further
mutual obligation failures will result in either a financial penalty, or
payment cancellation if reasonable excuse cannot be established.

Workforce Australia participants registered with Workforce Australia
Online for Individuals will transition to a Workforce Australia
Employment Services Provider on being assessed as capable during a
Capability Assessment.

If the Capability Assessment outcome is not capable, the job seeker will
return to the TCF green zone with their demerits reset to zero. An
outcome of not capable indicates that:

-   the job seeker is not capable of meeting 1 or more of their current,
    compulsory requirements, or
-   action taken during the Capability Assessment has resulted in either
    a change of service level or referral for an ESAt

An outcome of not capable means the job seeker returns to the green zone
and their provider is responsible for re-negotiating a new Job Plan.

Further Capability Assessments

Where the job seeker returns to the green zone, their demerit count is
reset to zero. A further Capability Assessment will be triggered if the
job seeker accrues another 5 demerits in 6 active months, or is fast
tracked.

Occasionally, a job seeker who moves into the financial penalty zone
following a Capability Assessment may be returned to either the green or
warning zone. This may occur when a demerit is removed retrospectively.

Capability Assessment review process

Services Australia is not involved in disputes with the job seeker over
the accrual of demerits. Job seekers should be referred to their
provider if they wish to dispute their demerits. If they are not
satisfied following the discussion with their provider, they can contact
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.

A Capability Assessment is an administrative process that occurs before
a job seeker can be moved to the financial penalty zone. It is not a
legislated decision under Social Security Law and the outcome is not
appealable.

If job seekers wish to discuss the terms of their Job Plan, or the
Targeted Compliance Framework zone they are in, they must contact their
Employment Services Provider or ParentsNext Provider. If the job seeker
is in online employment services they must contact the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations' Digital Services Contact Centre
(DCSL).

Related Links

Participation Compliance workflow

Targeted Compliance Framework

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation requirements

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Fully compliant job seekers returning to the green zone

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
