
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the Australian
Apprenticeships Incentives Program. The Australian Apprenticeships
Incentives Program supports both apprenticeships and traineeships
(Australian Apprenticeships) with a system of financial incentives.

Encouragement for employers and individuals

The Program encourages employers, through the payment of financial
incentives, to offer employment-related training opportunities that will
encourage people to acquire and expand their working skills. The program
also encourages individuals to take up employment-related training
opportunities, through the payment of personal benefits, which assist to
maintain a flow of skilled employees.

Australian Apprenticeships Centres administer employer incentives and
personal benefits.

Employer Incentives (directed to the employer)

The Program involves a number of standard and targeted (additional and
special) employer incentives. Standard incentives are provided for
employers at the commencement and completion of Australian
Apprenticeships at Certificate II, III and IV levels as well as Diplomas
and Advanced Diplomas. Additional and special incentives are also
available to employers who employ Australian Apprentices in specific
target groups and/or areas.

Personal Benefits (directed to the Australian Apprentice)

To be eligible for personal benefits Australian Apprentices must be
undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship in a skills shortage trade
occupation recognised under the 'Trade and Related Worker' section of
the Australian Standard Classification of Occupations and listed on the
National Skills Needs List (NSNL) as being in national skills shortage.

Personal Benefits paid under the Australian Apprenticeships Incentives
Program include:

-   the Tools for Your Trade Payment
-   the Living Away from Home Allowance
-   Support for Adult Australian Apprentices payments, and
-   Disabled Australian Apprentice Wage Support (the payment targeted to
    Australian Apprentices with disabilities)

Tools for Your Trade Payments

The Tools for Your Trade Payments scheme finished on 30 June 2014.

The Tools for Your Trade payments were five tax exempt cash payments
provided to support Australian Apprentices with the costs of their
training, purchases of relevant tools and other costs associated with
their Australian Apprenticeship.

Trade Support Loans

Trade Support Loans are an income contingent loan scheme available to
Australian Apprentices to help them meet everyday costs while they
undertake their training. The loan of $20 000 is paid monthly in
arrears.

Apprentices are not required to repay the loan until they are earning
above the minimum repayment threshold. Unpaid loan amounts will be
indexed according to the Consumer Price Index (CPI). Apprentices who
successfully complete the apprenticeship will receive a 20 per cent
discount on their loan amount.

Australian Apprentices will need to apply for the loan through their
Australian Apprenticeships Centre.

Apprentices who also receive an income support payment, including Youth
Allowance (YA), Austudy and ABSTUDY apprentice payments, are not
required to declare any Trade Support Loan payments as income.

Living Away From Home Allowance (LAFHA)

LAFHA is payable to Australian Apprentices who need to leave the
parental/guardian residence for the first time to take up or remain in
their first Australian Apprenticeship when all other criteria are met.

LAFHA may be paid for up to 3 years. No personal income or parental
income and assets tests are required to receive LAFHA. However,
Australian Apprentices cannot be in receipt of Youth Allowance, Austudy
or ABSTUDY and receive LAFHA at the same time.

Individual Homeless Australian Apprentices seeking assistance with
verification of their status in order to receive LAFHA may approach
Services Australia.

Support for Adult Australian Apprentices (SAAA) payments

This initiative is currently targeted at Australian Apprentices aged 25
years and over and is payable to either the Australian Apprentice or the
employer depending on the employment arrangements when all other
criteria are met. The payments are set at $150 a week ($7,800 per annum)
in the first year of training and $100 per week ($5,200 per annum) in
the second year of training.

Note: SAAA payments will cease 1 July 2015. Payments that fall due
before this date will still be paid.

SAAA payments are considered to be assessable income for Services
Australia, Department of Veterans' Affairs and Australian Tax Office
purposes.

SAAA payments made to the employer are not assessed as the employer
would have incorporated the amount in the Australian Apprentice's normal
wage.

See Existing customer starts Australian Apprenticeship for coding
instructions.

Customer services to be provided by Services Australia

Services Australia can support the program by facilitating access to
information for employers and employees/customers.

Other direct assistance to eligible Australian Apprentices may be
available. Australian Apprentices should check their eligibility for
personal benefits with their Australian Apprenticeships Centre. If an
Australian Apprentice is unsure who their Australian Apprenticeships
Centre is they can find out by calling 133 873.

The Resources page contains a link to more information for Australian
Apprenticeships and potential users of the scheme, including information
on Trade Support Loans and Living Away from Home Allowance.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
