
Direct registration with a provider for disability employment assistance services 001-02230030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a job seeker with an illness, injury or
disability can access employment services through direct registration
with an Employment Services Provider.

Direct registration to a Disability Employment Services Provider

Job seekers with an illness, injury or disability may directly approach
a Disability Employment Services Provider such as Disability Employment
Services (DES) to register for employment assistance.

This direct registration process applies for job seekers who are:

receiving a payment and do not have mutual obligation requirements, or

not receiving an income support payment and is:

-   an Eligible School Leaver
-   a Special Class Client
-   participating in Work Assist
-   volunteering to meet Program of Support (POS) requirements

A person who is not receiving an income support payment is eligible to
commence in DES to satisfy Program of Support (POS) requirements where:

-   Services Australia has assessed and rejected a claim for Disability
    Support Pension (DSP) on the grounds that POS requirements have not
    been met
-   the Provider has, and retains, a signed statement or email from the
    person that they have claimed and intend to re-claim DSP, subject to
    POS requirements
-   the Provider records that the person is undertaking a POS in the
    Special Placement section of the job seeker Eligibility screen
-   the person meets other DES eligibility requirements

Job seekers may be referred for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
by a provider when a customer does not have a current and valid
assessment of their work capacity, to determine the most suitable
assistance.

DSP recipients

Job seekers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP) can also directly
register with a provider. If required, the provider can directly refer
the job seeker for an ESAt to determine the most suitable employment
assistance service for the job seeker. The outcomes of the ESAt will not
affect the job seeker's eligibility for DSP.

Provider actions following initial approach from the job seeker

The DES provider will assess whether the job seeker is eligible to
receive assistance from their service. The provider may advise the job
seeker they:

-   are immediately eligible to be placed in their service without the
    need for further assessment
-   need to be referred for a ESAt to determine which type of assistance
    is most suitable for them
-   are not eligible for the service offered by that provider

If a DES provider determines that an ESAt is required to determine the
most suitable employment assistance for a person then the provider
arranges the ESAt referral. In these circumstances, Assessment Services
will action the referral.

When the ESAt takes place, the Assessor is generally responsible for
connecting the job seeker with any recommended services.

The role of Services Australia in direct registration

The role of Services Australia (the agency) in direct registration
includes any of the following:

-   advising the job seeker about local providers, if approached by the
    job seeker. The Resources page has a link to the Workforce
    Australia - Providers website
-   assisting the provider with parts of the direct registration
    process. For example, confirming or creating a Customer Reference
    Number (CRN) if required
-   Assessment Services conduct the ESAt and make the recommendation and
    referral where appropriate
-   accepting the ESAt, after it is submitted by the Assessor
-   referring the job seeker to a recommended service. For example,
    where the job seeker has a current and valid ESAt, has previously
    chosen not to accept a referral to that service, but subsequently
    approaches the agency requesting a referral
-   providing advice to the provider about circumstances that may affect
    the job seeker's eligibility for a particular service

Matching the job seeker with a Services Australia record

When a job seeker directly registers with DES, the provider needs to
ensure that the person is registered as a job seeker and has a Job
Seeker Identification (JSID) number. The provider should complete the
job seeker registration if the person is not already registered.

As part of the job seeker registration and referral workflow the
person's job seeker record will be matched with their Services Australia
(the agency) record (if they have one) using the Customer Reference
Number (CRN).

If the job seeker is an agency customer and cannot provide their CRN,
the DES provider should assist the job seeker in contacting the agency
to obtain his or her CRN to continue the Direct Registration process.

Eligibility for DES

A job seeking must be receiving an income support payment unless they
are an Eligible School Leaver, Special Class Client, participating in
Work Assist or volunteering to meet Program of Support (POS)
requirements.

As a general rule, a referral cannot take place unless DES is
recommended in the customer's most recent current and valid Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) or Employment Services Assessment (ESAt).

Some groups of customers are exempt from the requirement for a JCA or
ESAt, including Work Assist participants, school students, special class
clients and school leavers. The DES provider determines whether an
exemption applies to the customer and where required.

Where required a job seeker may be referred for an ESAt to assess
eligibility for DES, including job seekers who 'directly register' with
a DES provider.

Community Development Program (CDP)

Job seekers located in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area are referred to a Community Development
Program (CDP) provider. The CDP provider will provide a similar
Disability Employment Service to job seekers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Workforce Australia -
Providers website.

Related links

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

Assessment Services

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
