
Voluntary work organisations 001-02010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess an organisation's request to
register as an approved voluntary work organisation.

Voluntary work

Some job seekers may meet some or all of their mutual obligation
requirements by doing voluntary work. Voluntary work as an approved
activity can only be included in a job seeker's Job Plan if the
organisation they are working for is listed in the Local Activities
Database (LAD) as an approved voluntary work organisation.

Staff are able to release information found in the Local Activities
Database (LAD) for any volunteer organisation who has advised it is
willing to accept referrals from Services Australia.

Details of any organisation that has advised it is not willing to accept
referrals from Services Australia should not be released.

The most recent assessment comments/details on their entry on the Local
Activity Data base (LAD) will state if the organisation will or will not
accept referrals.

Approving voluntary work organisations

Approved voluntary work organisations, must be a:

-   community based not-for-profit organisation with appropriate public
    liability insurance and personal accident/voluntary workers
    insurance, or
-   government sector agency

Organisations wanting to give voluntary work opportunities to eligible
job seekers must register with Services Australia. Organisations must
submit a Voluntary Work - Request for Organisation Approval (SU461) form
if they want to either:

-   register as an approved voluntary work organisation for the first
    time, or
-   update their details with Services Australia

The Voluntary Work - Request for Organisation Approval (SU461) form can
only be submitted in person at a Centrelink office by a representative
of the organisation. If it is lodged by the customer, it is to be
actioned accordingly and under no circumstances, uploaded or scanned to
a customer's record.

The Voluntary Organisation Team assess all requests for voluntary work
organisation approval. The results of assessments are recorded in the
Local Activities Database (LAD).

Verifying insurance cover

A government sector agency will have appropriate insurances and does not
need to supply proof of insurance. All other organisations must provide
suitable proof that they have paid for and have an active public
liability insurance policy and personal accident/voluntary workers
insurance policy.

Public liability insurance

Public liability insurance covers the cost of claims made against an
organisation by a third party, if the services delivered by the
organisation result in injury or property damage.

Community based organisations must provide proof that they have public
liability insurance of at least $5 million.

Personal accident/voluntary workers insurance

Personal accident/voluntary workers insurance covers the cost of claims
made against an organisation by volunteers because of a work accident.

The level of personal accident/voluntary workers insurance may be
different for each organisation. Services Australia cannot give advice
about what level of cover is appropriate. Organisations should be
encouraged to get professional advice to determine appropriate levels of
cover.

Government sector agencies do not need to supply proof of insurance to
Services Australia.

Verifying not-for-profit status

Government sector agencies are not-for-profit organisations and do not
need to supply proof of their status. Community based organisations must
provide proof of their not-for-profit status.

Australian public schools are considered to be government sector
organisations for the purpose of assessment as a voluntary work
organisation.

However, independent Parents and Citizen Associations and private
schools are not considered government organisations and must meet all
proof requirements.

Voluntary work organisations with multiple locations

Organisations may wish to get approval for more than 1 location.
Organisations can do this by listing locations separately on the
Voluntary Work - Request for Organisational Approval (SU461) form. The
physical address, best contact person and details for each location must
be included.

Once a decision is made, each location will have a separate entry in the
Local Activities Database (LAD) along with its physical address. The
approved or not approved outcome is for that physical address only. If a
job seeker wants to do voluntary work at a location that is not in the
LAD, a new assessment must be completed.

When assessing multiple locations of an organisation, it is important to
check the insurance documents verifies coverage for all locations
seeking approval.

Job seekers not meeting their mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers with a voluntary work approved activity must advise how many
voluntary work hours they completed when they report.

Voluntary work organisations do not need to tell Services Australia if a
job seeker stops or reduces their number of voluntary work hours. If a
voluntary work organisation suspects a job seeker is not telling
Services Australia about a change in their voluntary work hours, the
organisation can report a suspected fraud.

Change in circumstances for an approved voluntary work organisation

Organisations must tell Services Australia of a change of their
circumstances within 14 days. Examples of events include:

-   a change of their name, location or contact details
-   a change to their not-for-profit status
-   a community not-for-profit organisation no longer has the insurance
    needed
-   they cease operation, or
-   they no longer want to be an approved voluntary work organisation

Organisations can have their Local Activities Database (LAD) details
updated by:

-   providing a new Voluntary Work - Request for Organisational Approval
    (SU461) form with required proof

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the Local Activities Database (LAD)
-   the manual letter template
-   contact details for the Voluntary Organisation Team
-   the Voluntary Work - Request for Organisational Approval (SU461)
    form
-   the Services Australia website
-   Frequently Asked Questions

Related links

Voluntary work as an approved activity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
