
Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S)) 001-02020040

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

This document explains the eligibility criteria for assessment as a
Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S)), and the
type of service provided to customers in this group. Young people aged
15 to 21 years who present with at least one non-vocational barrier can
be registered as job seekers and access immediate assistance from an
Employment Services Provider.

VY assessment

Assessment as VY job seeker

In order to be assessed as a VY job seeker, a young person must meet all
of the following conditions:

-   be aged 15 to 21 years
-   not working 15 hours or more per week, not studying full-time and
    not currently receiving an income support payment
-   present with at least one serious non-vocational barrier
-   have legal rights to work in Australia

Assessment as VY(S)

In order to be assessed as a VY(S), a young person must meet all of the
following conditions:

-   be aged 15 to 21 years
-   be a full-time student
-   present with at least one serious non-vocational barrier
-   be in crisis, which is defined as circumstances that require
    immediate intervention to stabilise their situation
-   unable to be referred to an alternative local youth service (for
    example, Reconnect Program)
-   have legal rights to work in Australia

Registration for VY and VY(S)

Customers who meet the eligibility criteria for assessment as VY or
VY(S) can register for services via Services Australia or directly with
a provider. They have access to Stream C services which is specifically
targeted at job seekers experiencing complex and multiple barriers. Job
seekers in a Community Development Program (CDP) region are not
streamed, however their CDP provider will assess appropriate services
available for the job seeker's needs.

If the customer registers with a provider, they have a have a VY or
VY(S) flag set by the provider. Within 4 weeks of commencing in Stream
C/CDP services, the provider will refer the customer to the agency to:

-   test their eligibility for an income support payment
-   complete a Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
-   refer to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as appropriate
-   refer to a social worker to determine if there is an alternative
    local youth service that is available in accordance with the young
    job seeker's needs

If the customer registers with Services Australia, they:

-   will be registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEPs)/CDP fully
    eligible as part of the Participation Interview
-   are exempt from the RapidConnect process
-   will have a VY or VY(S) flag set and a Vulnerability Indicator (VI)
    recorded if applicable
-   will be referred for an ESAt as required
-   will be referred to a social worker for assessment of crisis
    circumstances. The social worker will refer the customer to
    appropriate services in their area (if available), or make an
    appointment to a provider for Stream C services/CDP services.

If young customers do not meet the criteria of VY, they may meet the
criteria to be registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEP) by
Services Australia.

Review of VY/VY(S) status

If an ESAt is not required or triggered (automatically or manually) as
part of the Job Seeker Classification Instrument assessment process or
the ESAt outcome does not confirm Stream C eligibility, the customer
will no longer be considered a VY or VY(S). Job seekers in CDP regions
should discuss their circumstances with their CDP provider.

If the young job seeker has a VY flag recorded on their record and is
granted an income support payment, they are no longer considered VY. The
VY/VY(S) flag must be removed.

Where the customer no longer meets the criteria for VY/VY(S):

-   For VY job seekers, Services Australia removes the VY flag, and any
    relevant Vulnerability Indicators, from the customer's record and
    the provider will receive an outcome from the JSCI indicating the
    job seeker's new eligible Stream for services. If the job seeker is
    Centrelink managed, the agency will be responsible for updating the
    job seeker's Job Plan.
-   For VY(S), Services Australia removes the VY(S) flag, and any
    relevant Vulnerability Indicators, from the customer's record. The
    customer does not have access to Stream Services if they are no
    longer assessed as VY(S). Services Australia should assess if
    customer is eligible for other programs such as Reconnect.

Related links

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

Participation with jobactive

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
