
Eligibility for Parenting Payment (PP) 001-05010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for Parenting Payment
(PP). PP is paid to the principal carer of a dependent child and is
separate from Family Tax Benefit and Paid Parental Leave. Only one
parent or guardian can receive the payment.

On this page:

Rates of PP

There are two different payment rates:

-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) - for single parents, and
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) - for partnered parents

Eligibility for PP

To be eligible for PP, a person must be both qualified and payable.

In general, to be qualified for PP a person must:

-   be the principal carer of a PP child aged under 8 (single parents)
    or under 6 (partnered parents)
-   meet residence requirements
-   meet mutual obligation requirements if required

Payability for Parenting Payment (PP)

PP is not payable if income and assets exceed the thresholds (this
includes partner income and assets if partnered). PP cannot be granted
at nil rate. See Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests
and Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

PP is not payable before the start day

Tax File Number details for both customer and partner (if applicable)
must be provided

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Identification for customer and partner (if applicable)

Applicable waiting periods and preclusion periods:

-   Income Maintenance Period (IMP)
-   Ordinary Waiting Period
-   Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)
-   Admission process for incarcerated customers
-   Compensation Preclusion Period
-   Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) if customers
    have mutual obligation requirements
-   Financial penalty as a result of compliance action such as
    unemployment preclusion period or Unemployment Non-Payment Period
    (UNPP), post-cancellation non-payment period, or serious failure
    period

Bank account details must be provided for payment of PP

The rate of PP must be greater than nil. PP may remain current during an
employment income nil rate period. However, PP cannot be granted at nil
rate

Entitlement where the recipient or child is temporarily overseas for PPS
or PPP

Generally, family assistance payments do not affect PP payability as
they are exempt income under social security law

Income received under the Paid Parental Leave scheme is considered
assessable income under social security law and will affect PPP
payability or PPS rate. This includes Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad
and Partner Pay (DAP)

Note: there are no age provisions for a customer to be eligible
Parenting Payment. If the customer is under the age of consent, see
Customer or partner under age of consent with a dependent child in their
care.

Grandparent or non-parent carers

If the customer is a grandparent or non-parent carer of children and
lives in the same house as the parent/s, they are generally not eligible
for payments. This may become evident when checking the current living
arrangements of the customer. For more information on circumstances
where a grandparent may be considered to be the principal carer of a
child, see Help for grandparents caring for children and Principal carer
of a dependent child. The Resources page has a link to the Services
Australia website.

Partner in receipt of Parenting Payment

If the customer’s partner is already in receipt of PP, the customer
cannot be granted PP. Only one member of a couple can be considered the
principal carer of a child and therefore receive PP. If the couple
decide that the other member of the couple should receive PPP, advise
the customer that their partner will need to confirm this with the
agency. The partner’s PP will need to be cancelled before the customer
can be granted, but the cancellation must not occur prior to confirming
details with the partner.

Child bereavement before PP granted

PP may be paid for a 14 week bereavement period where a child has died
soon after birth, if PP is claimed within 4 weeks of the date of birth.
Customers are not eligible for PP for a stillborn child. However,
Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) can be paid if the customer is not eligible
for Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

See Death of a Parenting Payment (PP) child.

Contents

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Customer or partner under age of consent with a dependent child in their
care

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Checking the status of an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Manual processing of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims

Processing proof of a child's birth

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Start day for Parenting Payment (PP)

Deferment, non-payment period or rate reduction period for Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP)

Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
