-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the suspension of JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA). Before suspending a customer's
payment, care must be taken to establish that the customer is
temporarily not eligible for payment and that there is a legislative
basis to suspend the payment.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment or the payment is not payable as a result of:

-   changes in their circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment, or
-   information that has not been provided to ensure payments are
    directed correctly (such as a valid address or bank account details)

Before a payment is suspended:

-   an appropriate request for information must have been issued and
-   the claimant/recipient and/or their partner or correspondence
    nominee must have provided the requested information/action within
    the time allowed to respond. See Requesting information (CLK)

A decision to suspend a payment potentially has a great impact on a
customer and must be made in accordance with legislation and the
relevant process. Suspensions placed on customers' records that do not
follow the correct process may cause financial hardship and distress to
customers. For example: if requested information is not provided but no
follow up action taken, Service Officers should consider the length of
time since the request was made. It may be more appropriate to reissue
the request.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification, and
full arrears may be issued if payment is subsequently restored.

Reasons for suspension

Reasons for suspension of payment include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the customer failed to reply to correspondence
-   the customer failed to attend an interview
-   a customer has separated from their partner
-   a customer or their partner is in prison or psychiatric confinement
-   the customer's mail has been returned to Centrelink 'whereabouts
    unknown'
-   employment income or an increase in assets

Income from employment

Before suspending a payment due to employment income, consider if the
customer can retain certain benefits for a period of time:

-   Working Credits may enable the customer to keep some of their income
    support payment while they are working
-   If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and
    some of that income is employment income, the payment may remain
    current at nil rate for up to six fortnights and they may retain
    certain benefits

Customer contact

Before a payment is suspended, information must be requested from the
customer under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The
Decision Maker (DM) must be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence
that the customer is either temporarily not qualified for the payment or
the payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information
(CLK).

All decisions to suspend JSP and YA job seekers are made under section
80 of the Social Security (Administration) Act.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system a manual Q134 or Q999
letter must be sent and include:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the customer's review and appeal rights

When the payment is suspended additional appropriate actions are also
required. For example: issue letter, code manual review, DOC the
decision.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension. Also provide information about the
required documentation or advise the customer what is required so the
payment can be restored.

Date of effect

The date of effect of a decision to suspend a customer's payment depends
on the specific circumstances relating to the suspension. If the
customer or their partner informs the agency of a change in
circumstances, generally the date of effect is the date on which the
event or change in circumstances occurred. An exception exists with
respect to events and changes in circumstances concerning employment or
non-employment income, when a working credit balance applies.

If the customer fails to provide requested information when responding
to a section 63 or section 68 notice, the date of effect of the adverse
determination is the date the determination was made. The 'date of
determination' in these instances means the date it is determined the
customer has failed to respond to the notice within the reasonable
timeframe. Where the customer has already been paid for the 'date of
determination', the date of effect for the suspension will be Date Paid
To (DPT) plus 1.

Reviewing suspension - cancellation or restoration of payment

Suspended payments are reviewed within 13 weeks of the suspension. If a
customer does not contact or provide requested information, the
suspended payment may be cancelled as a result of the review and
notification of the cancellation will be issued.

A payment may be restored when the customer re-establishes their
qualification for the payment or provides the required information.

For information on:

-   restoring payments, see Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
    Youth Allowance (job seeker) and Special Benefit (SpB)
-   cancelling payments, see Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Vulnerable or at risk customer

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative.

For more information, see Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension
and Cancellation of vulnerable and at risk customers.

The Resources page contains an attachment that outlines the legislative
basis for suspending payments.

Related links

Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Requesting information (CLK)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Creating a Q134 letter

How to code and action a manual review

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Employment income nil rate period

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
