
Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers 001-09070190

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage compulsory Quarterly Participation
Interviews (QTI activity type) for job seekers assessed as having a
Partial Capacity to Work (PCW) or a Temporary Reduced Work Capacity
(TRWC) of either 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week.

Purpose of the QTI

The purpose of the QTI is to ensure job seekers remain engaged with
Services Australia and are aware of voluntary participation options.
These interviews are conducted every 12 weeks.

Job seekers with a QTI requirement are still required to report and
should be encouraged to use [] self service options (online accounts,
Express Plus Mobile Apps and phone self service) to complete their
report. They can also report in person at a service centre or submit
their report in writing (SU19 form).

Exemption from QTI

Job seekers do not require a QTI if they have a current exemption from
their mutual obligation requirements. This includes job seekers granted
a temporary incapacity exemption because they have lodged a medical
certificate and their Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) confirms
that they have a TRWC of 0-7 hours per week and are unable to
participate in a suitable activity.

A job seeker will be required to attend a QTI if they have a TRWC of 0-7
hours per week and cannot be granted a temporary incapacity exemption
for any reason, or if they do have a temporary incapacity exemption and
it expires while they still have a TRWC of 0-7 hours per week.

PCW job seekers

A job seeker has a PCW of less than 15 hours per week if both their
current and future work capacity with intervention (as assessed in an
ESAt) is less than 15 hours per week.

Job seekers with a PCW of 15-29 hours per week are not required to
attend a QTI, unless they also have a TRWC of less than 15 hours per
week for longer than 12 weeks.

For more information about requirements for all job seekers with a PCW,
see Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced
work capacity.

Requirement to attend a QTI

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements are required to attend
QTIs every 12 weeks if they have an assessed work capacity of:

-   PCW of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week, or
-   TRWC of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week that extends beyond 12 weeks

The criteria includes Centrelink managed job seekers living in a
designated Community Development Program (CDP) area. If the job seeker
fails to attend the appointment, their payment should be suspended and
be prompted to make contact with the agency.

The 'Attend Quarterly Appointment' activity must be included in the job
seeker's Job Plan as their only compulsory activity. The QTI activity
must also be coded on the job seeker's Activity and Exemption Summary
(AEX) screen.

QTI requirements apply to all job seekers with a PCW or TRWC 0-14 hours
per week who are not fully meeting their requirements through paid
employment. A job seeker cannot end their QTI requirement early because
they wish to be connected to a jobactive, CDP or Disability Employment
Services (DES) provider. These job seekers can volunteer to participate
in employment services. Note: job seekers assessed with a TRWC 0-7
cannot volunteer with a DES provider.

Note: job seekers with an assessed TRWC of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week of
less than 12 weeks duration are not required to attend QTIs, as this
will not be included in their Job Plan. They are however still required
to report and to attend compulsory Services Australia interviews when
requested. The 'Reduced Capacity Requirements' activity must be included
in their Job Plan as their only compulsory activity. If the TRWC is
extended beyond 12 weeks, then QTIs will be required and must be
included in their Job Plans.

PCW or TRWC job seekers meeting mutual obligation requirements

If a PCW or TRWC job seeker is in paid employment or self-employment
within their assessed bandwidth, they are fully satisfying their mutual
obligation requirements, and will not be subject to QTI requirements.
These job seekers must have the appropriate compulsory activity included
in their Job Plan such as 'Paid Work' activity or 'Self-employment'
activity, instead of the QTI requirement of 'Attend Quarterly
Appointment' activity. These job seekers must have the appropriate
Activity Type recorded on the AEX screen, for example 'PTW' for paid
work or 'SEL' for self-employment.

Triggering the QTI requirement

A job seeker can only be assessed as having a PCW or a TRWC recommended
by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report.

When the ESAt report is accepted by the agency and the job seeker has
either a future work capacity with intervention or a TRWC of 0-14 hours
per week, the 12 week count for the QTI will automatically begin.

The ESAt report will still display with a status of 'submitted' for 28
days until the Department of Education, Skills and Employment's system
auto-updates this to 'finalised'. This does not affect the commencement
of QTI requirements, as they are effective from the date the report was
accepted by Services Australia.

The duration of the 12 week count will not change, regardless of the job
seeker's recorded activity type, until the PCW/TRWC 0-14 hours per week
status ends or changes. The requirement for the QTI is coded on the job
seeker's record and a Job Plan is negotiated with the job seeker to
include the appropriate compulsory activity. See the Resources page for
types of activities to include.

When the ESAt report is accepted a Service Component will be 'STA'rted
and an appointment will be automatically booked. This initial
appointment is to ensure the Job Plan is updated with the compulsory
activity and QTI requirement coding is completed as soon as possible
after the acceptance of the ESAt report.

Circumstances when the QTI requirement will not trigger

The QTI will not be required if the job seeker either:

-   has an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements, such as
    temporarily incapacitated for all work
-   is in self-employment or paid employment that meets their mutual
    obligation requirements
-   does not have a current and valid assessment of their work capacity

If a current and valid assessment of the job seeker's work capacity is
not available, the customer must be referred for an ESAt.

QTI cycles

The start date for the first interview is 12 weeks after the ESAt report
acceptance date. Subsequent interviews will be held 12 weeks after the
previous interview. If an interview is rescheduled, or the job seeker
did not attend and then later the interview is completed, the next
interview is 12 weeks from the date of the original interview, not from
the date the interview was completed.

The 12 week count continues uninterrupted regardless of any delays,
rescheduling, or exemptions, therefore QTIs will be completed at 12, 24,
36 weeks etc. This start date also applies to TRWC job seekers who were
originally assessed as less than 12 weeks duration but have had their
period of reduced work capacity extended past 12 weeks.

Service Component 707 (Phone) or 708 (Face to Face) will automatically
start when the ESAt report is accepted. This Service Component is to
ensure the coding of the QTI requirement on the AEX screen and the
updating of the Job Plan with the compulsory activity occurs.

Service Component 710 (Phone) or 711 (Face to Face) will automatically
start once the AEX screen and Job Plan have been updated. This Service
Component is for the purposes of conducting the ongoing quarterly (12
weekly) interviews, to discuss the job seeker's circumstances, options
available to them and to ensure they understand their obligations.

While a QTI appointment type is booked for 2 weeks after the ESAt
acceptance date, this appointment does not form part of the QTI cycle.
This appointment is to negotiate a Job Plan to include QTI as an
activity. QTIs do not commence until 12 weeks after the ESAt acceptance.

Conducting the QTI

The Service Profiling Update Workflow is used to conduct the QTI
interview with the job seeker. The workflow provides a checklist of
appropriate actions and discussion topics. The Process page (Table 2,
Step 2) contains information about conducting the QTI.

Including QTI and other activities in the Job Plan

The agency must negotiate a Job Plan with job seekers who have been
assessed as having a PCW or TRWC 0-14 hours per week. These job seekers
are regarded as Centrelink managed job seekers regardless of whether
they also volunteer to participate with a provider such as jobactive,
DES or CDP.

The Job Plan must include at least one compulsory activity where a job
seeker has a TRWC of 0-14 hours per week of 12 weeks or more or PCW of
0-14 hours per week. The compulsory activity for this customer group
should be 'Attend Quarterly Appointment' (QTI), unless they are
satisfying their mutual obligation requirements through paid work.
Voluntary activities may also be added to the Job Plan if appropriate.

The compulsory QTI requirement must not be removed from the Job Plan
even if the job seeker volunteers for employment services.

-   If a job seeker continues to participate in DES, the Job Plan should
    not be updated by the agency, as the provider will update the Job
    Plan with the QTI activity
-   If the job seeker has volunteered with a service provider and the
    provider has incorrectly removed the compulsory QTI activity from
    the Job Plan, the provider must be contacted to discuss adding the
    QTI back into the plan

Note: incorrectly updating a job plan for a DES participant who has
decided to continue with a DES provider will inadvertently suspend the
customer from the provider.

For job seekers with a TRWC of less than 12 weeks, the Job Plan must
include the compulsory activity of 'Reduced Capacity Requirements',
unless they are satisfying requirements through paid work.

The job seeker may choose to continue to participate in their current
activity during the TRWC period but it must only be included in their
Job Plan as a voluntary activity (with the exception of paid work, which
can be a compulsory activity). These job seekers may volunteer to be
connected with a provider who may add voluntary activities to the Job
Plan.

The Resources page contains a table of suggested compulsory activities
that may be added to the Job Plan for job seekers assessed as having a
PCW or TRWC of less than 15 hours per week.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans

28 day review of Job Plans

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Understanding Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Understanding Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Questions in the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
