
Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider 001-10090020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled
Service Officers with PFDEC or WNPPD security resource re-engage a
Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker with their CDP provider
during or following compliance action.

When to consider re-engagement

Re-engagement is not required for all compliance actions, however it
must be considered when certain failures are investigated.

A CDP job seeker is required to re-engage if their circumstances at the
time the compliance action is completed suggests they will be able to
meet the requirement within a reasonable timeframe.

A provider re-engagement appointment will generally be required if a
connection failure is being investigated as the CDP job seeker:

-   did not enter an Job Plan with their provider when notified of a
    requirement to do so, or
-   failed to attend an appointment arranged by the provider with a
    third party

Re-engagement is required when a valid Non-Attendance Report (NAR) is
submitted, however this is the CDP provider's responsibility. The
provider has responsibility for:

-   negotiating a re-engagement appointment with the CDP job seeker
    (when re-engagement is required)
-   notifying the CDP job seeker of the reconnection or further
    reconnection requirement
-   finalising the NAR when the reconnection requirement is met, and
-   managing any subsequent requests to reschedule

Note: Services Australia is not required to re-engage the CDP job seeker
when investigating a non-attendance failure or a reconnection failure
that was generated by a Provider Appointment Report (PAR). Re-engagement
for these failures is managed by the provider as part of the NAR
process.

When a failure is being investigated that requires Services Australia to
arrange re-engagement the reconnection requirement is scheduled by the
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer and the CDP
job seeker is notified of this during the failure investigation.

Re-engagement and reconnection requirements

When a CDP job seeker's circumstances indicate they can re-engage, a
reconnection or further reconnection requirement must be notified. A
requirement given by a provider while actioning a Non-Attendance Report
(NAR), or Services Australia while investigating a connection failure,
is defined as a reconnection requirement or further reconnection
requirement within legislation. Further non-compliance with a
reconnection or further reconnection requirement may result in a
reconnection failure and a reconnection failure period being imposed or
continuing to affect a CDP job seeker's payment.

In all cases, the specific re-engagement requirement given for a
compliance action will be attendance at a re-engagement appointment with
their provider.

Re-engagement timeframes

CDP job seekers should be re-engaged as quickly as possible. As a
general rule, a re-engagement appointment should be arranged within the
next 2 working days if the CDP job seeker's circumstances and
appointment availability allow it. If a suitable CDP provider
re-engagement appointment is not available within this timeframe, the
first suitable appointment should be booked. If the CDP job seeker is
unable to attend a re-engagement appointment within the next 28 calendar
days due to circumstances outside of their control, they should not be
given a re-engagement requirement.

Rescheduling re-engagement appointments

Both Services Australia and CDP providers are able to reschedule
re-engagement appointments arranged by Services Australia.

If the CDP job seeker contacts Services Australia to reschedule their
re-engagement appointment, careful consideration is required before
rescheduling the appointment.

CDP job seekers who contact Services Australia should not be directed to
their provider when Service Officers are able to reschedule. Service
Officers should consider whether reasons provided for the reschedule
request are reasonable and, if so, reschedule the appointment.

When a Non-Attendance Report is submitted, the re-engagement appointment
can only be arranged and rescheduled by the provider.

The Resources page contains re-engagement appointment reasons, how to
manually record a 'no reengagement' requirement in the customer's
record, links to Office Locator and an attachment listing re-engagement
codes and when they are to be used.

Related links

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Report

Investigating a connection failure

Investigating a No Show No Pay Failure

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers with their requirements

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers

Finalising Community Development Program (CDP) re-engagement
requirements

Cancellation of payment after a compliance related suspension

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
