
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of the Service Officer in ensuring that
job seekers recently released from prison and receiving payments subject
to mutual obligation requirements are, or will be, undertaking the
highest level of participation appropriate, given their individual and
family circumstances.

Barriers to participation for prison release customers

Job seekers recently released from prison have been identified for
assistance as they are more likely to face a range of disadvantages in
their efforts to seek, gain and maintain employment. As such, they are
at greater risk of becoming long-term unemployed.

Assessment of barriers at initial contact

As part of the new claim process, the Participation Interview will
determine a customer's job readiness, any barriers to participation and
capability to look for and accept work through the Job Seeker Snapshot.

This will result in an appropriate referral for assistance being
identified for the job seeker and may include an appointment with a
Service Officer or specialist officer (for example, social worker). Book
a social worker appointment for customers who are homeless or at risk of
homelessness.

In assessing a customer's capacity to participate, the interviewing
Service Officer should:

-   take into account the job seeker's individual and family
    circumstances
-   take into account whether or not the job seeker has to comply with a
    restrictive order
-   work with the job seeker to identify opportunities for greater
    participation
-   match the job seeker's needs with the most appropriate type of
    assistance
-   motivate the job seeker to voluntarily take up a range of
    appropriate activities
-   for a Centrelink managed job seeker, negotiate the activities to be
    included in their Job Plan

Service Officers are to refer to the information in a job seeker's Job
Seeker Snapshot, for an assessment of the job seeker's relative level of
advantage or disadvantage in the employment market. Service Officers
must check the status of a job seeker's Job Seeker Snapshot in case more
information is required about the impact of a job seeker's possible
barriers to employment.

See Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers for specific claim and interview steps
required for initial contact with these job seekers prior to release.

Negotiating Job Plans

The negotiation process to set participation goals, discuss appropriate
activities and make referrals must be undertaken jointly by the job
seeker and the Service Officer.

A Provider managed job seeker does this with their provider rather than
Centrelink.

Service Officers must engage with the job seeker to determine which
activities they will undertake that will improve the job seeker's
employment prospects. There is some scope to include suitable activities
from the customer's restricted orders, such as study or unpaid community
work. However, there are limitations on including activities such as
involuntary psychiatric, psychological or medical treatment.

Generally, Centrelink will only negotiate Job Plans with job seekers who
will be Centrelink managed.

Exemptions for job seekers recently released from prison

Consider whether the job seeker should be required to satisfy normal
mutual obligation requirements. If so, options include:

-   granting a new mutual obligation requirements exemption, or
-   extending, ending or changing the type of an existing mutual
    obligation requirements exemption

While an exemption is in place, job seekers can register with an
Employment Services Provider. This may be offered where early support
from a provider may help re-integration.

All job seekers can request an exemption if their circumstances mean
they cannot meet their mutual obligation requirements. Reasons can
include, but are not limited to, a temporary incapacity due to a medical
condition, including a serious illness, principal carers with caring
needs, expectant mother, refugees or customers experiencing a major
personal crisis.

Job seekers recently released from prison who have participated in the
Time to Work Employment Service (TWES) programme up until release, are
not eligible for a Major Personal Crisis (MPC) exemption solely on the
basis of prison release.

For all other job seekers recently released from prison, it will often
be appropriate to grant an exemption for 2 weeks to give the person time
to adjust to life outside, and to sort out basic personal arrangements.
The exemption may be extended in certain circumstances.

A job seeker undertaking a Community Service Order for more than 20
hours per week may be granted an exemption for up to 13 weeks. After the
13 weeks, any further time is expected to be undertaken in combination
with job search.

Customers released under supervision orders (known as an Extended
Supervision Order (ESO) in Victoria and South Australia) may be granted
an exemption for an initial 13 weeks. This exemption will be reviewed
and extended as required.

From 1 July 2018, in most cases, exemptions cannot be granted due to
substance misuse. If a customer is released on a Drug Treatment Order
and has to participate in a Drug Court Program, the activity will be
included in their Job Plan for no more than 6 months at a time. The Job
Plan will need to be updated every 6 months taking into consideration
their Drug Court program obligations and their ability to look for and
take up suitable work.

Job Plan during an exemption period

If a job seeker is currently exempt from mutual obligation requirements,
they are unable to negotiate a Job Plan with Centrelink but may choose
to volunteer to be connected with an Employment Services Provider.

If a current exemption from their mutual obligation requirements is in
place, the job seeker will need to negotiate or renegotiate their Job
Plan with either Centrelink or their provider (if they are provider
managed) once the exemption period ends, when a review will be
conducted.

Circumstances impacting compliance

When a job seeker has been recently released from prison, record the
details on the Circumstances Impacting Compliance screen.

Related links

Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers

Community Development Program (CDP)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Job Plans

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
