-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes for the Participation Interview. This
workflow is used for all customers claiming a payment with mutual
obligation requirements including JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) (job seeker) and some Parenting Payment (PP) customers.
The Participation Interview must also be completed when a customer
claims JSP, YA (job seeker) and PP (in certain circumstances), as part
of a transfer from another payment. The workflow is used for online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Participation Interview

The Participation Interview uses information provided by customers in
their claim and responses within the Participation Interview to assess
their eligibility for income support, their job readiness and to make
referrals if appropriate.

The Participation Interview:

-   interacts with Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
    (DEWR) through web services
-   enables registration of job seekers in the DEWR system
-   loads information from the customer's online claim or ACC into
    certain Participation Interview questions where DEWR requires these
    questions to be asked. This information can be edited if required by
    Services Australia staff
-   identifies long term mutual obligation requirements exemptions prior
    to running the Job Seeker Snapshot including principal carers with
    possible long term exemptions and women eligible for the Sunset
    Widow Allowance (SWA) exemption
-   displays the result of the Job Seeker Snapshot where it has been
    completed online during the new claim process
-   facilitates staff access to the DEWR system to conduct the Job
    Seeker Snapshot
-   establishes RapidConnect eligibility or exemption for JSP and YA new
    claimants
-   enables booking appointments with Workforce Australia Employment
    Services Providers, including booking and rebooking RapidConnect
    appointments
-   allows staff to flag potential referrals of job seekers for
    Employment Services Assessments (ESAts) where recommended by the Job
    Seeker Snapshot

Accessing the Participation Interview

The Participation Interview can only be accessed when a job seeker or PP
customer with mutual obligation requirements has lodged a claim online
or where ACC has been completed.

Interview processes

The Participation Interview includes the following individual processes:

-   Job seeker registration
-   Job Seeker Snapshot
-   Referrals to ESAts, SEE and AMEP programmes
-   RapidConnect questions, referral and appointment rebooking
-   Deferred referrals
-   Online Diary
-   Reapply Job Seeker Snapshot functionality
-   Activity Management (JSR/UPD activities etc.)
-   Discuss the security benefits of recording a voiceprint and voice
    biometrics technology

Note: preferred service centre defaults to the one closest to the
customer's location.

Job Seeker Registration (JSR)

Job seekers eligible for services from Employment Services Providers
must register to access these services. The Participation Interview
registers JSP, YA (other) and PP customers who have submitted an online
claim or have had ACC completed. The JSR will auto-finalise for:

-   JSP
-   YAL (other)
-   Special Benefit (SpB) with JSP conditions
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers whose youngest child is
    older than 6, and
-   job seekers who completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online during the
    new claim process

Their claim information and responses to the JSR questions are used to
determine if the Job Seeker Snapshot needs to be completed.

Job Seeker Registration only (JSRO)/No Remote Referral Required (NRRR)

The Participation Interview helps Service Officers identify potential
JSRO and NRRR job seekers.

Job seekers who are registered as JSRO/NRRR are not required to have the
Job Seeker Snapshot completed, the Participation Interview workflow will
allow it to be skipped and completed as required.

If a customer is identified as a JSRO/NRRR job seeker, Service Officers
can still complete the Job Seeker Snapshot if the job seeker wants to
access a Workforce Australia or CDP provider or other assistance. For
example, Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) and Adult Migrant
English Program (AMEP).

If this is the case, register the job seeker as a Fully Eligible
Participant (FEP), complete the Job Seeker Snapshot and refer them to a
provider using the Participation Interview workflow.

YA (job seekers)

Job seekers aged 15 to 22 will be presented with questions to identify
if they are Vulnerable Youth (VY).

See Registering a customer as a job seeker.

Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot questions and responses determine the level and
type of employment assistance the job seeker may be eligible to receive.
Be mindful that this information is personal and sensitive. Ensure the
job seeker understands the importance of disclosing information relevant
to their personal circumstances to facilitate the most appropriate
service offer.

The Participation Interview will load the answers to certain questions
into the Job Seeker Snapshot from the online claim:

-   Are you Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander?
-   Indigenous status?
-   What is the date of birth of your youngest child?

YA (job seeker) specific questions:

-   What is the highest level of schooling you have completed?
-   Have you completed any other qualification(s)?
-   If yes, what qualification(s) have you completed?

Where JSP, YAL (other), Special Benefit (SpB) under JSP conditions and
PPS customers whose youngest child is older than 6, job seekers have
completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online, during the Participation
Interview the workflow will bypass the Job Seeker Snapshot questions and
go straight to the Job Seeker Snapshot Results screen.

If the job seeker says the information is incorrect or has changed since
they completed it online, correct it as part of the interview by running
the Job Seeker Snapshot questions again.

See Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview.

Referring a job seeker for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Based on answers to the Job Seeker Snapshot questions, the system may
display a recommendation for the job seeker to be referred for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). Using the Participation Interview
workflow, a Service Officer can agree with this recommendation and
trigger a referral, or decide that it is not appropriate. A job seeker
may have an existing assessment of their work capacity from a previous
ESAt.

See Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is
required.

Deferred referrals

A job seeker's referral to a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider or Disability Employment Services provider may need to be
deferred in some circumstances. This is usually due to a job seeker
firstly needing a referral for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt).
Once the ESAt is finalised, and the job seeker’s employment service
eligibility is determined, they will be referred as necessary.

Deferred referrals to Employment Services Providers are either recorded
automatically by the system or manually by Service Officers where
appropriate.

RapidConnect

RapidConnect questions and referral

RapidConnect is a referral process that gives unemployed people early
access to assistance through Employment Services Providers. Job seekers
claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) may be referred
directly to these services for registration before their income support
claim is finalised. Meeting RapidConnect requirements may also affect
the date a job seekers payments can start.

The Participation Interview will use information provided by the job
seeker to determine if they are subject to RapidConnect requirements or
have a RapidConnect exemption. In some circumstances, a RapidConnect
exemption will be automatically applied where appropriate. Additional
questions relating to RapidConnect eligibility may also be asked during
the Participation Interview to determine if the job seeker has a
RapidConnect exemption.

Some job seekers who are exempt from RapidConnect requirements, must
still be referred to employment services. However, their payments will
not be delayed pending their attendance with a provider or agreeing to a
Workforce Australia online Job Plan.

-   Most job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect are automatically
    referred to Workforce Australia Online for Individuals during the
    Participation Interview. These job seekers are not required to
    attend a RapidConnect appointment with a provider. Instead, they
    will meet their RapidConnect obligation by agreeing to their Job
    Plan online. Job seekers who are referred to Workforce Australia
    Online under RapidConnect provisions will need to complete their
    Career Profile before they can agree to their Job Plan online
-   If a job seeker who is subject to RapidConnect is not automatically
    referred to Workforce Australia Online during the Participation
    Interview, an appointment will need to be booked for them with a
    provider. They will need to attend this appointment to meet their
    RapidConnect obligation

RapidConnect appointment rebooking

Customers who are required to attend a RapidConnect appointment can have
their RapidConnect appointment rebooked if:

-   they have missed their appointment, and
-   are still within 14 days of RapidConnect determination

However, the job seeker's payment start date may be affected if the
reason the appointment was missed was not for an acceptable reason.

To initiate the appointment rebooking, select the Participation
Interview workflow under Staff Workflows. Select Rebook appointment to
start the RapidConnect Online Diary appointment workflow.

To reschedule and rebook an appointment, see RapidConnect.

Online Diary

Use the Online Diary to initiate referrals, check current appointments
and view the job seeker's full appointment history and appointment
outcomes.

During the interview, the Online Diary may be required to book
appointments for job seekers with Employment Services Providers. This
includes Workforce Australia Services Providers, Workforce Australia
Transition to Work (TtW), Disability Employment Services (DES) and
Community Development Program (CDP).

The Online Diary will not feature in registration and referral workflows
for job seekers selected for Workforce Australia Online for Individuals.
They will be automatically connected to the Workforce Australia Online
and given instructions by the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations on how to participate and meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Where a job seeker is being referred for an ESAt, the Online Diary is
not to be used to book an ESAt appointment. This will be automatically
handled by the system or if needed manually by Assessment Services.

Re-indexed job seeker claim

When an online claim or ACC is re-indexed, the Participation Interview
may present as already being completed or required.

The workflow must still be run before finalising the claim, see Table 3
on the Process page.

Customer declines Participation Interview or link with provider

To be eligible for income support, job seekers eligible for services
from Employment Service Providers must answer the questions in the
Participation Interview and be linked with the Workforce Australia
Online or an appropriate provider.

Reject claims using reason code JRC (job seeker registration cancelled),
if the job seeker declines to complete the Participation Interview or to
be linked with Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider/Disability Employment Services.

Correspondence nominee

[A self service option is available for customers: Placed under section
headings or general content where self service options are available.]
Correspondence nominees can submit an online claim on behalf of the
customer. The nominee cannot complete the Participation Interview on
behalf of the customer, but can attend the interview with the customer.
For more information see Obligations of nominees.

In exceptional circumstances, a customer may not be able to complete the
interview. This could be due to a speech impediment or other medical
incapacity. In these cases, use discretion to allow the nominee to
complete the interview on the customer's behalf.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the privacy notice shown to customers when they complete an online
claim.

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

RapidConnect

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Online Diary

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Voiceprints for phone self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
