
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy intent of serious failure and
Unemployment Non Payment Period (UNPP) waivers and the circumstances in
which they may be recorded.

Background

Under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework the most serious instances of
non-compliance by Community Development Program (CDP) participants can
result in a serious failure period or an Unemployment Non-payment Period
(UNPP). During a serious failure period or UNPP, a CDP participant will
not receive an income support payment. These types of compliance actions
are intended to remind CDP participants that meeting mutual obligation
requirements is a condition of receiving a participation payments.

Participants who incur a serious failure period or UNPP may request a
waiver to avoid serving some or all of the non-payment period in certain
circumstances.

Waiving a serious failure period

When a serious failure is applied, the CDP participant is given the
option of waiving some or all of the serious failure period by
re-engaging with their provider. This is offered to non-compliant CDP
participants when a serious failure has been applied, to demonstrate a
commitment to their mutual obligation requirements.

If a CDP participant wishes to waiver a serious failure period, they
must contact the Participation Solutions Team (PST) and agree to attend
a waiver re-engagement appointment with their provider.

If the PST determines a CDP participant does not have any capacity to
re-engage with their provider and they are in severe financial hardship,
serious failure hardship provisions may be considered.

Waiving an Unemployment Non Payment Period (UNPP)

When a UNPP is applied, the UNPP may be waived if the CDP participant
meets certain hardship provisions. These provisions ensure vulnerable
CDP participants (or CDP participants with dependent children) do not
serve the UNPP if it results in severe financial hardship. A UNPP may be
waived under these provisions if the CDP participant:

-   falls within a class of person specified by the Secretary of the
    Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, and
-   would be in severe financial hardship as a result of the UNPP

Requesting a serious failure or Unemployment Non Payment Period (UNPP) waiver

A waiver can be requested any time from the date a serious failure or
UNPP is applied or reapplied up until the end of the serious failure
period or UNPP. CDP participants who request a waiver, or contact to
find out how payment can be reinstated during a serious failure period
or UNPP, should be referred immediately to a PST-skilled Service
Officer.

Before a waiver is recorded, the PST-skilled Service Officer will
consider any other action the CDP participant is taking in relation to
the serious failure or UNPP decision. If the CDP participant is seeking
an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT) first review, a waiver must not be recorded until the outcome of
the review is known. This is because granting a waiver will prevent or
limit the ability to record Payment Pending Review.

Action taken after a serious failure waiver is recorded

When a serious failure waiver is recorded, the CDP participant's payment
will recommence from the date the PST-skilled Service Officer determines
the waiver should take effect. The date of effect is generally the date
the waiver is requested, but may be an earlier date if an extreme event
prevented the CDP participant attending an earlier serious failure
re-engagement appointment.

Where a waiver is granted on condition the CDP participant attends a
waiver re-engagement appointment with their provider, payment will
temporarily recommence but permanent waiver is generally dependent on
the CDP participant attending the re-engagement appointment. If the
provider decides to set other serious failure requirements in addition
to attending the waiver re-engagement appointment, they will discuss
these requirements with the CDP participant.

If the CDP participant attends the waiver re-engagement appointment, the
serious failure period will be permanently waived. After a serious
failure period is permanently waived, no further action can be taken to
reinstate the serious failure period.

However, if the CDP participant does not attend their waiver
re-engagement appointment, the provider will record an appointment
result which will result in Services Australia's system automatically
reinstating the serious failure period.

Action taken after an Unemployment Non Payment Period (UNPP) waiver is recorded

When a waiver is recorded, the CDP participant's payment will recommence
from the date the PST-skilled Service Officer determines the waiver
should take effect. The date of effect will generally be the later of
the date the CDP participant requested the waiver or met the conditions
for the UNPP to be waived.

Related links

Serious failure penalties

Applying an Unemployment Non Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Job Seeker Compliance for job seekers affected by a natural disaster or
declared emergency

Waiving a serious failure period

Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not
attended

Serious failure hardship provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
