
Change of circumstances for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) 001-19051514

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer's obligation
to advise changes in their circumstances, consequences of failure to
notify of changes and the requirement to check contact details every
time a customer contacts Services Australia.

Notification obligations

JSP customers are obliged to advise Services Australia, usually within
14 days, of any event or change in circumstances that could affect their
payment.

When a customer has signed their claim form or accepted the customer
declaration online or verbally (confirming they have read and understood
what changes they must advise) they are bound by the notification
provisions.

Notifiable events

Customers are advised the types of things they must notify in their
grant notification letter and on the back of each reassessment letter
sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes a customer must advise. As
circumstances vary for each customer, this list is not exhaustive.

Changes of circumstance that may require review or update to a
customer's record include:

-   income or assets, including commencing employment
-   contact details including changes to address and/or telephone number
-   accommodation details, including changes to address and rent
-   relationship status
-   principal carer status
-   residency status
-   study
-   approved requirements/exemptions, including starting/ceasing a
    rehabilitation program
-   departing Australia, even for a short period
-   imprisonment
-   no longer have work or study to return to

Statement reporters

JSP customers are required to lodge a Reporting Statement for a
specified period. Any changes to a customer's circumstance must also be
advised when the Reporting Statement is lodged, or within 14 days,
whichever is earlier.

Customers transferring to JSP will be exempt from both mutual obligation
and fortnightly reporting (if they previously had no requirements) until
they have completed their Transition Appointment. These appointments
will be automatically booked for them between April and June 2020.

Online notifications

JSP customers who have an Approved Activity or Principal Carer long-term
exemption can view their activity or exemption from their Online
Account. If they have a change of circumstance, they are able to click
on a link within the activity, which in turn will create a work item for
a Service Officer to contact to discuss their circumstances.

Consequences of failure to notify

JSP customers may incur an overpayment if they fail to notify a change
of circumstance that results in a loss of entitlement.

Check and update contact details

Customer's addresses (including postal address) and telephone details
(including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every contact, and
updated if required. Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves
via IVR, address details do not need to be confirmed.

Contents

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (job seeker), Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Commencing or returning to self-employment for JobSeeker Payment, Youth
Allowance, Widow Allowance, Partner Allowance and Austudy

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Transfer from JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA) to Carer
Payment

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment
related exclusion period

Payment pending review (PPR) of a decision to impose a 26 week MALEP
exclusion period

Waiving a Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP)
employment related exclusion period

NSS system coding for manual rate of payment

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Related Links

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Disability notification issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
