
Job seeker change of address 001-02070010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process when a job seeker notifies they have
changed address.

Requirement to notify change of address

Services Australia must have a record of current address details for all
job seekers. When a job seeker changes their address, either temporarily
or permanently, they need to notify the agency within 14 days of moving.
Where possible, the job seeker will continue to receive services from
the same Employment Services Provider.

Note: when a temporary address is recorded, job seekers will remain
connected to the same Employment Services Provider and will be required
to comply with their mutual obligation requirements.

Notifying Employment Services Provider of address change

As part of the information exchange between the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment (DESE) and Services Australia systems, job seekers
are able to give their Employment Services Provider their new contact
details. If the update relates to a change of home address, the
Employment Services Provider will advise the job seeker that they will
need to contact Services Australia to discuss and confirm the updated
details.

Services Australia will determine if there are any potential impacts on
eligibility and/or ongoing entitlement. Where new information has been
received from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment that
requires the job seeker to provide confirmation of their home address to
Services Australia, the job seeker is sent a reminder if not opted out
of the reminder service.

If the job seeker fails to respond to this reminder or has opted out, a
letter will be sent to the job seeker. If the job seeker fails to
confirm the contact details with Services Australia within 14 days of
receiving the letter, their payment will be suspended.

Changing provider after change of address

Job seekers will remain connected to the same provider throughout their
time of unemployment, as long as their Employment Service Area (ESA)
remains unchanged.

-   When a job seeker moves to a Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
    Development Program (CDP) provider
-   When a job seeker moves address and assistance can no longer be
    accessed from the original provider, they will be transferred to the
    same provider organisation at the new location
-   If the original provider does not service the new area, the job
    seeker will be randomly allocated a new provider. The job seeker
    will require an appointment which will be organised by the new
    provider. Services Australia is not required to book an appointment
    with the new provider in these cases
-   If the job seeker's change of address does not change their ESA or
    service centre, they will remain connected to their current provider
-   If the job seeker's change of address is temporary, they will remain
    connected to their current provider and will be required to comply
    with their mutual obligation requirements
-   If the job seeker believes they can receive a better service
    elsewhere, they should talk to their current or proposed provider.
    Job seekers may be transferred by agreement if the losing and
    gaining providers agree to the transfer. A request for a transfer
    may be lodged electronically via the Workforce Australia website
-   If the job seeker has permanently moved to a new area, but remains
    linked to the provider in their old area, advise the job seeker to
    contact their provider or to call the Department of Employment and
    Workplace Relations Customer Service Line. See the Resources page
    for a link to the contact details
-   When a job seeker moves from a Community Development Program (CDP)
    region, the presence of a postal address may affect their transfer
    between CDP and Workforce Australia. The CDP indicator is determined
    by the presence of a community code. Where a job seeker advises of a
    change of address, the Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment system firstly checks for a community code under the job
    seeker's residential address. If none is present, the system will
    check for a community code under the job seeker's postal address. If
    a community code is present under the job seeker's postal address,
    the job seeker will remain linked to their CDP provider and will not
    be a transfer to Workforce Australia

Volunteer changes address

If a Volunteer job seeker initially registered at the provider and is
not registered at Services Australia, they should be referred to their
provider to change their address. The agency will not have details of
the job seeker to update.

Outstanding participation suspension at the time a Workforce Australia job seeker transfers to a new provider

Where non-compliance is managed under the Targeted Compliance Framework,
a participation suspension (TCW or TCF) does not automatically lift when
a job seeker transfers to a new provider. The provider who serviced the
job seeker at the time the suspension report generated is responsible
for notifying reconnection requirements and determining when conditions
to lift the payment suspension have been met. Provider contact details
are contained in the suspension report accessed via the Participation
Compliance workflow and sent to the job seeker via SMS and a suspension
letter. For further information, see Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted
Compliance Framework.

Outstanding participation suspension at the time a CDP job seeker transfers to a new provider

Where non-compliance is managed under the Job Seeker Compliance
Framework, a participation suspension (ANR or APA) does not
automatically lift when a CDP job seeker transfers to a new provider. If
a CDP job seeker is transferring to a new provider and has an
outstanding ANR suspension, they should attempt to contact their
previous CDP provider to have the suspension lifted. When a CDP job
seeker has an outstanding APA suspension at the time of transfer, they
will need to contact the Participation Solutions Team (PST). See
Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider.

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP)

Do not undertake any MALEP assessments. The Department of Social
Services (DSS) have paused all Moving to an Area of Lower Employment
Prospects (MALEP) assessments.

For JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) and Special
Benefit (Nominated Visa Holders) job seekers with mutual obligation
requirements, there may be other impacts on their income support. For
example, Services Australia must determine if the job seeker has reduced
their employment prospects by moving to a new location. If this is the
case, the Service Officer should investigate a possible Moving to an
Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment related exclusion
period. For more information, see Moving to an Area of Lower Employment
Prospects (MALEP) employment related exclusion period. There may also be
changes to rent assistance.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Department
of Employment and Workplace Relations Customer Service line.

Related links

Recording accommodation details

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment
related exclusion period

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Self service terminals

Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Community Development Program (CDP)

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
