-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a customer is eligible for
the independent rate of Disability Support Pension (DSP) or independent
status for Youth Allowance (YA) on the basis of being an orphan.

Assessing independence

A customer is considered independent if their natural or legally adopted
parents are deceased. This applies even if the young person is being
supported by somebody else.

If a guardian or other third party person has previously been paid
Double Orphan Pension (DOP) on behalf of the young person, then
verification may not be required as this has already been provided for
the DOP assessment.

YA customers

YA customers who are independent are not subject to assessment under the
Parental Means Tests.

YA customers who are independent because they are orphans may meet the
minimum age requirements for YA and be paid from 15 years of age, unless
they are under the school leaving age for the State or Territory in
which they reside and do not have a formal exemption from attending
school. See Determining minimum and maximum age for YA.

Once independence as an orphan has been established, YA can be paid at
the 'Away From Home' rate as they are not living as an accommodated
independent person. This includes orphans that are living with a
guardian who is not their natural parent, relationship parent or
adoptive parent.

Some independent students may also qualify for a Relocation Scholarship.
Additional coding is required for independent students who qualify for
Relocation Scholarship to ensure it pays correctly.

DSP customers

This assessment of independence applies to DSP customers aged 16 or 17
years. This is not required for DSP customers aged between 18 and 20 as
they are considered independent when living away from the parental home
for any reason.

The Resources page contains examples on assessing independence as an
orphan and links to claim forms.

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

ABSTUDY customer is an orphan

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Assessing independence when a customer's parents cannot exercise
responsibilities

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
