
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study 001-19051528

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the payment options available to JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) customers who return to full-time study.

JSP customer returns to full-time study

When a JSP customer with mutual obligation requirements returns to
full-time study, Services Australia will need to determine if the
customer will:

-   have the course approved under the short course guidelines, or
-   for JSP single principal carers - have the course approved if they
    are granted Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and studying at
    least 30 hours per fortnight, or
-   qualify for payment of Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or ABSTUDY, or
-   have their income support cancelled if they do not fit into any of
    the above categories

Customers may continue to receive JSP while undertaking full time
courses of up to 12 months duration under short course guidelines.

Customers who identify as an Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander may be eligible to claim transfer to ABSTUDY and can submit an
ABSTUDY claim 13 weeks in advance.

Note: JSP customers who are not subject to mutual obligation
requirements can study but will need to consider their options if mutual
obligation requirements commence, for example, do they claim a student
payment or seek to have their course approved? See Resources for further
information.

Income Support Options

Service Officers should:

-   consider the personal circumstances of the JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
    customer intending to commence a course
-   assist the customer to determine which payment may be more
    beneficial

Some points to consider when assessing the most beneficial payment
include:

-   JSP customers aged 22-24 are not eligible for YA as a full-time
    student if they are undertaking a course of less than 12 months
    duration, if they identify as an Australian Aboriginal or Torres
    Strait Islander they may be eligible for ABSTUDY
-   Payment rates for JobSeeker Payment, Austudy or ABSTUDY, see Rates
    and Thresholds
-   Income test for JobSeeker Payment, Austudy or ABSTUDY, see Rates and
    Thresholds
-   Working Credit and Student Income Bank limit, accrual and depletion
    rules
-   If the customer is a single principal carer studying an approved
    scholarship course, the payment rates for PES will remain the same
    for the period of the course
-   Whether the JSP customer will be disadvantaged by losing access to
    the level of support currently being provided by their employment
    service provider

The above list is not exhaustive and care should be taken to consider
the customer's individual situation when providing advice.

Qualification for Youth Allowance (YA) (student), Austudy or ABSTUDY

JSP customers who are 22-24 years of age, and wishing to undertake a
full-time course with a duration of less than 1 year, are not qualified
for YA. They have reached the maximum age for YA and should seek short
course approval from their Employment Services Provider, or in limited
circumstances, by Services Australia. A 22-24 year old JSP customer can
only transfer to YA if the course duration is 12 months or longer and
will need to submit an online claim for YA to test their eligibility.

If a customer identifies as an Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander, they may be eligible for ABSTUDY. There is no restriction on
age or the length of the course.

To be eligible for Austudy, the customer must be aged 25 years and over.
There is no restriction on whether the customer is undertaking a short
course or not to be eligible.

Parenting Payment customer transfer to JSP and continuing study

Parenting Payment (PP) customers who transfer to JSP or Youth Allowance
(YA) are able to continue their approved study for the remainder of
their course. This applies even when customers have more than 12 months
left to complete the course. This study will satisfy the customer's
mutual obligation requirements for the remainder of the course.

PP customers receiving Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) when they
transfer to JSP or YA may retain their PES payment. The PES payment may
continue while in receipt of JSP or YAL, until the course is completed.

Full time study and principal carers

Principal carers in receipt of JSP or YA who wish to undertake or return
to full-time study are subject to the same full-time short course
approval rules as for other JSP or YA customers.

Principal carers and PES

JSP single principal carers will be eligible to apply for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES). Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers who
transfer to JSP as a single principal carer will continue to be able to
qualify for PES (where all other qualifications are met). These
customers will no longer be required to be continuing in the same course
of study to retain access to PES. JSP single principal carers
undertaking study must apply for PES and meet PES approval.

Employment Services Provider approved study

Customers negotiate study activities with their employment services
provider.

Services Australia is only able to approve short courses for customers
prior to them entering employment services, and under limited
conditions.

Services Australia maintains responsibility in determining payment
eligibility. JSP may be cancelled by Services Australia if the
Employment Services Provider includes study in the customer's Job Plan
that:

-   is clearly not of a vocational nature, or
-   doesn't meet the short course duration requirements

The Resources page contains an example that outlines the process of a
customer returning to full-time study and an example of circumstances
where a full-time student may still qualify for JSP.

Related links

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Working Credit

Participation with Workforce Australia

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligibility for Austudy

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
