
Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework 001-18030205

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how job seekers who are subject to the Targeted
Compliance Framework (TCF) are re-engaged with their provider following
non-compliance with a compulsory requirement. It includes information
about how and when a participation suspension is used to re-engage the
job seeker.

Non-compliance events, re-engagement and participation suspensions

When a non-compliance event occurs, providers have responsibility for
re-engaging the job seeker.

Suspensions may be used to get the job seeker to contact their provider
to discuss the failure.

Deferred suspensions

Payment will not be suspended immediately if:

-   The job seeker is in the TCF green or warning zone, and
-   The failure is a mutual obligation failure (MOF)

When a MOF occurs for a job seeker in the TCF green or warning zone, the
provider will record a non-compliance event in ESSweb. This will send a
notice to the job seeker telling them:

-   It appears they did not meet a requirement, and
-   They must contact their provider or their payment will be put on
    hold

To avoid payment suspension the job seeker must, within 2 business days:

-   contact their provider to explain the reason for non-compliance, and
-   meet any re-engagement requirement issued by the provider

If the job seeker does not contact their provider, their payment will be
suspended after 2 business days. Their payment will remain suspended
until they contact their provider and meet any reengagement set by the
provider.

Immediate suspensions

An immediate payment suspension will be triggered when the provider
records the non-compliance event in ESSweb for a job seeker in the
penalty Zone.

This suspension prompts an SMS to the job seeker telling them they must
contact their provider to re-engage. Services Australia also formally
notifies the job seeker of the suspension, including the requirement to
contact their provider.

Unemployment or work refusal failures

When an unemployment or work refusal failure is identified, the provider

-   must talk to the job seeker before a failure report can be submitted
-   can code a Non-compliance Event (NCE) to get the job seeker to
    re-engage with them to discuss the work refusal. The NCE will
    immediately suspend the job seeker's payment

If the provider is not satisfied with the job seeker's explanation, they
can submit a work refusal failure for Services Australia to investigate.

If the job seeker doesn't reengage with their provider within 29 days of
the NCE, the job seeker's payment will be cancelled. The job seeker will
need to re-claim their payment.

If an unemployment failure has been identified and the provider cannot
contact the job seeker:

-   the provider will schedule an appointment, and notify the job seeker
    of the requirement to attend the appointment
-   Job seekers who fail to attend the appointment will receive a notice
    advising they may have missed a requirement and must contact their
    provider within 2 business days, and
-   If the job seeker fails to reengage with their provider within 2
    business days their payment will be suspended

If the job seeker doesn't reengage with their provider within 29 days of
the reengagement requirement being issued, the job seeker's payment will
be cancelled. The job seeker will need to re-claim their payment.

Outstanding participation suspension at the time job seeker transfers to new provider

A participation suspension (TCW or TCF) does not automatically lift when
a job seeker transfers to a new provider. The provider who triggered the
suspension is responsible for determining when to restore payment.

Review process

A job seeker's payment can be suspended as a result of a mutual
obligation failure, unemployment failure or work refusal failure.
Providers are responsible for managing re-engagement so payment can be
restored. Services Australia's system automatically responds to the
electronic notification to:

-   restore payment, or
-   cancel payment if the job seeker fails to re-engage within 29 days

Job seekers who ask for a review of these decisions need to talk with
their provider first. If the job seeker is not satisfied with the
outcome, they can contact the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations' National Customer Service Line if they are not referred by
their provider. If the job seeker is still not satisfied with the
outcome, Services Australia manage the remainder of the review process.
See Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals.

The Resources page contains a link to Locator.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Non-compliance events

Capability Assessments

Mutual obligation failures

Work refusal failures

Unemployment failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
