
Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW) 001-02290000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Workforce Australia - Transition to Work
(TtW) service. Note: this service is different to the Transition to Work
Program offered by the NSW Department of Communities and Justice.

TtW overview

TtW assists eligible young job seekers into work, education,
apprenticeships and traineeships. TtW services are delivered by
Employment Service Providers. They operate separately to Workforce
Australia, Disability Employment Services and Community Development
Program.

TtW is for young job seekers aged 15 to 24 and is targeted to early
school leavers and young people who have experienced difficulty
transitioning from education to employment. Eligibility is determined by
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations' ICT system.
Eligible job seekers will be given intensive pre-employment assistance
by a TtW provider to prepare them for work, an apprenticeship, a
traineeship or further education. This may include but is not limited
to:

-   support in overcoming barriers to working
-   access to mentoring
-   career advice
-   work experience
-   help to gain drivers' licences (particularly in regional areas)
-   referrals to relevant support services in their local area
-   develop practical skills to get a job
-   connect with education or training

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements are expected to
participate in TtW for 25 hours per week for up to a maximum of 18
months. Some job seekers who face significant non-vocational barriers
may have their participation extended to 24 months (as determined by the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations). After the completion
of the TtW, if they are not tracking towards an outcome, their TtW
Provider will transfer the job seeker to Workforce Australia Services.
Note: volunteer participants will not be referred to Workforce Australia
Services.

Eligibility requirements

To be eligible to participate in TtW, job seekers must:

-   be aged 15-24 years of age on commencement in the service, and
-   an Australian citizen, or
-   the holder of a permanent visa, or
-   New Zealand Special Category Visa holders (a protected Special
    Category Visa holder, and non-protected Special Category Visa
    holder), or
-   Nominated Visa Holders (including Temporary Protection Visa Holders
    and Safe Haven Visa Holders), and
-   meet the requirements as determined by the Department of Employment
    and Workplace Relations' ICT system

Note: job seekers who live in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area, are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider. TtW is not available to job seekers
in these areas.

The TtW programme provides assistance to three groups of participants.
These are:

Group One - Early School Leavers (referred by Services Australia):

A young person who:

-   has not been awarded a Year 12 Certificate or a Certificate III or
    higher (as identified by the Job Seeker Snapshot), and is assessed
    as eligible for Workforce Australia Services, or
-   is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person (including a
    person who has been awarded a Year 12 Certificate or Certificate III
    or higher), and

They are receiving Youth Allowance (other), or any other 'activity
tested' Income Support Payment with mutual obligation requirements, and

They do not have a pending Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Group Two -disengaged young people (directly registered or Services
Australia referred as volunteers):

They have not completed Year 12 (or equivalent) or Certificate III or
higher (as identified by the Job Seeker Snapshot), and

They are not already participating in employment services, and

They are not currently working an average of eight hours or more per
week for a period of 4 weeks (32 hours), and

They:

-   have not attended secondary education for a period of 4 weeks, or
-   are not currently enrolled in secondary education, or
-   have an approved exemption from legal requirements to attend school

or

-   They have been awarded a Year 12 Certificate or a Certificate III or
    higher but have not engaged with employment or education for six
    months or more, and
-   They are not already participating in employment services, and
-   They are not currently enrolled in secondary education, or have an
    approved exemption from legal requirements to attend school

or

-   They are an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person who has been
    awarded a Year 12 Certificate or a Certificate III or higher,
    irrespective of whether they have been engaged in education or
    employment for the previous six months or more

Note: Group Two includes young people who are not receiving income
support, or, those receiving income support such as Parenting Payment
but who do not have mutual obligation requirements.

Group Three - Workforce Australia referrals (referred only by Workforce
Australia Employment Providers):

-   They are identified by Workforce Australia as having a capacity to
    benefit from TtW services (for example, a young job seeker who has
    addressed their unstable housing or mental health issues)

Role of Services Australia

The agency's role is to provide information and refer eligible job
seekers to a TtW service provider. This includes:

-   Group One job seekers who are applying for Youth Allowance and have
    mutual obligation requirements
-   Group Two young people who can voluntarily participate in TtW

For Group One job seekers, Service Officers must:

-   register the job seeker
-   conduct the Job Seeker Snapshot, and
-   refer eligible participants via the Participation Interview workflow

For Group Two young people, Service Officers can:

-   advise the young person they can directly register with their local
    TtW provider; or
-   register the young person, and
-   refer eligible participants via the Online Diary

Where available, TtW referrals will have priority over Workforce
Australia employment services. If TtW is available and offered in the
Online Diary, job seekers must be referred to TtW, and should not be
referred to Workforce Australia employment services. Where a local TtW
provider is displayed in the Online Diary but no appointments are
available, Service Officers must contact the TtW provider and request an
appointment timeslot be opened to facilitate the referral. Job seekers
can request referral to Workforce Australia employment services.

Service Officers must not refer job seekers who have already commenced
in Workforce Australia employment services. Job seekers who are
participating with Workforce Australia employment services should
discuss participation in TtW with their Workforce Australia employment
services provider.

Following an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) an assessor may make
the determination that referral to TtW is the most appropriate outcome.
Assessors are able to then action a TtW referral in the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations ICT system.

TtW is available in most locations across Australia, except in remote
areas serviced by Community Development Program (CDP) providers.

RapidConnect and TtW

Job seekers eligible for TtW are subject to existing RapidConnect rules
of payability and appointment availability. Job seekers must be advised
how provider appointment attendance can affect payability.

If there is a TtW provider in a job seeker's local area, but they are
unable to offer any appointments within 14 days, refer the job seeker to
Workforce Australia employment services. This ensures they will not miss
out on any payments due to RapidConnect rules.

Job seekers are not penalised under RapidConnect rules for being
referred to a TtW provider within 14 days, where a Workforce Australia
Employment Services Provider appointment is available within two days.
The system will consider only TtW appointment availability in this
scenario.

See Processes for RapidConnect.

Mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers receiving income support with mutual obligation requirements
will fully meet their requirements by participating in TtW. Participants
in TtW are Provider Managed and consequently, the TtW service provider
is responsible for developing a Job Plan with participants. If the job
seeker does not meet their mutual obligation requirements, they will be
exited from the service, and transferred to Workforce Australia
employment services by their TtW provider. Volunteers will not be
referred to Workforce Australia.

Early School Leavers who are under 18 years of age

As a system requirement, all job seekers under 18 years of age who have
not completed Year 12 (or equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher and
are a new customer, are required to have a study exemption coded on NES
to qualify for Youth Allowance (YA), even when they are meeting their
mutual obligation requirements.

However, YA will no longer be cancelled when the exemption expires. The
exemption does not have to be recorded again while the job seeker
remains on payment.

For more information see Mutual obligation requirements for YA job
seekers under 22 years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an
equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification.

Compliance

Job seekers participating in TtW must have a Job Plan, however, all
participation will be voluntary and participants in TtW will not be
subject to Targeted Compliance Framework.

Job seekers who have been referred to TtW must attend their first
appointment. Job seekers who are exempt from RapidConnect, or for whom
RapidConnect does not apply, will have the appointment rebooked if they
fail to attend their initial appointment. If the job seeker fails to
attend the second appointment, a third compellable appointment will be
booked. Income support payment may be suspended if job seeker fails to
attend their compellable appointment.

Income support payment will be cancelled if the job seekers fails to
attend a TtW appointment with their TtW provider within 28 days of
payment suspension.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements that are participating
in TtW will be exited from the service and transferred to Workforce
Australia Services, by their TtW provider, if they are not compliant in
the program. Volunteers will not be referred to Workforce Australia.

Transfers

When a job seeker is referred to a TtW provider they will generally
remain with the provider for the duration of their service period.
However, there are instances where a job seeker may need to transfer to
another provider, including:

-   change of address
-   by agreement
-   a breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their TtW
    provider

See the Process page for more information about each of these transfer
types.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations, which includes information about Workforce
Australia - Transition to Work (TtW).

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Online Diary

Job Seeker Snapshot

RapidConnect

Participation Summary screen

Processes for RapidConnect appointments

Job Seeker Management Activities

Approved Activities for Job Plans

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Employment Services Providers

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
