
Paid work as an approved mutual obligation requirement 001-09070070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains Services Australia's process in approving paid
work as an approved activity for job seekers who choose to use their
paid work to satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

Approval and requirements

Some job seekers may be able to use paid work to meet their mutual
obligation requirements. Others can volunteer to participate in paid
work as an approved requirement.

Where the paid work approved requirement fully satisfies a job seeker's
requirements, Services Australia must approve it, regardless of whether
the job seeker is currently managed by Services Australia or their
provider. For job seekers in Workforce Australia and the Community
Development Program (CDP), Services Australia must negotiate this
requirement. For Disability Employment Services (DES) participants,
their DES provider will update the Job Plan.

Sufficient work test requirements

Paid work that meets the sufficient work test can be used to satisfy
mutual obligation requirements for customers who:

-   are principal carers
-   have a partial capacity to work (PCW) of 15 hours or more per week
-   are 55 years and over

The sufficient work test has 2 parts:

-   the minimum hour's requirement, and
-   the minimum remuneration requirement

A job seeker must meet both these requirements to satisfy the sufficient
work test.

The sufficient work test requires these job seekers be:

-   working at least 30 hours per fortnight, and
-   earning equal to or above the national minimum wage for the minimum
    number of hours required - that is, 30 hours per fortnight at the
    national minimum wage, or
-   employed in an occupation covered by an award, junior or trainee
    wage, the job seeker may be payable at a lower rate than the
    national minimum wage, if they are at least earning the applicable
    hourly award rate for their occupation for a minimum of 30 hours per
    fortnight

Job seekers with full-time mutual obligation requirements can also use
work to fully satisfy their obligations, but the work must be at least
70 hours per fortnight, with income equal to or above the national
minimum wage. If the employment is less, other activities like job
search will be needed. They may still qualify for payment depending on
the income test applicable for their circumstances.

Identifying job seekers who are meeting requirements

When a job seeker with part-time mutual obligation requirements has been
declaring sufficient hours and earnings from employment to potentially
fully satisfy their requirements, an activity and action item will
automatically generate on their record. Service Officers must contact
the job seeker and discuss the paid work to determine whether it can be
approved as fully satisfying requirements.

Job seeker meeting requirements with paid work

Workforce Australia

If the job seeker's paid work is fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, the approved requirement should be recorded on the
Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen on the job seeker's record.

The job seeker must lodge their Reporting Statement and declare their
income to keep receiving an income support payment. The job seeker will
be automatically suspended from Employment Provider Services, and there
is no need for them to discuss this with their Employment Services
Provider. However, if the job seeker would like to keep volunteering in
Employment Provider Services, they would need to discuss this with their
provider. Once Employment Provider Services have been suspended, the job
seeker will be Centrelink managed.

Note: some job seekers' approved part-time work (PTW) requirement will
be automatically updated if they:

-   are a principal carer, and
-   receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment Single (PPS),
    or Youth Allowance (YA) (Job seeker), and
-   have declared in their last 2 consecutive fortnights that they
    worked at least 30 hours each fortnight and earned income equal to
    or above the national minimum wage

Disability Employment Services (DES)

If the job seeker's paid work is fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, the approved requirement should be recorded on the
Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen on the job seeker's record.
Services Australia must not negotiate a new Job Plan for DES
participants at this stage, as this will result in the job seeker being
exited from the DES program.

DES participants receive post placement and ongoing support and so
should remain connected to their provider.

The DES provider will update the job seeker's Job Plan. The job seeker
is still required to lodge their Reporting Statement and declare their
income to keep receiving an income support payment.

Only if the job seeker chooses to exit DES, after discussions with their
DES provider, will Services Australia need to negotiate a new Job Plan.

Job seeker partially meeting requirements with paid work

If a job seeker is partially meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, use the sufficient work test to establish the additional
hours of work needed to fully meet their requirements. This is
determined as follows:

-   where the amount earned is already sufficient to meet the
    remuneration test, the person will need to do, or look for, at least
    the number of hours needed to increase their employment to the
    minimum number of hours needed, or
-   where the amount earned is insufficient, the person will need to
    look for, or do, the additional number of hours needed to meet the
    remuneration requirement

Note: for principal carers with a dependent child who receive JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or Parenting Payment (PP),
activities and other mutual obligation requirements should be scheduled
to occur during school hours (that is, generally between 9 am and 3 pm
during school terms) unless otherwise requested or agreed by the
principal carer.

Ministers of religion

For ministers of religion who are either a principal carer of a
dependent child or a person assessed as having a partial capacity to
work (PCW), and are doing at least 30 hours of paid pastoral work a
fortnight for their religious order, the amount of remuneration received
does not have to be at the national minimum wage. These customers are
fully satisfying their mutual obligation requirements and are not
required to meet the sufficient work test.

Ministers of religion are to provide evidence annually to verify they
are working 15 hours per week of paid work for their religious
organisation. When the evidence is provided, the Service Officer records
a Display on Access (DOA) DOC stating, 'customer is a minister of
religion doing paid work for their religious organisation. They are not
required to meet the sufficient work test.'

Connection to an Employment Services Provider for principal carers or
job seekers with a PCW who are ministers of religion is voluntary whilst
they are doing sufficient work to meet their participation requirements.
However, a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) registration should be
done.

Combinations of activities

If the job seeker does not fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements through paid work, they can do another approved activity
combined with their paid work.

For most job seekers, Services Australia can only approve combinations
of activities that include an employment component, that is, paid work
and self-employment, or, in the case of mature age 55+ job seekers,
employment and voluntary work combinations. Any other combination of
approved activities, like paid work and part-time study, must be
negotiated between the job seeker and their Employment Services
Provider.

For principal carers, Services Australia can approve a combination of
approved study and suitable paid work or self-employment and paid
employment (part-time work) where activities total a minimum of 15 hours
per week or 30 hours per fortnight.

Assessment of commission work

Regardless of when the income is paid and/or received, for commission
work to satisfy the activity test the:

-   affecting income must satisfy the income test, and
-   hours worked must satisfy the sufficient work test

Principal carer income

Income provided by a partner to a member of a couple who is receiving a
social security payment, does not meet the definition of income under
the Social Security Act (1991).

For example, a principal carer being paid by their current partner to
provide child care to their own children would not be regarded as
meeting requirements.

However, a principal carer who is involved in a viable family day care
business and cares for other children in addition to their own may have
this activity assessed for meeting mutual obligation requirements.

Similarly, a customer who is employed by, and gets income from, a
business where their partner is involved in that business may have this
income included and the activity assessed for mutual obligation
requirements. Centrelink managed job seeker will be interviewed by a
Service Officer and negotiate an appropriate Job Plan.

Reasonable excuses if the requirements are not met

Sometimes a job seeker may not complete the specified hours or earn a
sufficient level of income to satisfy their requirements for the
fortnight.

Strict limits apply as to how often a reasonable excuse can be accepted
before their current Job Plan is renegotiated.

However, this does not prevent assessment of the job seeker's
circumstances and deciding that an exemption from the requirements is
acceptable under any of the approved categories.

For details on acceptable responses as to why a job seeker may not have
met the requirements of their Job Plan, see Table 2 on the Process page.

Negotiate new Job Plan if the requirements are not met

A failure to meet the requirements means the job seeker will no longer
continue with their nominated activities as their principal requirement
and must be referred to an Employment Services Provider, if not already
active with one, and negotiate a new Job Plan.

Services Australia must negotiate a new Job Plan for Centrelink managed
job seeker if the job seeker is:

-   under 55 and has given a reasonable excuse for 2 consecutive
    fortnights
-   55 and over and has given a reasonable excuse for 3 consecutive
    fortnights
-   any age and does not have a reasonable excuse
-   55 and over and is renegotiating their voluntary work or combination
    of voluntary and paid work activities at their annual review
    appointment

In the cases where a reasonable excuse is given but the maximum limit of
excuses has been reached, and the job seeker is Centrelink managed, the
Job Plan must be renegotiated at that time. When the limit is reached,
an 'issue' will display within the relevant workflow to prompt the
Service Officer to renegotiate a Job Plan.

Breaks in activities - general

Where a holiday or a break that is outside the control of the job
seeker, of less than 4 weeks occurs during an activity, there is no need
to adjust the job seeker's requirements.

However, if the break is more than 4 weeks then the person must
participate in other approved activities, like job search, for the
period of the break. The job seeker will become provider managed and
enter into a new Job Plan.

Breaks in activities - principal carers and customers with a partial capacity to work (PCW)

-   Casual part-time work: Principal carers and customers with a PCW of
    15 hours or more per week whose requirement is casual part-time paid
    employment, must do other approved activities, especially job
    search, for any fortnight in which the 30 hours part-time work
    requirement is not met. This includes breaks or holidays in casual
    part-time work that are beyond the control of the customer
-   Permanent part-time work: Principal carers and customers with a PCW
    whose requirement is permanent part-time paid employment are not
    required to do other activities during a break or holiday, as long
    as their basic rate of income support does not increase and they get
    the same amount of employment income during the break
-   Principal carers who have approved activities of paid work or study
    and paid work (combined) may be subject to the Allowable Break
    provisions over Christmas school holiday periods if the employer has
    a temporary closures or reduces hours or shifts

The Resources page contains a link to the Fair Work Ombudsman website
and examples of how to decide if part-time work can fully satisfy mutual
obligation requirements.

Related links

Approved activities for principal carers

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Negotiating Job Plans

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider

Employment Services Providers

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Wages and conditions of employment

Approved mutual obligation requirements for mature age customers

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers of dependent
children over the Christmas/New Year period

Voluntary work as an approved requirement

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
