-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how Services Australia establishes contact with
job seekers or ParentsNext participants following a non-compliance event
or the generation of a Capability Assessment.

Reasons for contact

Job seekers or ParentsNext participants managed under the Targeted
Compliance Framework may contact Services Australia when a:

-   Capability Assessment is needed, or
-   work refusal failure or mutual obligation failure or unemployment
    failure has been committed, to determine if a financial penalty or
    payment cancellation will be applied

Job seekers managed under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework (Community
Development Program (CDP) job seekers), may contact the agency in
response to the generation of a:

-   Non-Attendance Report (NAR)
-   potential failure, or
-   Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Capability Assessments - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, providers are responsible for
notifying the job seeker they are required to contact Services Australia
to arrange a Capability Assessment. The Capability Assessment is a
reconnection requirement. A participation suspension applies until the
job seeker complies with this reconnection requirement.

Job seekers who contact to arrange a Capability Assessment must be
referred to the Participation Solutions Team (PST). The Capability
Assessment is conducted at the time of first contact wherever possible.
The PST-skilled Service Officer uses the Capability Assessment workflow
in the Participation Compliance Hub to record the contact and conduct
the Capability Assessment.

When a Capability Assessment has been started, but is unable to be
completed at first contact, the PST-skilled Service Officer will record
the job seeker contact in the Capability Assessment workflow and advise
the job seeker to call back before midday the following business day.
This action is required to lift the participation suspension. A contact
trigger will prevent further reporting until a Capability Assessment has
been conducted and the outcome is recorded.

Mutual obligation, work refusal and unemployment failures - Targeted Compliance Framework

When a mutual obligation failure or work refusal failure has been
committed, payment is not payable until the job seeker talks with their
provider and complies with reconnection requirements. Job seekers who
contact the agency because of a participation suspension following a
mutual obligation failure or work refusal failure should be advised to
contact their provider. For further information, see Re-engaging job
seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework.

Outstanding unemployment failures, work refusal failures or mutual
obligation failures in the financial penalty zone, prevent job seekers
from finalising their fortnightly reporting.

As part of reporting, job seekers can choose to accept the financial
penalty mutual obligation failures without a compliance investigation
being conducted by Services Australia. These failures include:

-   a first or second failure in the financial penalty zone for
    non-attendance at provider appointments, third party appointments,
    job interviews, mandatory activities, or
-   failing to comply with another compulsory requirement (for example,
    not meeting their monthly points target)

Contact with the PST is required when the job seeker has an active
mutual obligation failure and:

-   the job seeker chooses not to accept a penalty for a first or second
    mutual obligation failure and elects to discuss the failure with
    Services Australia, or
-   the failure cannot be accepted by the job seeker until they speak to
    a PST-skilled Service Officer, or
-   the penalty for the failure would be payment cancellation

Non-Attendance Reports (NAR) - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Community Development Program (CDP) providers are responsible for
determining whether a NAR is appropriated, submitting NARs and
re-engaging CDP job seekers following a NAR.

NARs received by Services Australia will result in the CDP job seeker's
payment being suspended 'Non-Attendance Report Received' (ANR) if
another suspension is not already in place. When another suspension is
in place, a display on access (DOA) DOC will automatically be created on
the CDP job seeker's record alerting that a NAR is outstanding.

A letter and SMS are issued advising the CDP job seeker to contact their
provider to discuss the non-attendance. Messaging on IVR and the online
landing page will also direct CDP job seekers to contact their provider
about the outstanding NAR.

When a CDP job seeker contacts Services Australia and the only
outstanding compliance action is a NAR, Service Officers should advise
the CDP job seeker to contact their provider as quickly as possible to
have any outstanding issues resolved so payment can be restored.

If the CDP job seeker requests an explanation or applies for a formal
review of a decision to suspend (ANR) or cancel their payment as part of
the NAR process, refer them to the Participation Solutions Team
(PST)–skilled Service Officer who will initiate the internal review
process.

When other compliance action is outstanding, the CDP job seeker should
be referred to the PST who will advise the CDP job seeker to contact
their provider after the other compliance action has been resolved.

Provider Appointment Reports (PAR) - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Community Development Program (CDP) providers can submit a PAR to
initiate a compliance investigation following a CDP job seeker's
non-attendance at a provider appointment. The PAR is a type of
non-compliance report used when the CDP provider believes the CDP job
seeker did not have a reasonable excuse for their non-attendance and
considers the imposition of a financial penalty is the best way to
ensure future compliance by that CDP job seeker. A PAR may only be
submitted by a CDP provider:

-   after a NAR has already been submitted for the same non-attendance
    event, and
-   they have spoken to the CDP job seeker about their reasons for
    non-attendance at an appointment

The PAR will include all relevant information from the CDP provider for
a Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (with PFDEC
or WNPPD security resource) to investigate. A submitted PAR will also
place a contact trigger onto the record, and a letter and/or SMS will be
issued requesting the CDP job seeker contact as soon as possible. The
PST-skilled Service Officer is required to establish contact with the
CDP job seeker. The purpose of this contact is to:

-   advise the CDP job seeker a failure is under investigation, and
-   provide the CDP job seeker with an opportunity to explain the
    circumstances that led to the failure

A submitted PAR may lead to one of the following types of failures for
PST to investigate if the CDP job seeker failed to attend a:

-   regular (contact) appointment with their CDP provider, a submitted
    PAR will trigger a Non-Attendance Failure for investigation
-   re-engagement appointment that is a reconnection requirement, a
    submitted PAR will trigger a reconnection failure investigation

Participation Reports - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

When a Participation Report is received from a Community Development
Program (CDP) provider, the CDP job seeker's payment may be suspended or
a contact trigger may be added to the CDP job seeker's record. A letter
and/or an SMS are issued requesting the CDP job seeker contact as soon
as possible.

The Participation Report may lead to one of the following types of
failures, which are investigated by PST-skilled Service Officers with a
PFDEC or WNPPD security resource:

-   connection/reconnection failures
-   No Show, No Pay failures
-   serious failures, and
-   Unemployment Non-Payment Periods (UNPP)

As part of the failure investigation, the Service Officer is required to
establish contact with the CDP job seeker. The purpose of this contact
is to:

-   advise the CDP job seeker a failure is under investigation, and
-   provide the CDP job seeker with an opportunity to explain the
    circumstances that led to the failure, and
-   re-engage the CDP job seeker with their requirements if appropriate

Until contact with the CDP job seeker is established, a decision
regarding the failure cannot be made.

If a payment suspension (participation) has been imposed, the CDP job
seeker's payment will be restored when they agree to re-engage or the
Service Officer determines re-engagement is not required.

Job seekers with barriers

When a job seeker has a language barrier, an interpreter should be used
for any contact.

When a job seeker has a significant barrier and/or vulnerability
impacting their ability to discuss their non-compliance with the
PST-skilled Service Officer, the Service Officer should consider contact
and servicing approaches which are appropriate to the job seeker's needs
and circumstances. Consultation with a specialist such as a social
worker may assist the PST-skilled Service Officer to determine
appropriate servicing.

A third party such as a correspondence nominee or a person (such as a
partner, social worker or friend) authorised by the job seeker to
support them in their discussion with the PST-skilled Service Officer
may also be appropriate. Unless there is an impediment, which prevents
the job seeker discussing the non-compliance with the PST-skilled
Service Officer themselves, they are expected to be involved in the
discussion and their third party can be involved as a support person.

Finalising Reporting Requirements

When a job seeker has contacted following an unsuccessful attempt to
finalise their reporting requirements, most of their reporting
information will have already been collected during the reporting
process. This is stored in an activity on the job seeker's record. The
Participant Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer may need to
stimulate the report once the compliance action is finalised.

The Resources page contains information on contact and servicing
approaches when a job seeker has barriers and/or vulnerabilities, as
well as contact details for the Participation Solutions Team (PST).

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Frameworkl

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reporting overview

Accepting information from nominees

Disclosing information to a nominee

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
