
Part-time or full-time study as an approved mutual obligation requirement for Youth Allowance (YA) 001-09070220

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when part-time or full-time study can be accepted
as an approved mutual obligation requirement for YA job seekers.

YA early school leavers

'Early school leavers':

-   are YA job seekers who are under 22 and have not completed Year 12
    (or equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher
-   are required to undertake approved requirements and/or job search to
    meet their mutual obligation requirements. For job seekers aged
    18-21, some combinations of study and work may meet requirements

As with other job seekers, YA early school leavers will generally only
have study or a combination of activities including study, approved by
their provider once they have commenced in employment services.

Study, training and job search may be undertaken in combination with
other approved activities:

-   if undertaking approved requirements, it must be for at least 25
    hours per week
-   if undertaking an combination of approved requirements and job
    search, their provider will determine the number of job searches
    required in addition to their other activities
-   if undertaking only job search they must look for work for at least
    25 hours per week and the number of job searches will be determined
    by their provider

Job Seekers with a partial capacity to work or temporarily reduced
capacity to work of 15-29 hours per week or who are principal carers are
expected to undertake at least 15 hours of approved study or approved
combinations of activities.

Note: job seekers with a temporarily reduced work capacity or partial
capacity to work of 0-14 hours per week will be exempt from the study
requirement. These job seekers will only need to attend a compulsory
quarterly interview with Services Australia to meet their mutual
obligation requirements. However, study or training may be undertaken on
a voluntary basis.

Full-time study and mutual obligation requirements

YA job seekers (who are not eligible as a student or apprentice) are
expected to focus on job search. However, some short courses may be
appropriate if the job seeker is unlikely to find work with their
existing skills, and the course will enhance their immediate
employability. As such, they are generally subject to short course
approval policy.

The issue of whether a job seeker can have their full-time study
approved by their employment services provider or not does not determine
their qualification for YA (job seeker). A job seeker can be determined
to not qualify for YA (job seeker) due to full-time study, only where:

-   they have been advised (either at grant or at a later time) by their
    provider that their full-time study will not fully meet their mutual
    obligation requirements, and
-   the job seeker is not willing to satisfy other mutual obligation
    requirements such as job search

Otherwise, it is up to the provider to negotiate appropriate activities
for the job seeker and to instigate compliance action as necessary for
failure to meet points target.

In general, when a person is studying full-time, they should test their
eligibility for a student payment. However, full-time study in certain
circumstances, for example, courses of less than 12 months may be
approved by a provider or Services Australia as an approved requirement
for job seekers.

If a YA job seeker is already connected with a provider or has claimed
YA and is referred to a provider through normal processes, they should
be advised to discuss approval for any full-time study with their
provider.

Services Australia role

In limited circumstances, Services Australia can approve full-time short
courses as fully meeting requirements and making job seekers Centrelink
managed prior to them commencing in employment services.

Services Australia should not be approving and coding a short course for
a job seeker who is already provider managed, in accordance with the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Short Course Guidelines.
The job seeker should be referred to their provider to discuss their
participation and approval in a short course. This is important because
it may impact on the level of servicing the provider can offer. If the
provider approves the short course, they will code the course details in
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment system. However, if
the job seeker is enrolled in a course of study that would make them
eligible for a student payment, then this should be discussed with the
job seeker and where necessary a transfer to another more appropriate
income support payment done.

If a job seeker is undertaking a course of full-time study which cannot
be approved under short course policy, and they are not eligible for a
student payment, they will not remain qualified for YA unless they can
reduce or re-organise their hours of study so that the course is
considered part-time, and/or they can still undertake job search or
other requirement to fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.
In this way, full-time study which cannot be approved can be undertaken
as long as the job seeker continues to meet all of their mutual
obligation requirements and meet their points target, including
attending appointments and accepting offers of employment.

Provider full-time short course approvals

Employment Services Providers have the primary role in the approval of
short courses full-time study for YA job seekers, regardless of the
current Stream of the job seeker. The provider can approve a full-time
short course for YA job seekers at any time after they have commenced
participation with the provider.

Providers can approve short courses for a job seeker on the condition
that the course is:

-   vocationally orientated
-   less than 12 months
-   highly likely to provide a job seeker with a qualification that will
    result in an Employment Outcome, improve their employability or lead
    to qualifications in an identified area of skills shortage

Note: providers are responsible for identifying what training relates to
skills in demand in each particular Employment Region, as there is no
defined list.

When an Employment Services Provider approves a job seeker to undertake
a full-time short course, Services Australia will receive notification
automatically from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Services Australia full-time short course approvals

Services Australia, in limited circumstances, can approve a full-time
short course as an approved requirement if the job seeker is undertaking
qualifying study for YA job seekers. The agency can only approve
full-time study for YA job seekers who are Centrelink managed (if they
have not yet commenced in employment services) if all the following
conditions apply:

-   the course is full-time (or at least 15 hours per week for principal
    carers or job seekers with a partial capacity to work of 15-22 hours
    per week)
-   the job seeker has a confirmed offer of employment in writing from
    the employer, pending the completion of a specified short course
-   the course runs from one to 13 weeks
-   the course has a clear vocational application; and
-   the job seeker is prepared to meet any costs involved

Full-time short course hours for YA job seekers

For mutual obligations requirements, the duration of full-time education
or training course is defined for:

-   YA job seekers with full-time requirements - 20 or more hours per
    week, with at least 15 hours spent in the classroom or other
    directed activities and up to five hours spent in private study
-   YA job seekers assessed with a partial capacity to work (15-29 hours
    per week) - 15 or more hours per week, including any combination of
    contact and non-contact hours, or any course which is classified as
    full-time by the institution or organisation providing the course
-   YA job seekers who are principal carers - 15 or more hours per week
    (or 30 hours per fortnight), including any combination of contact
    and non-contact hours, regardless of whether the study is classified
    as full-time or part-time by the institution or organisation
    providing the course

Mutual obligation requirements and full-time short courses

If a full-time short course requirement is approved by Services
Australia for a Centrelink managed job seeker, the job seeker will be
deemed to be satisfying their mutual obligation requirements for the
duration of the course. Where a provider approves the short course, job
seekers are still required to look for and accept work, but not where it
conflicts with the time of the course or if it would prevent them from
completing the course. Job seekers will be required to undertake up to
20 job searches a month. There is no automatic reduction in job search
for undertaking a full-time short course. Job seekers are required to
accept any suitable work that does not conflict with the course and they
are not permitted to limit their job searches only to areas relating to
the course.

Job seekers with full-time mutual obligation requirements who are
undertaking full-time short courses are required to remain connected
with their provider. Job seekers are also required to attend an
appointment with their provider or the agency if notified of a
requirement to do so. However, appointments should be scheduled for
times that do not conflict with the job seeker's study timetable.

Job seekers (excluding those with Disability Employment Services (DES)
and ParentsNext), may have their job search requirements reduced by
their provider if they are:

-   connected to a Workforce Australia provider, and
-   undertaking 40 or more contact hours of study and/or work per
    fortnight

If the job seeker is undertaking 70 or more contact hours of study
and/or work per fortnight, their job search requirements may be fully
met.

Job seekers must negotiate their job search requirements with their
Workforce Australia provider.

Job seekers with part-time mutual obligation requirements (for example,
principal carers or people assessed with a partial capacity to work of
15-29 hours per week) undertaking an approved full-time short course are
deemed to be fully satisfying their mutual obligation requirements.
However, they are still connected with the provider, although their
Stream Service would be suspended.

Part-time study

YA job seekers must undertake study or training to meet their mutual
obligation requirements unless they can provide verified evidence of
completion of Year 12 (or equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher.

For other YA job seekers, any type of part-time study which cannot be
approved under short course policy can be undertaken as long as the job
seeker continues to meet all of their mutual obligation requirements,
including attending appointments and accepting offers of employment. For
example, a job seeker may be studying at night and willing to look for
work during the day. If the job seeker is seeking and willing to
undertake suitable work, and their studies do not appear to be fixed in
time or place so as to restrict their ability to satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements, they will remain qualified for YA, even where
the course cannot be approved as fully meeting or counting towards their
mutual obligation requirements.

However, such study can only be approved by their provider. Services
Australia staff need only record details of any part-time study on the
job seeker's record.

Principal carers on YA can participate in approved study of at least 15
hours per week (30 hours per fortnight) in any combination of contact
and non-contact hours to fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements. This is whether the institution regards the course as
full-time or part-time. If the study is less than 15 hours per week, the
principal carer must participate in another requirement. This could be a
combination of paid work and study, or self-employment and study. If no
other requirement can be approved to fully meet the job seeker's
requirements, they will have job search requirements, in addition to
their hours of study.

Studying during a period of temporary reduced work capacity or partial capacity to work

Job seekers assessed as having a temporary reduced work capacity or
partial capacity to work of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week can volunteer to
participate in part-time or full-time study. However, these job seekers
will still have Quarterly Participation Interviews as their only
requirement to meet their mutual obligation requirement.

Job seekers transferring from transitional Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Job seekers transferring from transitional DSP (granted between 11 May
2005 and 30 June 2006) to YA job seeker, are able to continue their
studies in the same course they were undertaking whilst on DSP if, at
the time of transfer, they were studying and receiving PES. They can
continue to undertake the course as their approved requirement until the
course has been completed, even if the remainder of the course is longer
than 12 months, or until they cease to be eligible for YA.

Job seekers transferring to YA from Parenting Payment (PP)

If a job seeker is undertaking full-time or part-time study as a PP
recipient and then transfers to YA as a job seeker (for example, child
leaves care), they can continue to complete their course of study even
if the remainder of the course is longer than 12 months. They will be
taken as meeting their mutual obligation requirements in full while
completing their course as long as they continue studying in the same
course for at least 30 hours per fortnight (including contact and
non-contact hours).

The job seeker does not have to be a principal carer on YA following the
transfer for the study to continue to be allowed.

Approval for remaining in study beyond the allowable time

YA job seekers with less than 12 months of their course remaining who
are not eligible for YA as a student may have the remainder of their
course as a full-time student approved by a provider as an approved
requirement. In all cases, an assessment should first be made as to
whether the job seeker has exhausted their allowable/satisfactory
progress time, and whether they have any eligibility for a student
payment or not. The progress time limit may be extended if they have
failed a subject for reasons beyond their control, such as illness,
family trauma, or a natural disaster.

Full-time academic study

Generally, full-time study of more than 12 months or Masters or
Doctorate study cannot be approved for YA recipients except for the
groups to which the short course exception rules apply:

-   people transferring to YA from transitional DSP
-   people transferring to YA from PP

The Resources page contains a table of questions and answers relating to
full-time short course approval for job seekers, a link to a table of
part-time and full-time study options for working age job seekers, the
Request for course approval (SS362) form and contact details for the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
full-time study

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Part-time or full-time study as an approved requirement for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Part-time or full-time study as an approved requirement for Parenting
Parent (PP)

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding new study details

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
