
Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity 001-10070080

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the processes that apply when a job seeker fails
to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity.

Requirement to attend and satisfactorily participate in compulsory activities

Job seekers, including ParentsNext participants, receiving a
participation payment are required to attend and participate in
compulsory activities to help prepare them for the workforce. This
excludes job seekers in Community Development Program (CDP) as
activities are voluntary in CDP.

The job seeker's Job/Participation Plan sets out the compulsory
activities they must attend and satisfactorily participate in.

Providers have responsibility for negotiating the compulsory activities
included in the Job/Participation Plan with the job seeker. As part of
this negotiation, job seekers are expected to take responsibility for
discussing with their provider, circumstances that have the potential to
impact on their ability to participate.

When negotiating a Job/Participation Plan, the provider must ensure:

-   compulsory activities are consistent with relevant legislation and
    policies
-   compulsory activities do not exceed the maximum hourly limits set in
    social security law
-   the job seeker's circumstances and assessed capacity have been
    appropriately considered
-   the job seeker is capable of meeting all the requirements in their
    Job/Participation Plan

If these conditions have not been considered when negotiating a job
plan, job seekers cannot be compelled to attend or participate in the
compulsory activities included in their Job/Participation Plan.

Once the Job/Participation Plan is agreed to, the job seeker is expected
to:

-   participate in the activity on the scheduled days
-   be on time, and remain until the completion of the activity
-   satisfactorily participate in the activity
-   behave in an appropriate manner while participating in the activity,
    and
-   contact before the start time if they are unable to attend

Requirement to record own attendance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Most job seekers are responsible for recording their own attendance at
activities. The provider will determine if the job seeker is capable of
doing so, and will record this in their Plan. Providers are responsible
for assisting job seekers to access and use available system tools to
record attendance at activities (or report attendance to their provider
before close of business). Job seekers who are experiencing difficulties
with recording their attendance should discuss this with their provider
before close of business on the day of the activity.

When their provider has determined the job seeker is not capable of
recording or reporting their own attendance, the provider is responsible
for monitoring and recording the job seeker's attendance on a daily
basis.

Reporting absences and non-attendance

Job seekers who are unable to attend an activity are required to notify
their provider and explain why they are unable to attend/participate
prior to the activity start time. This reflects the same expectations an
employer would have of an employee.

Job seekers who need to arrive late or leave early from an activity on a
specific day should discuss this with their provider or the activity
coordinator.

When a job seeker fails to attend an activity, arrives late or leaves
the activity early without reasonable excuse, will be managed using the
Targeted Compliance Framework.

If the job seeker had a reasonable excuse but failed to make prior
contact to explain why they were unable to attend an activity, or failed
to discuss the need to arrive late/leave early beforehand, compliance
action may still apply.

Attendance not required on a specific day

When the job seeker fails to comply with a compulsory activity in the
Job/Participation Plan, that does not require attendance on a specific
day, a mutual obligation failure is committed at the end of that
fortnight. For example, when the job seeker does not undertake their
compulsory activity to do 20 hours of private study per fortnight or 20
job searches per month, a mutual obligation failure is committed.

When an early school leaver fails to attend a course included in the Job
Plan, compliance action may be applied. Compliance action is not
appropriate if the job seeker is doing poorly in their course but they
have a good attendance record.

Behave in an appropriate manner while participating in a compulsory activity

Job seekers are required to behave in an appropriate manner while
participating in an activity.

When inappropriate behaviour occurs while participating in a compulsory
activity, the job seeker will be managed using Targeted Compliance
Framework.

Misconduct or behaving inappropriately means failing to behave in
accordance with the standards that would be expected in a workplace.
This includes, but is not limited to:

-   not following reasonable instructions
-   being disruptive or uncooperative
-   behaving in a manner that is aggressive, violent or offensive
-   harassing other people
-   behaving in a manner that causes risk to the health and safety of
    themselves or other participants
-   being intoxicated or consuming intoxicants during the activity
-   behaving in a manner that may harm the reputation of the program

Generally this type of behaviour is only considered inappropriate when
serious in nature, deliberate and within the job seeker's control.

If misconduct has occurred, a reasonable excuse assessment is not
required because there is no reasonable excuse for behaviour that is
within a job seeker's control. When misconduct is reported by a
provider, if Services Australia establish the behaviour was not in the
job seeker's control, free text is sent to the provider to ensure this
can be considered for future servicing.

Managing non-compliance when a job seeker fails to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, when a job seeker fails to
attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity, a mutual
obligation failure has been committed. When a job seeker is required to
record their own attendance but fails to do so, including when they
attend but forget to record, a mutual obligation failure has also been
committed and will be reported electronically to Services Australia by
the Employment Services System (ESS).

Following a reported mutual obligation failure, participation payments
are not payable until the job seeker contacts their provider and meets
the reconnection requirement notified by the provider. Participation
payments are cancelled if the reconnection requirement is not met within
four weeks.

When a provider, or the ESS, reports the mutual obligation failure, the
job seeker's participation payments are automatically suspended. The
Services Australia system lifts the payment suspension when the provider
electronically notifies the conditions for lifting the payment
suspension have been met.

Job seekers in the green or warning zone will accrue one demerit if the
provider is not satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for failing
to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity. When
the provider is able to establish that the job seeker attended but
failed to record their attendance, a demerit will not be applied.

Job seekers in the financial penalty zone will incur a financial
penalty, unless:

-   their provider closes the Non-Compliance Report (NCR) because they
    are satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason
-   Services Australia conducts a compliance investigation and
    establishes that the job seeker has reasonable excuse. Participation
    Solutions Team (PST) skilled Service Officers are responsible for
    conducting these compliance investigations

Managing non-compliance when a job seeker fails to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory requirement - Job Seeker Compliance Model

The Job Seeker Compliance Model ensures Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers comply with their mutual obligation requirements. The
model is a mix of incentives, deterrents and safety nets, intended to:

-   deliver a consistent and reasonable approach to supporting job
    seeker participation and engagement with their CDP provider, and
-   protect vulnerable job seekers from incurring penalties for
    circumstances beyond their control

Refer to Job Seeker Compliance Model further information on managing
non-compliance for CDP job seekers.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Determining failure hierarchy when there are multiple failures

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
