
Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22 years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification 001-09020040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the mutual obligation requirements for Youth
Allowance (YA) job seekers under 22 years of age who have not completed
Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher)
qualification.

Definition of Early School Leaver (ESL)

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers under 22 years of age, who have not
completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III
or higher) qualification are identified as Early School Leavers (ESL).

Identifying ESLs

Job seekers can be identified as an ESL via the Newstart Education
Status (NES) screen. All YA job seeker claims will require verification
action and coding on the NES screen to specify if the job seeker has
evidence they have completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education
(Certificate III or higher) qualification. The verification can only be
actioned by a Services Australia Service Officer.

If a customer transfers from YA (full-time student) to YA (job seeker)
and has not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education
(Certificate III or higher) qualification, they will be subject to the
ESL requirements from their date of transfer.

Job seekers who completed a Certificate II in 2015 or earlier

YA students who completed a Certificate II in 2015 or earlier, and who
are current and continue on payment when they transfer to YA job seeker,
will not be identified as an ESL.

If there has been a break in payment for 13 weeks or more and the job
seeker previously had a Certificate II keyed as Year 12 or an equivalent
level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification, it will no
longer remove them from the ESL cohort.

Mutual obligation requirements for ESLs

ESLs are required to undertake approved requirements and/or job search
or a combination of these to meet their mutual obligation requirements
until they turn 22 years of age or attain Year 12 or an equivalent level
of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification. For provider
managed job seekers, this is:

full-time education or training

a combination of part-time education or training and part-time work for
a total of 25 hours per week (15 hours for Principal Carer Parents and
those with a Partial Capacity to Work of 15 to 29 hours per week), or

other approved requirements for 25 hours per week (15 hours for
Principal Carer Parents and those with a Partial Capacity to Work of 15
to 29 hours per week)

in Community Development Program (CDP) regions requirements such as
study and training are voluntary. For all CDP job seekers, including
ESL:

-   CDP providers consider each job seeker's assessed capacity and
    individual circumstances when negotiating Job Plans
-   minimum hourly requirements do not apply, and
-   there are no specific requirements for CDP job seekers based on
    their age group or participation category

It is the responsibility of the Employment Services Provider to discuss
mutual obligation requirements with the job seeker and negotiate an
appropriate Job Plan.

Requirements that result in an ESL being managed by Services Australia

ESLs who have one of the following approved requirements will be managed
by Services Australia (the agency):

-   Quarterly Participation Interview (QTI) (job seekers with partial
    capacity to work (PCW) or temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) of
    0-14 hours per week)
-   Job seekers with partial capacity to work (PCW) or temporary reduced
    work capacity (TRWC) of 15-29 hours per week undertaking paid work,
    study or self-employment, or a combination of the 3, for at least 15
    hours per week
-   Principal carers undertaking paid work, study or self-employment, or
    a combination of the 3, for at least 15 hours per week
-   Job seekers participating in Self-Employment Assistance whose
    Self-Employment allowance has ceased after 39 weeks after commencing
    the programme
-   Job seekers participating in Youth Activities

Referrals to Employment Service Providers

ESLs are eligible for referral to either Workforce Australia -
Transition to Work (TtW), Disability Employment Services (DES) or the
Community Development Program (CDP) for job seekers who live in a
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations designated remote area.

Note: except for eligible job seekers in CDP regions, ESLs identified as
eligible must be referred to Workforce Australia - Transition to Work
(TtW) (where available).

Verification of Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Youth Allowance job seekers who advise that they have completed Year 12
or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher)
qualification are required to provide evidence of their qualification to
Services Australia. If evidence is not provided, the job seeker will be
considered an ESL. Note: ensure qualifications are recorded correctly.

Check if the job seeker has provided verification of completing Year 12
or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher)
qualification and the details are confirmed via the Education Course
History (EDCH) screen. If so, ensure the Y12/Equiv Verified field on the
Newstart Education Status (NES) screen is updated with an appropriate
code. For example, 'OTH' (other evidence as appropriate).

Updating education level on the Job Seeker Snapshot

When the ESLs education qualification level has been updated via the Job
Seeker Snapshot to state that they have now completed Year 12 or an
equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification,
the Employment Services Provider will notify the agency. A Manual
Follow-up (MFU) activity will be generated on the job seeker's record to
prompt a Service Officer to follow-up and obtain proof of the
qualification from the ESL in order for this to be keyed on the NES
screen.

Reminders to provide verification of Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

A Short Message Service (SMS) and/or e-mail reminder will be sent to
ESLs advising them to provide their educational qualifications for
verification to the agency as soon as possible. A reminder will also be
sent if the ESL uses the self-service facilities.

Proof of studies provided to Employment Services Provider

Early School Leavers can provide original documentation that proves Year
12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher)
qualification to their provider. The provider will sight the original
documentation and fax a copy to the National Business Gateway (NBG).
Upon receipt of the fax, NBG staff will take appropriate action
including updating the NES screen.

The latest information relating to the Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification verification on the
NES screen will be automatically transmitted to the Employment Services
System.

Verification of Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher) qualification at new claim

Job seekers have 28 days after claim to provide verification they have
completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III
or higher) qualification. If verification has not been provided by the
end of the 28 day period, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity will be
displayed on the job seeker's record on the Activity List (AL) screen.
In addition, an Action Item will be displayed.

Both the MFU and Action Item are reminders to Service Officers to take
follow-up actions regarding the verification of the job seeker's
qualification. If verification is not provided at the next contact
(generally when the job seeker lodges their next Reporting Statement),
the Service Officer must tell the job seeker they will be identified as
an ESL and the Service Officer will need to update the Job Seeker
Snapshot and NES screen. It will be the responsibility of the Employment
Services Provider to discuss mutual obligation requirements with the job
seeker and to negotiate a Job Plan with appropriate requirements.

Referral to Employment Services Provider

Some YA job seekers may be exempt from RapidConnect at the initial claim
stage due to potential eligibility for Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE) or Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP). These job
seekers are however still required to be referred immediately to an
Employment Services Provider with a note in the Online Diary that they
would benefit from participating in the relevant programme.

ESLs who are under 18 years of age

As a system requirement, all job seekers under 18 years of age who have
not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate
III or higher) and are a new customer are required to have a study
exemption keyed on the NES screen to qualify for YA, even when they are
undertaking approved requirements to satisfy mutual obligation
requirements.

However, Youth Allowance will no longer be cancelled when the exemption
expires. The exemption does not have to be recorded again while the job
seeker remains on payment.

The Resources page contains a list of study exemptions that can be
granted for YA job seekers under 18 years of age who have not completed
Year 12 or an equivalent level of education (Certificate III or higher)
qualification and links to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Part-time or full-time study as an approved mutual obligation
requirement for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Employment Services Providers

Youth Activities as an approved activity

Participation Interview

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Workforce Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
