
This document outlines the processes for approving drug or alcohol
dependency treatment programs, or interventions as approved activities
for job seekers.

Drug and alcohol treatments/interventions (treatment activities) as an approved activity

Drug and alcohol treatment programs/interventions (treatment activities)
can be undertaken as approved activities by job seekers in Workforce
Australia Employment Services.

Treatment activities may or may not contribute to mutual obligation or
annual activity requirements, depending on whether a job seeker is
provider or Centrelink managed.

Provider managed job seekers

Provider managed job seekers can discuss appropriate and available
treatment programs or interventions with their provider for
consideration in developing their points target.

If the job seeker is undertaking intensive treatment (such as
residential rehabilitation) and is unable to participate in other
activities, the treatment activity will fully meet their mutual
obligation requirements.

The job seeker will remain provider managed and the treatment activity
will be included in their points target.

If they are undertaking less intensive treatment activities (such as a
fortnightly counselling session), this may contribute to meeting their
mutual obligation or annual activity requirements. The job seeker will
need to undertake other activities, such as job search or training in
order to meet their requirements. However, the provider may reduce their
points target as appropriate, based on the job seeker's individual
circumstances.

Workforce Australia Employment Services Providers help job seekers by
having access to the Employment Fund, which can be used to pay for
professional services, such as drug and alcohol counselling or
rehabilitation.

Disability Employment Services Providers are able to use their service
fees to pay for appropriate types of assistance tailored to the
individual job seeker's circumstances. This assistance may include
interventions such as drug and alcohol counselling or rehabilitation.

If a job seeker fails to meet their compulsory requirements, they may be
subject to compliance action under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Centrelink managed job seekers

Centrelink managed job seekers may undertake treatment activities.
Participation in these treatment activities does not reduce a Centrelink
managed job seeker's mutual obligation requirements. They are additional
voluntary activities only.

Centrelink managed job seekers must still undertake the required
compulsory activities that have been approved by Services Australia, for
example:

-   part-time work, voluntary work, or
-   quarterly participation interviews

The voluntary treatment activities must not impact on their ability to
meet compulsory requirements. These job seekers are not be subject to
compliance action if they fail to attend or cease their treatment
activity. However, they must continue to meet their compulsory mutual
obligation requirements.

If the job seeker wishes to reduce or fully satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements through participation in a drug/alcohol
treatment activity, they should be referred to an Employment Services
Provider for assistance. Providers can access a greater network of
services and resources to support job seekers to overcome their barriers
to employment.

Services Australia does not have access to funding to pay for treatment
activities. If a job seeker wishes to discuss treatment options, they
should be directed to speak with their treating health professional.

Treatment activities

Provider managed job seekers

If a provider contacts to discuss treatment activities for a job seeker,
direct them to their Account Manager for assistance.

Centrelink managed job seekers

Where the job seeker is seeking to add a treatment activity as an
additional voluntary activity, Service Officers are not required to
recommend or determine appropriate treatment activities.

Inclusion of a treatment activity in the job seeker's requirements is
guided by evidence from treating health professionals and/or disclosure
by the job seeker.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
