
Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) factors 001-02050050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines factors that contribute to the JSCI outcome.

JSCI's 18 factors

The JSCI is made up of 18 factors that contribute to a job seeker's
disadvantage in obtaining and maintaining employment. Each factor is
allocated a weighting or points that indicate the relative impact the
factor has on the job seeker's ability to find work. The JSCI is
primarily used to determine the stream eligibility for the job seeker
who is referred to Employment Services Providers.

The Department of Education, Skills and Employment have determined the
JSCI factors and the number of points allocated to each factor as a
result of comprehensive research and analysis of data. The Process page
contains details of the 18 JSCI factors.

Identifying disadvantage

The JSCI is used to identify the relative disadvantage that job seekers
have in finding employment because of their personal circumstances,
labour market skills and local labour market environment. Responses to
the JSCI questions will identify the job seeker's appropriate level of
service.

Based on their JSCI results, job seekers may be referred to:

-   an Employment Services Provider that best suits their needs
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
-   Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Employment barriers and ESAt

In addition, the JSCI may indicate that the job seeker has employment
barriers that require further assessment and for this further assessment
to take place, the job seeker must be referred for an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt). The ESAt will determine the most appropriate
employment assistance for the job seeker. Where barriers are identified
through the JSCI that indicate a potential need for the most intensive
jobactive assistance, participation in Disability Employment Services
(DES) or participation in Community Development Program (CDP), the job
seeker will undertake an additional comprehensive assessment to
determine referral to the most suitable specialised service.

Where the JSCI does not indicate that referral for an ESAt is required,
but the job seeker's behaviour or JSCI responses indicate that
professional or specialist judgement or advice is appropriate, referral
for an ESAt can be made manually.

SEE and AMEP

Job seekers identified with language, literacy and numeracy needs as
well as the need for an ESAt are to be referred to Skills for Education
and Employment (SEE) at the same time the referral to the ESAt is done.
Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) job seekers must be referred
immediately to AMEP before they are referred for an ESAt, CDP provider
or to a jobactive organisation.

JSCI questions

The JSCI questions (asked online as part of the online JSCI trial or
during the JSCI interview) are designed to determine the number of
points that are allocated for each factor. Some factors are determined
by questions asked directly of the job seeker. Other JSCI factors are
based on information such as the job seeker's age, gender and their
geographic location that are already recorded in the system. Some JSCI
factors are supplemented by information obtained from the ESAt, if an
ESAt was completed.

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (other) job seekers can
complete the JSCI online after submitting their online claim. In these
cases, the job seeker registration and the JSCI questions will be
skipped in the Online Participation workflow at the Participation
Interview.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website.

Related links

Conducting a JSCI interview

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) factors for torture and
trauma

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Questions in the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
