
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports 001-02320000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the report submitted by an
Assessor once a customer's Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) has
been completed.

Employment Services Assessments (ESAt)

The ESAt process provides information to assist Services Australia to
determine a customer's eligibility for payment and mutual obligation
requirements. Customers can be referred for an assessment with
Assessment Services who will record the outcome of an assessment in an
ESAt report.

Creation of the ESAt

Assessors are required to complete an electronic ESAt report which is
created and maintained in the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment's Employment Services System (ESS). The report is accessible
on a customer's electronic Medical Information File Envelope (eMIFE)
once it has been accepted by Services Australia.

Contents of the ESAt

The ESAt report may contain some or all of the following information
depending on the customer's circumstances and referral reason:

-   Information about the customer's medical condition(s)
-   Information about a customer's work capacity, taking into account
    any permanent and temporary medical conditions
-   Information about currently addressed barriers to work and how these
    are being addressed
-   Information about other barriers to work and the impact of these on
    employment
-   A 'risk of non-compliance' rating, assessing a customer's barriers
    and vulnerabilities in relation to meeting participation
    requirements
-   Employment support requirements, including the level of support
    needed and the period for which support is required
-   Appropriate interventions and recommended referrals to employment
    assistance services
-   Details of referrals that have been completed by the Assessor and
    those that need to be followed up by the agency after the report is
    submitted
-   The Assessor's and, if necessary, any Contributing Assessor's
    qualifications
-   If consultation with the Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)
    occurred
-   If a Specialist Assessment IQ test is conducted by the Assessor, the
    name of the test applied should be included in the report
-   Referenced medical information used to inform the assessment
-   Details of any contact with treating health professionals

Submission and acceptance of the report

All ESAt reports will pass a validation check in the system after they
are submitted by the Assessor.

A flag will be raised on the customer's record for manual assessment for
reports which fail validation checking.

All submitted reports that are not flagged for manual acceptance will be
automatically accepted.

Staff are able to track the progress of the ESAt report and any
supporting medical documentation provided as part of the claim or
review.

Employment Services Providers

Relevant sections of the ESAt report will also be available
electronically to the Employment Services Provider to whom a referral
has been made.

When a customer is directly registered with a provider and the provider
refers the customer for an ESAt, Services Australia will be notified of
the referral and the outcomes of the assessment if the person has a
Customer Reference Number (CRN). The agency will not receive reports for
people who do not have a CRN.

Check and action report

Staff may access the entire contents of the completed ESAt report
electronically and may view and print the report as required, for
example for the purpose of appeals or other valid reasons.

After it is submitted by the Assessor, the ESAt report may require
manual checking and actioning. Regardless of which organisation
initially referred the customer for an assessment, Services Australia is
responsible for accepting/returning (rejecting) the reports that have
not been automatically accepted.

The completed report may be used to:

-   determine work capacity and develop an individually tailored Job
    Plan for activity tested customers
-   determine eligibility for and ongoing eligibility to income support
    payments including Youth Allowance independent rate

If an ESAt referral was made using a 'DSP Volunteer' referral reason,
the ESAt report is auto accepted. Once accepted, the information in this
type of ESAt has no effect on the customer's eligibility for income
support.

Overriding recommendations from an ESAt

Staff are the delegates for income support decisions. Where a Service
Officer does not agree with recommended hours of work capacity bandwidth
that the Assessor has recorded in the ESAt they must discuss this with
the Assessor before using the system override facility to change these.
This is done when checking the report.

Note: it is not necessary to contact the Assessor when implementing a
decision made by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) or other
external review body. Staff are able to override auto-populated data
from an ESAt report, including:

-   medical condition
-   type of condition
-   work capacity including baseline (formerly current) with
    intervention (formerly future) and temporary reduced

Any changes or additions must include a reason and the overridden
information is maintained on the customer's record for future reference.
An automatic notification is also sent to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment system advising of any changes.

The Resources page contains a link to the Assessment Services Branch for
information on ESAt support services for Assessors and ESAt
Administrators.

Contents

Actioning automatic activities of a current Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) referral

Inconsistencies in an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report

Understanding Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Request to finalise an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to
create a new ESAt referral

Release of an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to customer

Overriding Medical Conditions and work capacity recommendations in an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report

Using an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine
payment type

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Related links

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Actioning automatic activities of a current Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) referral

Assessing a job seeker's mutual obligation requirements based on
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

Assessment Services

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
