
Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation 001-18030210

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how non-compliance is managed under the Targeted
Compliance Framework when a job seeker or ParentsNext participant
returns to a participation payment following cancellation of a
participation payment.

On this Page:

Non-compliance cancellations

The Targeted Compliance Framework ensures job seekers, including
ParentsNext participants, who repeatedly and deliberately fail to meet
their compulsory requirements or who refuse or voluntarily leave
suitable work are appropriately held to account.

A non-compliance cancellation occurs when a job seeker:

-   fails to accept or commence suitable work
-   voluntarily leaves suitable work without reasonable excuse while in
    receipt of participation payment
-   is dismissed due to misconduct as a worker from suitable employment
    while in receipt of a participation payment, or
-   incurs a third financial penalty for persistently committing mutual
    obligation failures

When payment is cancelled, the job seeker enters a post cancellation
non-payment period of 4 weeks, or 6 weeks when an unemployment failure
related to a relocation job has been committed.

Payment cannot be restored when the job seeker's payment is cancelled
with the reason:

-   Mutual obligation or work refusal penalty (TCP), or
-   Unemployment failure penalty (TCU)

Job seekers may reclaim payment at any stage during or following the
post cancellation non-payment period. They will generally be subject to
RapidConnect. The start date of a return to payment will be affected by
the post cancellation non-payment period end date.

Where a job seeker returns to payment following a post cancellation
non-payment period, and a job plan was in place prior to the break in
payment, it remains in force until another job plan is created. When the
job seeker resumes payment, the previous job plan can be used to
determine the job seeker’s mutual obligation requirements (if they still
have the capacity to undertake the activities contained in the job
plan).

Failing to meet reconnection requirements

Participation payments are cancelled if the job seeker fails to comply
with reconnection requirements, including a requirement to contact
Services Australia to arrange a Capability Assessment, within 4 weeks of
the deemed date of notification of the reconnection requirement.

The job seeker's payment is cancelled with the reason 'Customer failed
to re-engage (CDR)’. Payment cannot be restored following this type of
cancellation. The job seeker will need to reclaim payment.

Job seeker's compliance zone when payment recommences

When a job seeker’s participation payment re-commences, the Employment
Services System (ESS) will identify which compliance zone the job seeker
will return to. This will generally be the zone they were in prior to
the cancellation.

However, job seekers will return to the green zone when they were in
the:

-   financial penalty zone and their payment has been cancelled for 3
    active months or more, or
-   warning zone and their payment has been cancelled for 6 active
    months or more

Job seekers who return to the warning zone, will retain the active
demerits, that is, demerits that have been accrued in 6 active months.

Returning to the financial penalty zone

If the payment was cancelled as a result of a third financial penalty
for mutual obligation failures and the job seeker returns to the
financial penalty zone, a new failure group commences for the purpose of
calculating the penalty count. This means a subsequent first mutual
obligation failure after re-commencement of payment will result in a 50%
payment reduction, a second a 100% payment reduction, etc.

When the payment was cancelled for any other reason and the job seeker
returns to the financial penalty zone within 3 active months, the
penalty count will be retained from the previous period on payment.

Outstanding Capability Interview or Capability Assessment

When a Capability Interview or Capability Assessment was triggered but
not completed prior to cancellation, the Employment Services System
(ESS) will recalculate the active demerits on return to payment to
determine whether the Capability Interview or Capability Assessment is
still required.

Job seekers who have:

-   3 demerits in the 6 active months, will require a Capability
    Interview
-   5 demerits in the 6 active months, will require a Capability
    Assessment

When a Capability Assessment is retriggered on return to a participation
payment, the job seeker should be referred to the Participation
Solutions Team (PST) so the Capability Assessment can be completed
before they are due to report.

Related links

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

RapidConnect

Fully compliant job seekers returning to the green zone

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
