
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use the information contained in an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine a customer's
work capacity, mutual obligation requirements or participation
requirements and eligibility for certain income support payments. A
current and valid ESAt is needed to make these decisions. This decision
making can be part of the new claim or Service Update/review process.

Request for an ESAt

A request for an ESAt may be made if job seekers with a medical
condition or other barriers are requesting employment assistance or
claiming or receiving an Activity Tested payment such as JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or Disability Support Pension (DSP).
See Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is
required.

Conditions likely to persist for less than 2 years

Assessors will record a condition as Persists for less than 2 years if
it:

-   is verified by medical evidence, and
-   is not likely to last longer than 2 years (previously recorded as
    temporary)

Medical conditions that are likely to persist for more than 2 years - not Diagnosed, Reasonably Treated and Stabilised

For a condition to be considered permanent (likely to persist for more
than 2 years), it must be verified by medical evidence indicating the
condition is likely to persist for more than 2 years. This is for the
purposes of determining:

-   the partial capacity to work status, or
-   the appropriate Employment Service Provider assistance

There is no requirement for the condition to be Diagnosed, Reasonably
Treated and Stabilised (DTS) for this assessment, although DTS
conditions are also taken into account.

Identifying if an invitation to claim DSP is required

In some circumstances, an ESAt can be upgraded to a Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA), where the assessor has enough evidence to assess the
customer's medical condition/s as DTS. An impairment rating can be
recorded under the Impairment Tables.

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced.
The new Tables are used to assess a customer's medical eligibility for
all DSP claims lodged on or after this date. The existing 2012 version
of the Tables will still apply for any DSP claims/reviews and appeals
lodged before this date.

There are changes to terminology which is reflected in ESAt/JCA report.

These changes include:

-   the term Diagnosed, Reasonably Treated and Stabilised (DTS) will
    replace the current term of Fully Diagnosed, Treated and Stabilised
    (FDTS)
-   the term likely to persist for more than 2 years, will replace the
    term permanent condition
-   the term likely to persist for less than 2 years, will replace the
    term temporary condition

Partial Capacity to Work

Customers are considered to have a partial capacity to work if they are
not eligible for Disability Support Pension (DSP) but are assessed as
having:

-   an impairment that prevents them from working, or being trained for
    work for at least 30 hours a week, at or above the relevant minimum
    wage, independently of a program of support, within the next 2 years

If a customer with a partial capacity to work is receiving JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment (PP) or Youth Allowance (YA) they may
have reduced participation requirements, and be eligible for
Pharmaceutical Allowance and a Pensioner Concession Card.

The Resources page contains a link to the DSP online claim form.

Related links

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Assessing a job seeker's mutual obligation requirements based on
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
