-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP). AMEP is
a free English language tuition program administered by the Department
of Home Affairs. AMEP is available to eligible migrants from the
humanitarian, family and skilled visa streams.

AMEP Training

AMEP participants have access to English classes for 5 years or more
from their visa commencement date or arrival in Australia. The program
provides English language tuition, which allows participants a choice of
learning streams – either Vocational English or Social English -
depending on their goals.

In addition, AMEP participants with particular needs can access the
following special activities/training:

Special Preparatory Program (SPP)

Additional hours of tailored English classes may be offered through SPP
for humanitarian entrants in recognition of their greater learning and
support needs arising from difficult pre-migration experiences such as
limited schooling and/or traumatic experiences.

Settlement Language Pathways to Employment and Training (SLPET)

To assist with the transition to work in Australia, additional tuition
is available to AMEP participants through Settlement Language Pathways
to Employment and Training (SLPET). SLPET provides AMEP participants
with 200 hours of tuition, including work placement, in addition to
their AMEP entitlement.

AMEP Eligibility

All permanent visa holders who are 18 years and over who do not have
vocational English are eligible for AMEP.

Access to the AMEP is also available to the following temporary visa
holders:

-   Bridging Visa F (Class WF)
-   Business Skills (Provisional) (Class UR)
-   Business Skills (Provisional) (Class EB)
-   Interdependency (Provisional) (Class UG)
-   Partner (Provisional) (Class UF)
-   Partner (Temporary) (Class UK)
-   Resolution of Status (Temporary) (Class UH)
-   Safe Haven Enterprise (Class XE)
-   Skilled - Designated Area-sponsored (Provisional) (Class UZ)
-   Skilled - Independent Regional (Provisional) (Class UX)
-   Skilled - Regional Sponsored (Subclass 475)
-   Skilled - Regional Sponsored (Subclass 487)
-   Skilled - Regional Sponsored (Subclass 489)
-   Temporary (Humanitarian Concern) (Class UO)
-   Temporary Protection (Class XD)
-   Skilled Work Regional (Provisional) (Subclass 491)
-   Skilled Employer Sponsored Regional (Provisional) (Subclass 494)

Eligibility for migrants under 18 years of age

The AMEP is intended for adult migrants aged 18 years or over. Migrants
aged under 18 are expected to be in school or training. AMEP service
providers can apply to have youth whose needs are not met through
mainstream schooling to participate in the AMEP. Participation for youth
is determined on a case-by-case basis in consultation with local
schools.

Eligibility for migrants not yet in Australia

To support English language learning in preparation for migration, from
1 October 2020, some migrants may be eligible for AMEP while outside
Australia where they hold, or have applied for:

-   a permanent visa; or
-   a temporary visa as determined by the Minister of Department of Home
    Affairs

Delivery of the AMEP

The program is delivered flexibly to respond to individual
circumstances, including the needs of participants living in rural and
regional locations. The learning options are:

-   Full or part-time classroom tuition: in learning centres or
    community based settings, designed to meet diverse needs,
    educational backgrounds and learning abilities
-   The Volunteer Tutor Scheme: provides English language assistance
    through a trained volunteer, usually on a one-on-one basis. Home
    tutoring usually takes place in the informal atmosphere of the
    participant's own home or at another mutually convenient venue
-   Distance Learning: can be undertaken either online or through
    workbooks with supplementary materials. Regular contact with a
    qualified teacher is provided over the phone or via the internet for
    participants undertaking this mode of study
-   Youth classes: some AMEP service providers offer youth-specific
    courses for participants under the age of 25 years. Youth-specific
    courses are tailored programs with both a social and educational
    focus, which target the specific needs of young people

Time limits

Participants must register, commence and complete the AMEP within
specified time limits. The AMEP time limits start on the first day of
arrival in Australia or after the date their visa came into effect—known
as the 'visa commencement date'. Prior to 1 October 2020 there was a
time limit of 510 hours participation in AMEP.

Participants who hold a qualifying visa and were in Australia on or
before 1 October 2020 have no time limits on achieving a vocational
level of English through participation in AMEP.

Participants who hold a qualifying visa and were in Australia after 1
October 2020 have time limits:

Registration with an AMEP provider:

-   within 6 months of their visa commencement date for people aged 18
    years or over; and
-   within 12 months of their visa commencement date for people aged
    under 18

Commencement of tuition with an AMEP provider within 12 months of a
person's visa commencement date.

Completion of AMEP tuition within 5 years of a participant's visa
commencement date. Extensions to all time limits are available under
prescribed circumstances. Participants have up to 10 years from their
visa commencement date to submit applications for extensions.

Support for childcare

Childcare is available at no cost to AMEP participants for children
under school age during AMEP class times. Childcare is arranged by AMEP
service providers and is generally located close to the participant's
class. Any childcare outside of the class hours or during semester
breaks may be at the clients own cost – depending on the service
provider's arrangement with the centre.

AMEP providers are not required to organise or deliver childcare during
times the AMEP participant is not in class, for example during term and
semester breaks.

Childcare will not be provided to those participants choosing other
methods of AMEP delivery, such as home tutoring, or distance learning.

When a participant transfers from AMEP to Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE), their entitlement for childcare under AMEP ceases. The
customer may be eligible for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
(Transition to Work).

Transferring from AMEP to SEE

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) and AMEP are similar but
separate programs that cannot be undertaken concurrently. AMEP
participants are encouraged to complete their AMEP hours before
transferring to SEE. A participant can be referred to SEE while
participating in AMEP, but if they are accepted into SEE, they will be
exited from AMEP automatically.

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

A customer must be on an eligible income support payment for 12 months
or more when they commence the program to be eligible for an Education
Entry Payment (EdEP).

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Home Affairs
website for further information regarding Adult Migrant English Program
(AMEP).

Contents

Connecting customers to Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Related links

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

English programs for migrants

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
