
Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised 001-10040100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure outlines when it is appropriate to send additional
information to Employment Services Providers and what needs to be
considered following a decision not to apply a failure. Provision of
information to providers relating to a decision not to apply a failure
is the role of all Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service
Officers with PFDEC or WNPPD security resource and service centre
Service Officers with UNPP security resource.

Authority to disclose information

Section 202 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 provides
Services Australia with the authority to disclose information to
Employment Services Providers and ParentsNext providers that assists the
provider to execute their duties to provide a service to the job seeker
or ParentsNext participant.

The reasons why a decision is made regarding a failure, or information
collected during the compliance investigation may affect the provider's
capacity to deliver services to the job seeker or affect the job
seeker's capacity to meet compulsory requirements.

The job seeker compliance system is aimed at encouraging job seekers and
ParentsNext participants to meet their compulsory requirements, which
may include looking for work and participating in tasks and activities.
The job seeker compliance system helps to reinforce expectations with
job seekers who are not looking for work or meeting compulsory
requirements by ensuring they are held accountable for their actions. At
the same time, job seekers who have a good reason for not meeting their
requirements are not penalised.

The information that is forwarded to providers is an important part of
ensuring this focus is maintained.

Recording a decision not to apply a failure

As part of recording a decision not to apply a failure, the PST-skilled
Service Officer is required to select the most appropriate rejection
reason. This rejection reason is electronically forwarded to the
provider, providing an indication as to why the decision was made.

During a compliance investigation, job seeker circumstances impacting
compliance may be added or reviewed. This information may be displayed
to the provider in the Employment Services System (ESS) Capability
Management Tool.

The Compliance Investigation workflow may generate auto text to be sent
to the provider based on the rejection reason recorded. The PST-Skilled
Service Officer should use the free text field to accurately explain the
reason for the rejection where appropriate.

Release of information to providers

While the release of appropriate information to a provider is
encouraged, it must be relevant to the provider's servicing of the job
seeker (as per the provisions outlined in section 202 of the Social
Security (Administration) Act 1999).

While the PST-skilled Service Officer is not required to obtain the job
seeker's consent to release relevant information to the provider, it may
sometimes be appropriate to:

-   discuss with the job seeker the benefits of the provider being aware
    of the personal circumstances, and
-   determine the level of information the job seeker is comfortable
    being disclosed to their provider

Job seekers are advised how information we collect can be used when the
privacy script is delivered via the automated privacy message or when
read to them as part of the Compliance Investigation workflow,
Capability Assessment workflow or Comprehensive Compliance Assessment
workflow.

Access to information

Any information recorded in the Participation Compliance workflow,
including information forwarded to providers relating to reasons for a
decision not to apply a failure, may be obtained by the job seeker under
the Freedom of Information Act 1982.

The Resources page contains examples of when it would be appropriate to
forward additional information to a provider about the reason a failure
has been rejected.

Related links

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Participation Compliance workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
