
Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious illness 001-09120080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess an exemption from mutual obligation
or participation requirements for a job seeker or ParentsNext
participant with a serious illness. This may apply to customers
receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Parenting
Payment (PP) or Special Benefit (SpB).

Exemption circumstances

Job seekers and participants with mutual obligation or participation
requirements receiving the above payments may be eligible for a
temporary exemption from their requirements in certain verifiable
circumstances.

Job seekers and participants suffering from a serious illness who are
undergoing or recovering from intensive medical treatment can have an
exemption granted for longer than the standard maximum exemption period
of 13 weeks. This exemption is known as the Temp Incap - Serious Illness
exemption.

The Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption may initially be granted for
more than 13 weeks and up to 12 months, as stated on a single medical
certificate. Eligible job seekers will have modified reporting
requirements during the exemption. Consider this exemption each time the
job seeker lodges their Reporting Statement (SU19) form.

If the same serious illness condition persists at the end of the initial
12 month exemption, consider extending the exemption for up to 6 months
based on further medical evidence. The exemption period must be covered
by the dates on the new medical certificate.

If a job seeker is still clearly temporarily incapacitated for all work
after being granted a total period of 18 months exemption for the same
medical condition, they may be granted a further exemption of up to 13
weeks at a time. This is under Temporary Incapacity exemption
guidelines.

If the serious illness is primarily as a result of drug or alcohol
misuse or dependency, a Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption should
not be granted unless the job seeker is a Community Development Program
(CDP) participant. The job seeker can volunteer to undertake drug
dependency treatments or interventions. This may count towards meeting
their mutual obligation and Annual Activity Requirements if they are
provider managed.

Serious illness conditions

Examples of medical conditions that may indicate a job seeker or
participant is seriously ill include cancer, acquired brain injury,
serious burns, organ transplants, physical injury requiring long
recovery periods, or severe mental health issues.

As a result of their condition, these job seekers and participants may
not be able to work, study, attend training, look for work, or
participate in a suitable activity for extended periods of time. These
job seekers may not qualify for Disability Support Pension (DSP) because
their condition is not yet fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised, or
their condition is not expected to last for more than 2 years, or they
may not be residentially qualified for DSP.

If a job seeker's medical evidence verifies they have a terminal
illness, they may be manifestly eligible for Disability Support Pension
(DSP).

Note: this exemption should not be used as a way to reduce the number of
contacts with job seekers.

Medical evidence for exemptions, including Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption

For incapacity of a short-term or temporary nature expected to last for
a period of less than 2 years, the job seeker must provide a medical
certificate as proof of incapacity (preferably a Centrelink medical
certificate (SU415) lodged by the job seeker or a SU683 lodged
electronically by the medical practitioner).

Where the job seeker meets the eligibility criteria for the Temp-Incap -
Serious Illness exemption, an initial period of exemption of up to 12
months may be granted. In all cases a single period of exemption must be
based on the dates of incapacity stated by the medical practitioner on
the medical certificate.

If the serious illness is noted as permanent (PRM), Service Officers
must determine if a non-serious illness temporary exemption applies to
other temporary conditions listed. See Assessment of a medical
certificate to determine exemption from mutual obligation requirements
for a temporary incapacity. If no medical conditions listed are of a
temporary nature, then the incapacity exemption is not applied.

If proof of incapacity cannot be provided on an SU415 or SU683, the job
seeker's medical practitioner may provide sufficient evidence to grant
an exemption in another format, as long as it provides all the same
information as an SU415/SU683. People from rural or remote areas may
have limited access to doctors, medical evidence can be completed by a
community nurse.

A medical certificate may be verified if there is doubt about its
accuracy or authenticity. If doubt exists, the issuer should be
contacted by telephone to confirm the authenticity of the certificate
and/or information about altered details.

If the medical practitioner advises they never issued the certificate or
the information is different, discuss with immediate supervisor and
complete a Suspected Fraud referral if appropriate.

Process the medical certificate as per normal procedures. Do not
document specific details of the allegation(s) on the job seeker's
record.

Escalate to Level 2 Helpdesk if further assistance is required.

Exacerbation of a permanent condition

An exacerbation of a permanent condition is considered to be temporary
if it is likely that the job seeker will be able to return to work
within the next 2 years.

If medical evidence shows the illness or injury is expected to affect
the job seeker's ability to undertake work or study of at least 8 hours
per week for an extended period (more than 13 weeks and less than 24
months), they may meet the eligibility criteria for granting the Temp
Incap - Serious Illness exemption. In all cases a single period of
exemption must be based on the dates of incapacity stated by the medical
practitioner on the medical certificate.

Recurring medical conditions

A recurring medical condition is one that will come and go with periods
of wellness or remission of the symptoms, such as asthma or multiple
sclerosis.

If medical evidence shows the illness or injury is expected to affect
the job seeker's ability to undertake work or study of at least 8 hours
per week for an extended period (more than 13 weeks and less than 24
months), they may meet the eligibility criteria for granting the Temp
Incap - Serious Illness exemption. In all cases a single period of
exemption must be based on the dates of incapacity stated by the medical
practitioner on the medical certificate.

Job seekers - ESAt and Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemptions

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) are out of scope for ParentsNext
participants but may be relevant for job seekers.

In all cases the Service Officer should make the decision about whether
to grant an exemption, including Temp incap - Serious Illness, based on
available evidence, including the medical certificate completed by the
job seeker's medical practitioner.

Job seekers with a serious illness who clearly meet the criteria for the
Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption do not need to be referred for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) to determine whether an exemption
can be granted.

If the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) identifies the
requirement for an ESAt for a job seeker who meets the criteria for the
Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption, the JCA flag may be withdrawn so
the pending JSCI can be completed without referring the job seeker for
an ESAt.

A referral for an ESAt can still be made to determine if a job seeker
has a Partial Capacity to Work or to identify if another payment is more
appropriate - see Assessment of a medical certificate to determine
exemption from mutual obligation requirements for a temporary
incapacity.

Current and valid assessment for job seekers

An exemption cannot be granted solely on the information in a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) or an ESAt report. The job seeker must still
meet all the eligibility criteria of the Temp Incap - Serious Illness
exemption by providing a medical certificate completed by a registered
medical practitioner indicating dates which reflect the full period of
the exemption (preferably a Centrelink medical certificate (SU415)
lodged by the job seeker or an SU683 lodged electronically by the
medical practitioner.

If the job seeker has a current and valid ESAt or JCA the information in
the report should also be taken into account when making a decision to
grant an exemption. When considering the information in an ESAt report
always ensure it is a current and valid assessment of the customer's
work capacity. For example, the condition is clearly indicated on the
medical certificate? in the current ESAt or JCA? Has the condition
deteriorated/improved since the last assessment? Has the job seeker's
work capacity changed since the last assessment?

Where a JCA or an ESAt with a current and valid assessment of the
customer's work capacity exists for the medical condition, ensure all
current medical evidence and circumstances surrounding the condition are
taken into consideration when determining the exemption period.

Reporting requirements and Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemptions

Job seekers

Job seekers who have been granted the Temp Incap Serious Illness
exemption can be manually placed on 4 weekly variable reporting and are
required to lodge a modified Reporting Statement (SU19) for up to a
maximum of 12 weeks.

ParentsNext

Compulsory ParentsNext participants who have been granted the Temp Incap
Serious illness exemption for a period of 52 weeks are automatically
placed on 12 weekly variable reporting and are required to lodge a
modified Reporting Statement (SU19). Reporting requirements cannot be
manually updated for ParentsNext participants.

Modified SU19

Where a customer has been placed on variable reporting due to a Temp
Incap Serious Illness exemption, the SU19 is modified to include
questions about their medical condition. The exemption will be
reconsidered if the customer states on the SU19 their condition has
significantly:

-   improved and they can now work or participate in activities for at
    least 8 hours per week. They should be contacted and the Temp
    Incap - Serious Illness exemption reconsidered. These exemptions
    should not be end-dated without discussion with the customer to
    confirm that the exemption is no longer appropriate
-   deteriorated and they are unlikely to recover within the next 2
    years. This indicates they should be considered for another payment
    such as Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Appointing a nominee or authorising a person to act on behalf of a seriously ill job seeker or ParentsNext participant

Job seekers or participants who have been granted the Temp Incap -
Serious Illness exemption may be unable to conduct business on their own
behalf for extended periods.

In order for them to maintain contact with or respond to contact from
the agency during a period of incapacity, job seekers and participants
can request the appointment of a third party as:

-   a correspondence nominee
-   a payment nominee
-   both a correspondence and payment nominee

When a job seeker or participant identifies that their medical
circumstances may prevent them from conducting their business with the
agency, advise the job seeker or participant of the facility to appoint
a nominee.

Related links

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

JSCI Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) flags

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Appointing nominees

Expiry and renewal of medical certificates for payments with mutual
obligation requirements

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
