
Change of circumstances while receiving services from an Employment Services Provider 001-02070000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures to use for job seekers who advise
a change in circumstances while they are receiving services from an
Employment Services Provider.

Change of circumstances

There will be instances where a job seeker receiving an income support
payment with mutual obligation requirements has a change in
circumstances. A job seeker may inform either Services Australia or
their provider of a change in their circumstances.

Updating the Job Seeker Snapshot

If a job seeker advises Services Australia of a change in circumstances
that may affect the level of employment servicing, or trigger a referral
to another programme, the agency should update the Job Seeker Snapshot.
The result of this update may lead to an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt) or a referral to another programme.

An ESAt may be needed if the job seeker has a medical condition that
significantly affects their ability to work. This may include situations
where an existing medical condition has changed. In this case, the ESAt
may indicate the job seeker is eligible for a different type of
Employment Services Provider. The Service Officer should book an initial
appointment with the new provider.

If a Disability Employment Services (DES) job seeker contacts the agency
to advise of a change in circumstances, the Job Seeker Snapshot should
not be completed.

For information about this process, see Conducting a Job Seeker
Snapshot.

Employment Services Provider transfers

Job seekers generally remain with the same Employment Services Provider
for their period of unemployment. However, there may be some instances
where a job seeker may transfer to another provider offering the same
type of service, for example:

-   when a job seeker has moved address
-   where there has been a breakdown in the relationship between the job
    seeker and their provider or Community Development Program (CDP)
    provider

Job seekers who approach Services Australia for any transfer reason
should be advised to discuss their situation with their Employment
Services Provider. The agency has no role in transferring job seekers
between providers.

If the job seeker is not satisfied with the response from their provider
in relation to the transfer request, the job seeker should contact the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations' National Customer
Service Line to further discuss their concerns. See Breakdown of the
relationship between a job seeker and their Workforce Australia provider
for more information.

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations' National Customer Service Line.

Contents

Job seeker change of address

Release of information to Employment Services Providers

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their Workforce
Australia provider

Workforce Australia/Community Development Programme (CDP) registration
inactivated and cancellation of income support in error

Related links

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Assessment Services

Job Seeker Snapshot

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
