
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a job seeker can still be considered
unemployed for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) purposes when they become involved, or are thinking of becoming
involved, in self-employment.

Determining unemployed for eligibility purposes

A job seeker who is substantially engaged in running a business would
generally not be regarded as unemployed. It is irrelevant whether the
business is being run at a profit or loss, or whether any income is
currently being received.

However, there are situations where a self-employed person can be
granted an allowance.

Job seekers running a business can be regarded as unemployed when:

-   the business is on a small scale
-   the business is designed to be a supplement rather than an
    alternative to wages
-   the job seeker is a 'sleeping partner' - for example, has invested
    capital but not time and effort
-   the business is a contracting or sub-contracting enterprise

A job seeker must continue to meet their mutual obligation requirements,
for example, prove that work is being sought in fields other than those
purely related to their business.

Note: the fact that a person spends a fair amount of time associated
with their business and does not earn enough income from the business
does not necessarily entitle them to JSP or YA (job seeker). The
customer needs to meet their mutual obligation requirements and must be
willing and able to undertake any suitable work or study.

Job seekers who have an Australian Business Number (ABN) are not
automatically assumed to be self-employed. There is no requirement for
customers with an ABN to have this cancelled to qualify for JSP or YA
(job seeker).

Satisfying mutual obligation requirements

A job seeker with part-time or full-time mutual obligation requirements
may be able to satisfy their requirements by undertaking
self-employment, if the work meets the sufficient work test.

For self-employment to be regarded as sufficient work both the following
conditions must be met:

-   the person must be able to show that they are working at least their
    required number of hours under their mutual obligation requirements,
    and
-   their assessable, net income from their business provides the
    equivalent of the national minimum wage rate for the minimum
    required hours

Where the self-employment does not satisfy the sufficient work test, the
person will be required to look for alternative work. If their
commitment to their business interferes with their ability to meet their
mutual obligation requirements, the person will usually not be
considered to be unemployed.

Related links

Self-employment as an approved activity

Self-Employment Assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
