
Youth Activities as an approved activity 001-09070080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker, under 22
years of age, may fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
undertaking study or training, or a combination of activities for a
minimum number of hours per week as part of their Job Plan.

Mutual obligation requirements

If a YA customer is enrolled in a course of study which would qualify
under the rules for YA as a full-time student, then payment as a YA
(student) should be considered in the first instance.

However, if a YA job seeker is participating in sufficient hours of
suitable activities or programmes, they can fully satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements.

This approved activity option is known as 'Youth Activities' and can be
applied where other activities that fully meet mutual obligation
requirements, such as paid work, study (for principal carers) or short
courses, do not apply.

If this is approved by Services Australia, (the agency), the job seeker
is not required to look for work. They will be managed by the agency and
not have to be referred to and participating with an Employment Services
Provider.

Suitable activities to satisfy mutual obligation requirements as 'Youth Activities'

When approving Youth Activities, the primary focus is whether the
activity or combination of activities/programmes will improve the job
seeker's skills and qualifications and improve their prospects of
gaining employment. Ideally, the activity/ies will also improve the job
seeker's work capacity and increase social participation.

Examples of activities include, but are not limited to:

-   a part-time vocational training course
-   unpaid work experience or voluntary work
-   paid employment or self-employment (meeting the Sufficient Work
    Test)
-   measures designed to eliminate or reduce any disadvantage the person
    has in the labour market
-   a self-employment development opportunity
-   training for Aboriginal program placement
-   an approved literacy course through TAFE/Adult Education Providers
-   a rehabilitation program, including a vocational rehabilitation
    program
-   a program of assistance as recommended by an Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
-   local youth agency or state/territory funded programmes such as post
    school or New South Wales State Based Transition To Work or the
    National Disabilities Insurance Scheme's School Leavers Employment
    Supports (SLES) initiative. Note: this service is different to the
    national Intensive Support - Transition to Work programme offered by
    the Department of Education, Skills and Employment

Youth Activities Hourly Requirement

To have Youth Activities approved, the YA job seeker has to be
undertaking a 50 to 74 per cent study load (in a suitable vocational
course of study, as per normal course approval policy) or a combination
of activities/programmes for a minimum number of hours per week as part
of their Job Plan. The minimum hours required will depend on the job
seeker's participation category:

-   Principal carers Parents - 15 hours per week
-   Partial Capacity to Work job seekers - 15 hours per week
-   Other YA job seekers - 25 hours per week

Mutual obligation requirements for Community Development Program (CDP) YA job seekers

Where a CDP job seeker in receipt of YA participates in Youth
Activities, these activities are voluntary.

For all CDP job seekers, including YA job seekers:

-   CDP providers consider each job seeker's assessed capacity and
    individual circumstances when negotiating job plans
-   minimum hourly requirements do not apply, and
-   there are no specific requirements for CDP job seekers based on
    their age group or participation category

See Community Development Program (CDP) for information on mutual
obligation requirements for job seekers in CDP.

Local or State Government Programs

Local youth agency or State/Territory funded post school programs such
as the NSW State Government Transition to Work (NSW TTW) program,
Victorian Transition To Employment (TTE) Initiative or the National
Disability Insurance Schemes SLES initiative can be approved as 'Youth
Activities' for YA job seekers. These job seekers have no job search or
other compulsory activities, as participation in these programs will
fully meet their mutual obligation requirements. Note: NSW TTW is
different to the national Intensive Support - Transition to Work
programme offered by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment

Job seekers who have commenced or are due to commence NSW TTW, Victorian
TTE or SLES within 8 weeks of applying for YA, need to have the program
included as an approved activity in their Job Plan. The job seeker is
not required to undertake any other activities prior to commencing the
post school program.

In the past, job seekers with mutual obligation requirements were
required to exit NSW TTW or Victorian TTE and commence in Disability
Employment Services (DES) in order to qualify for Youth Allowance
(other) where DES was the recommended referral from an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA). Although
this is no longer required in order to meet mutual obligation
requirements and be eligible for payment, job seekers will still have to
exit NSW TTW, Victorian TTE or SLES if they want to commence in DES, as
the Department of Social Services does not allow full concurrency with
these post-school programs and DES.

Note: job seekers who are in their final 6 months of participation in
NSW TTW, Victorian TTE or SLES can directly register with a DES provider
as an eligible school leaver, and start receiving DES assistance while
they finalise their participation in the post school program.

To be eligible to participate in DES and NSW TTW, Victorian TTE or SLES
concurrently a participant must:

-   be in their final 6 months of participation in NSW TTW, Victorian
    TTE or SLES
-   meet eligibility requirements for DES as an eligible school leaver,
    and
-   have the capacity to benefit from DES and be able to fully and
    effectively participate in both programs at the same time

Existing arrangements regarding the concurrency of DES and post school
programs continue to apply to job seekers who are not in their final 6
months of 1 of the 3 approved transition programs. For all other job
seekers, NSW TTW, Victorian TTE or SLES cannot be undertaken
concurrently with DES. Only once they have exited the post-school
program, are they eligible to commence in DES under eligible school
leaver arrangements. They are not required to undertake an ESAt for the
purpose of accessing DES. If a job seeker has already commenced in DES,
they cannot exit DES in order to undertake a local or state government
transition program or SLES.

Drug Court participants

Unemployed people participating in Drug Court programs may be able to
use this activity to meet their mutual obligation requirements. The
activity should be included in their Job Plan as 'Youth Activities' for
no more than 6 months at a time. The Job Plan should be updated every 6
months and take into consideration the person's individual Drug Court
program obligations and their ability to look for and take up work, or
undertake study if appropriate. Once accepted into the program,
participants will be required to follow an individual case management
plan which will set out the requirements of the program. This program
will be strictly monitored by the court and any deviance may result in
the imposition of sanctions and in the last resort, expulsion from the
program.

State government training program

If a job seeker is participating full time in a state government
training program and is receiving a Training Wage they should be
considered as employed and not unemployed. They do not satisfy the
mutual obligation requirements and are not eligible for YA (job seeker).
If the job seeker is participating on a part time basis then the
Training Wage they are paid whilst in the program should be treated as
earned income.

Note: an Australian Apprentice (apprentice or trainee) claiming YA is
not subject to an Activity Test.

Deferred referral to Employment Services Provider

YA job seekers, 22 years of age and under who have been identified at
the First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow stage
as potentially eligible for the approval of Youth Activities will be
exempt from RapidConnect and automatically deferred from referral to
jobactive, national Intensive Support - Transition to Work programme or
a Community Development Program (CDP) provider for a period of 6 weeks.

YA job seekers will only be referred to jobactive, national Intensive
Support - Transition to Work or a CDP provider at the end of the 6 week
deferred referral period if they have not commenced in Youth Activities.

Youth Activities can continue for a maximum of 52 weeks.

Related links

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Negotiating Job Plans

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

RapidConnect

Intensive Support - Transition to Work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
