
Serious failure hardship provisions 001-10120070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the hardship provisions where payment may be
reinstated during a serious failure period.

Serious failures may be incurred by Community Development Program (CDP)
participants refuse or fail to accept suitable employment, or are
persistently non-compliant.

Serious failure hardship provisions

Payment may be reinstated during a serious failure period under hardship
provisions when a CDP participant:

-   does not have the capacity to attend a waiver re-engagement
    appointment with their CDP provider, and
-   serving the serious failure period would cause the CDP participant
    to be in severe financial hardship

Incapacity to attend a waiver re-engagement appointment

CDP participants are only eligible for payment under hardship provisions
during a serious failure period if they do not have any capacity to
attend a waiver re-engagement appointment. Capacity to attend the waiver
re-engagement appointment should be based on the CDP participant’s
current circumstances, including current exemptions from mutual
obligation requirements.

As a general rule, a CDP participant has some capacity to attend a
waiver re-engagement appointment if they do not have an exemption from
mutual obligation requirements. If an exemption is appropriate but it is
yet to be granted, a waiver should only be recorded under hardship
provisions after the exemption is granted.

Note: the CDP participant is not required to agree to attend a waiver
re-engagement appointment in order for an assessment under serious
failure hardship provisions to take place.

Severe financial hardship

Severe financial hardship means a CDP participant:

-   has a dependent child or is a member of a couple and has liquid
    assets below $5000 (including their partner's liquid assets), or
-   is not a member of a couple and has liquid assets below $2500

Making payment under hardship provisions

CDP participants may test their eligibility for payment under hardship
provisions at any time during a serious failure period.

When a CDP participant is assessed as eligible for payment under
hardship provisions, payment will be fully reinstated from the date the
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
determines the waiver should take effect. As general rule the waiver
will take effect from the date it is requested by the CDP participant.

When payment is reinstated under hardship provisions, the CDP
participant will be considered a fully eligible CDP participant for the
purpose of accessing employment services. These CDP participants will
not be required to comply with their mutual obligation requirements for
the period they are exempt from mutual obligation requirements.

Liquid assets preclude payment

When a CDP participant does not qualify for payment under hardship
provisions in the first instance due to their level of liquid assets,
they can approach Services Australia at any time during the course of
the Serious Failure period for a reassessment of hardship.

The rules that relate to unavoidable or reasonable expenditure for the
Liquid Assets test will be applied in these situations. Prior to
applying the reasonable expenditure test, the Participation Solutions
Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD) may be required to ascertain
whether the CDP participant still has no capacity to attend a waiver
re-engagement appointment.

Roles and responsibilities

The Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
is responsible for:

-   determining whether a CDP participant is eligible for payment under
    hardship provisions during a serious failure period, and
-   ending the serious failure period if hardship provisions apply

The assessment of hardship by the PST-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
may occur either during the course of finalising the determination to
apply a serious failure or at any other stage while the CDP participant
is serving the serious failure period.

Related links

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Serious failure penalties

Job Seeker Compliance Framework waiver and hardship provisions

Waiving a serious failure period

Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not
attended

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers
affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
