-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Job seeker reporting requirements

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

Customers with mutual obligation requirements will generally report each
fortnight via [] self-managed service channels (online account, Express
Plus Centrelink mobile app or phone self service), in person or in
writing (SU19) to be paid JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA).

A JSP customer should be directed to the Services Australia website for
more information about employment income and reporting. Discuss
self-managed service options and the priority reporting line with the
customer.

See Reporting overview for information on different reporting methods
available for job seekers.

Job seekers (JSP and YA) mainly report fortnightly (2 weekly) unless
variable reporting applies. This allows the job seeker to:

-   inform Services Australia of their own (and their partner's)
    employment income paid in that reporting period
-   advise of any changes in circumstances

Centrelink Managed job seekers will provide confirmation of any mutual
obligation requirements or participation requirements which have been
met (unless exemptions exist).

Job seekers can:

-   view a summary of their due to report dates and reporting periods in
    their online account. This displays all reporting periods within 12
    weeks of the date viewed
-   access this summary by selecting Income and Assets > Employment
    Income > Next reporting periods from the menu

Job seekers who have provided their mobile number or email address are
sent a reminder via email or Short Message Service (SMS) the day before
they are due to report.

Centrelink managed job seekers with no mutual obligation requirements
(such as income support payment reduced to nil rate) are not required to
report mutual obligation requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements reporting profile

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements are given a reporting
profile based on:

-   their approved activity, or
-   exemption from mutual obligation requirements and employment income
    reporting frequency

The reporting profile with the more frequent reporting requirement will
be applied by service profiling.

For example, if the job seeker has a mutual obligation requirements
profile of 4 weekly and an employment income profile of 2 weekly, they
are required to report fortnightly.

Employment or other circumstances different from current profile

If during a discussion the customer indicates employment or other
circumstances are substantially different or not accurately represented
by the profiling result, the Service Officer can choose to amend the
reporting requirement if the customer:

is now working, they must be placed on two weekly reporting straight
away

has ceased work. They must be questioned about any unused leave
entitlements or termination payments they have received. If payment has
been received and the customer is able to provide the details, update
the customer's record

-   If they are unable to provide details of their unused leave
    entitlements or termination payments (and they are not available via
    Single Touch Payroll), an Employment Separation Certificate (SU1) is
    required. See Cessation of employment income

Any changes to reporting frequency will be actioned by the Service
Profiler.

The Service Officer should always advise of new reporting requirements
and notification obligations.

Note: if unused leave entitlements and/or termination payments are
pre-filled by the employer through Single Touch Payroll (STP) and are
confirmed by the customer, then verification via an SU1 is not required.

Notification of employment

For information, see Employment Services Provider reports customer
commenced employment but income not declared.

Job seeker employed by a supported employment service

Supported employment services normally electronically report employment
income for their employees.

Job seekers who are incarcerated and reporting requirements

When a job seeker is incarcerated, they have to contact Services
Australia to update their change in circumstances. To receive a final
payment an incarcerated person must report before going to prison.

The incarcerated person needs to complete the form SU709 - Confirmation
of Imprisonment for payment. The correctional facility should print the
online form from the Services Australia website, Corrective Services
resources page.

The completed SU709 - Confirmation of Imprisonment for payment can be
returned via:

-   email to the relevant Service Zone, see F2F Incarcerated customer
    contacts
-   Fax to 1300 786 102
-   Mail to Centrelink, Reply Paid 7800, Canberra BC ACT 2610

Job seeker circumstances and reporting frequency

Most job seekers claiming for or receiving JSP or YA (job seeker) with
mutual obligation requirements are placed on two weekly reporting
frequency or Stimulus reporting. In limited circumstances, some job
seekers with mutual obligation requirements can be placed on a reporting
frequency other than two weekly. This is defined as variable reporting.
Job seekers can be placed onto variable reporting if they meet the
variable reporting criteria.

The following job seekers are eligible to be placed on a 4 weekly
variable reporting frequency:

-   granted with the claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP) exemption
-   participating in the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Reporting requirements for job seekers who have current refugee
exemptions (including REF and R6M exemption reasons) or with Absence
Overseas (AOA) activity will not change. Job seekers with REF and R6M
exemption reasons can still be placed on 12 weekly reporting cycle if
the exemption period is 12 weeks or more.

If a customer advises part time, casual or full time employment details
then variable reporting must cease from the date after the first
Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) of the change to their circumstances.
When new Single Touch Payroll (STP) employment data is available,
customers will be automatically placed on two weekly reporting.

Job seekers on variable reporting are Statement reporters. They need to
report any changes that affect their payment on the EPED of the period
that change occurred.

Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers generally report fortnightly (2
weekly).

Reporting requirements and Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemptions

Job seekers granted the Temp Incap Serious Illness exemption are
generally placed on variable reporting and are required to report every
12 weeks using self-managed services or via a Reporting Statement
(SU19). The SU19 includes questions about the job seeker's medical
condition. The exemption will be reconsidered if the job seeker states
on their SU19 their condition has now significantly:

-   improved and they can now work for at least 8 hours per week. They
    should be contacted and the Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemption
    reconsidered. These exemptions should not be end-dated without
    discussion with the job seeker to confirm the exemption is no longer
    appropriate
-   deteriorated and are unlikely to recover within the next 2 years.
    This indicates they should be considered for another payment such as
    Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Variable reporting and debts

Job seekers with a debt are not eligible for variable reporting and must
report on a fortnightly basis.

The following are exceptions to the rules regarding debts to the
Commonwealth:

-   the debts were incurred by another person, such as a partner
-   a systems fault produced dual entitlement
-   the debts were incurred through other Government departments, or
-   the debts have been fully repaid

Job seeker automatically removed from variable reporting

In certain circumstances, job seekers will be removed from variable
reporting automatically by Service Profiling. These circumstances
include (but are not limited to):

approved activity or exemption has expired

Job seeker and/or partner has reported employment income that is over
the Income Free Area (IFA) at least once in the last 12 weeks

new Single Touch Payroll (STP) employment data is available

Job seeker has an outstanding compliance action and/or customer not
re-engaged

Job seeker has 2 or more applied failures in 6 months

Job seeker has a debt, unless one of the following exceptions apply:

-   the debts were incurred by another person, such as a partner
-   a systems fault produced dual entitlement
-   the debts were incurred through other Government departments,
    Community Development Employment Project (CDEP) or Community
    Development Program (CDP)
-   the debts were fully repaid

End of exemption and change to reporting date

When a job seeker's approved activity or exemption ends, their reporting
frequency is automatically re-profiled. They are placed on the reporting
frequency based on the change in activity/exemption.

To ensure a customer's next reporting date is not amended during a
reporting period, if possible, align exemption periods with a job
seeker's regular Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) code.

The exemption end date may not be able to be aligned with the job
seeker's reporting frequency, for example, Disability Support Pension
(DSP) exemption that may run for uneven weeks.

Maximum allowable periods for exemptions must be taken into
consideration.

Manually removing a job seeker from variable reporting

Service Officers can manually remove a job seeker from variable
reporting if necessary. Reasons include job seeker:

-   request
-   was originally placed on variable reporting for a discretionary
    reason, which has now ceased
-   advises commenced work (and still qualify for payment) and will
    receive employment income
-   partner has commenced work and will receive employment income
-   has a manual variable reporting cycle and system is unable to
    automatically update when compliance action is generated

The Resources page contains information on debt calculation and
reporting requirements for Special Benefit (SpB), frequently asked
questions and answers about variable reporting and a list of activity
type codes and suggested reporting frequency.

Early Lodgement of Reports

Early submission of a Reporting Statement is usually not acceptable.

Early reporting may be accepted if:

-   a customer changes their pay day code, see Changing Entitlement
    Period End Dates (EPED)
-   arrangements are in place for national public holiday processing.
    Job seekers will be notified of the early reporting date, see
    Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday
    periods
-   customer advises they are going overseas, see Recording and
    correcting employment income details

Note: changes in circumstances must be reported by the Entitlement
Period End Day (EPED) in the fortnight when the change occurred. For
customers who are on variable reporting, see General 14 day notification
provisions.

Late Lodgement of Reports

Self service reporters can report up to 13 days after the due date
without any penalty or cancellation.

If a job seeker attempts to report via self service more than 13 days
after their due Entitlement Period End Date (EPED), reporting will not
be available as their payment has cancelled (DNL – Did not Lodge). The
customer will need to contact Services Australia to discuss their
ongoing eligibility for payment.

If payment can be restored, the customer can be referred to self service
to complete reporting for the outstanding entitlement periods. See Early
or late lodgement of job seeker reports.

Encourage the customer to report before 5 pm on the due date to avoid
any delay in payment.

Updating and correcting reports

Job seekers can correct their and their partner's reported non-STP
employment income online if there are changes or an error made in the
initial reported income.

When making a correction on the same day as the initial report was
submitted, Centrelink managed job seekers are asked if their mutual
obligation requirements were met again. The circumstances of the
correction may have an impact on these requirements.

Job seekers can correct the non-STP employment income they reported in
the last six reporting periods.

Note: employment income that has been confirmed via the Single Touch
Payroll (STP) channel cannot be corrected via self service. Customers
must discuss changes and provide evidence to staff.

Reporting when job seeker is travelling overseas

See JobSeeker (JSP) customer going overseas and Youth Allowance (YA)
customer going overseas.

The Resources page provides information on reporting where job seekers
lodge after their payments have been cancelled, variable reporting,
activity codes and reporting frequency index.

Contents

Reporting statements for job seekers

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Lodgement and processing arrangements for Reporting Statements when self
service reporting is unavailable

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Raising debts resulting from a failure to report

Reporting requirements when a job seeker compliance investigation is
outstanding

Related links

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Reporting Employment Income via Centrelink online account

Reporting using phone self service option

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Employment income

Working Credit

Weekly payments

Mutual obligation requirements

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Reporting overview

Reporting screens

Self Service Access Facility (SSAF) for reporting employment income,
participation and change of circumstance details

Reporting Employment Income self service troubleshooting

Reporting and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
