
Partner Allowance (PA) 001-11000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document links to information about Partner Allowance (PA).

PA payment

PA was an income support payment available to partners of pensioners or
allowees who had no recent workforce experience and were born on or
before 1 July 1955.

When PA was granted, a customer remained eligible for PA, even after
their partner's eligibility for payment ceased.

PA ceased on 1 January 2022. Any customers that were current PA on this
date were transferred to Age Pension.

PA closed to new claims

PA closed to new claims from 20 September 2003.

From 20 September 2003, claimants who would have qualified for PA must
claim either:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) if they are under Age Pension age, or
-   Special Benefit (SpB) if they are over Age Pension age and not
    residentially qualified for Age Pension

PA cessation

PA ceased on 1 January 2022. All recipients were of Age Pension age on
or before this date.

Customers that had not claimed/transferred to Age Pension and were
current on payment on 1 January 2022 were automatically transferred to
Age Pension on this date.

Notifiable event possible impact on PA

When a PA customer notified multiple events within 14 days and the first
notifiable event resulted in an adverse decision and the second
notifiable event resulted in a favourable decision which nullified the
earlier event, PA should not have been cancelled.

Portability period

For customers who lost entitlement after being absent from Australia for
more than the maximum allowable portability period, PA was stopped. If
the customer returned to Australia within 13 weeks of the loss of
entitlement date their payment may have been restored. However, if they
did not return within 13 weeks, their PA was cancelled and the payment
could not be regranted as PA has not been able to be granted since 20
September 2003.

The Resources page contains a list of files that have been expired due
to Partner Allowance (PA) ceasing.

Contents

Partner Allowance (PA) qualification and savings provisions

Partner Allowance (PA) customer going overseas

Related links

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (job seeker), Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Commencing or returning to self-employment JobSeeker Payment, Youth
Allowance, Widow Allowance, Partner Allowance and Austudy

Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer

Cancellation of Partner Allowance (PA)

Restoration of Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA)

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Mutual obligation requirements

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
