
Expiry and renewal of medical certificates for payments with mutual obligation requirements 001-09121000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how suitably skilled Service Officers assess
eligibility to extend a job seeker's or ParentsNext participant's
temporary incapacity exemption from compulsory mutual obligation or
participation requirements.

Temporary incapacity exemption

A temporary incapacity exemption can be extended if:

-   the job seeker or participant continues to be unable to work or meet
    their mutual obligation requirements for 8 hours or more per week
    due to an incapacity, and
-   the incapacity is, or is likely to be, of a temporary nature

This can also be referred to as 'at least 8 hours or more per week'.

Maximum exemption period

The maximum exemption period is up to 13 weeks for a temporary
incapacity exemption when a job seeker is receiving one of the following
payments with mutual obligation or participation requirements:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) - including ParentsNext participants

The period to be coded for an extension of a temporary incapacity
exemption is the lesser of:

-   the period specified on a valid medical certificate, or
-   13 weeks (91 days) from the start date

For job seekers granted a temporary incapacity exemption for serious
illness:

-   The initial period can be up to 12 months if covered by a valid
    medical certificate. This can be extended for a further 6 months if
    required. This allows for a total period of up to 18 months
-   If the serious illness continues, further 13 week exemption periods
    can be coded as a non-serious illness temporary incapacity. The
    customer would need to continue to meet the temporary incapacity
    criteria as supported by medical evidence.

Temporary medical conditions

A medical condition is considered to be temporary if it is likely to be
resolved within 2 years.

Permanent medical conditions

A medical condition is considered permanent if it is likely to persist
for 2 years or longer and is not an exacerbation.

Temporary exacerbation of a medical condition (recurring)

An exacerbation of a permanent condition is considered to be temporary
if it is expected the current exacerbated symptoms will be resolved
within 2 years.

Example: A customer's anxiety has been assessed as being a permanent
medical condition but they manage it with medication, meditation and a
healthy lifestyle. They have recently lost their job and are currently
quite stressed resulting in erratic thoughts, bouts of crying and panic
attacks. This is an exacerbation of their permanent condition, as the
impact of the current symptoms will be resolved within 2 years.

Serious illness

A serious illness or injury is expected to impact on a customer's
ability to undertake work, study or meet their mutual obligation
requirements for 8 hours or more per week for an extended period (more
than 13 weeks and less than 24 months). See Exempting a job seeker from
mutual obligation requirements for serious illness.

If a job seeker's medical evidence indicates they have a terminal
illness, they may be manifestly eligible for Disability Support Pension
(DSP). Service Officers should help with claiming DSP.

Expiry of exemption

An exemption review is generated one day after the temporary incapacity
exemption ends.

If further medical evidence has not been provided when the exemption
period ends, the job seeker will be required to satisfy mutual
obligation or participation requirements to continue to receive payment.

Continuation of exemption

The period of temporary incapacity exemption from mutual obligation or
participation requirements can be extended if the job seeker lodges a
new medical certificate, and continues to meet the requirements for a:

-   temporary incapacity exemption, or
-   temporary incapacity exemption for serious illness

Gap in coverage

If a new valid medical certificate is provided, but there is a gap of
less than 14 days between the end of the period of incapacity on the
previous medical certificate and the start of the period of incapacity
on the new medical certificate, the new certificate can be taken as
providing continuous coverage. This only applies if the Service Officer
is satisfied the person has remained incapacitated for work during that
time and the medical certificate was lodged within 14 days of the expiry
date.

If the gap between the periods of incapacity is 14 days or more there is
no continuous coverage.

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referrals

Once a decision is made to grant or not grant a temporary incapacity
exemption, consider if an ESAt) referral is appropriate to reassess the
job seeker's work capacity. Note: ESAts are not applicable for
ParentsNext participants.

An ESAt may be required if the medical certificate and/or other
available information indicates the job seeker:

-   has permanent medical condition(s) that impact their ability to work
-   has medical condition(s) that are medium or long term (24 months) in
    nature, including episodic or chronic conditions (for example,
    schizophrenia, psychosis, depression and anxiety)
-   cannot be granted a temporary incapacity exemption and may have a
    temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) of less than 30 hours per
    week
-   has medical condition(s) that appear to be no longer of a temporary
    nature based on multiple medical certificates being lodged for the
    same condition

Do not proceed with an ESAt referral if:

-   the customer is a compulsory ParentsNext participant
-   the job seeker had medical conditions assessed through a previous
    ESAt that is still valid (with no significant change in medical
    conditions)
-   the conditions are temporary (less than 13 weeks)

Suspected fraud

If the available information suggests the job seeker has supplied
medical evidence that was not completed by a treating health
professional or has been amended after a medical practitioner completed
it, contact the medical practitioner to clarify.

If the medical practitioner advises they never issued the certificate or
the information is different, discuss with immediate supervisor and
complete a Suspected Fraud referral if appropriate.

Process the medical certificate as per normal procedures. Do not
document specific details of the allegation(s) on the job seeker's
record. Escalate to Level 2 Helpdesk if further assistance is required.

The Resources page contains medical certificate coding examples, links
to the Workforce Australia website and the Centrelink Medical
Certificate (SU415).

Related links

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Negotiating Job Plans for incapacitated persons

Assessment Services

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
