-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to stream and process a new claim for FHA
lodged online and via the Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694)
form.

Cumulative period of payment

The time limit of FHA has been extended to 4 years (1,460 days) in each
specified 10 year period. The first specified 10 year period is from 1
July 2014 to 30 June 2024. The second specified 10 year period will
commence on 1 July 2024.

This means a customer who has received their full 4 years (1,460 days)
of FHA before 30 June 2024 will be able to reclaim FHA from 1 July 2024.
Customers who are current on payment even if they have received less
than 1,460 days on 1 July 2024 will have their FHA reset to zero for the
second specified 10 year period.

Streaming FHA claims

If a customer applies for FHA, their claim is streamed to make an early
decision about whether the claim can be granted, rejected or referred to
a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). Making these decisions early in the
process leads to better outcomes for customers and better manages their
expectations, including if a decision is made they are not eligible.

Note: a new claim includes where a customer has previously applied for
FHA but withdrew their claim before it was accepted or rejected.

At streaming, a Service Officer reviews the customer's personal
circumstances, claim and associated documents to make sure all
appropriate action relevant to progressing the claim is taken at the
earliest possible opportunity.

When initially streaming the claim, contact is needed when there are:

-   complex issues
-   incomplete forms
-   extra information needed
-   customers experiencing vulnerability or at risk customers who
    require support to manage the claim process

All instances of customer contact:

-   Must be verbal first. Make 2 genuine attempts to contact before
    sending a written request for information. If the customer is
    subscribed for Electronic Messaging (EM), send a desktop message
    before calling
-   Check the customer's preferred time of contact in the FHA new claim,
    or on FHA Customer Summary (FCS) screen in Process Direct.
    Note: where a Service Officer is required to contact a customer,
    however is unable during customers preferred times, contact must
    still be attempted
-   Update the customer's file by recording all successful and
    unsuccessful contact attempts (verbal and written requests for
    information) and what was discussed/agreed
-   Offer a referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

Claims that can be finalised at streaming are to be processed to
finalisation immediately.

Combined partner claim

Where specific criteria is met, a farmer may be eligible to lodge a
claim on behalf of their partner when claiming Farm Household Allowance
online.

Partners of farmers who want, and are eligible, to lodge an Farm
Household Allowance combined partner online claim must:

-   be registered with an active Centrelink online account, and
-   subscribed to electronic messaging

The Farm Household Allowance combined partner claim will send a
notification to the partner asking them to log into their own online
account to complete the task for Farm Household Allowance combined
partner claim. Once the partner has completed and confirmed this task
and either farmer or partner has lodged all required documentation, the
claim can only then be submitted as a Farm Household Allowance combined
partner claim.

Note: the partner task must be completed and confirmed within 3 days of
being notified of the task or it will disappear and the claim will
revert to an individual Farm Household Allowance claim for the farmer
only. If the partner still wants to claim, they will need to submit
their own claim within 14 days to make sure the same start date of
payment if eligible.

Nominees acting on behalf of their principals cannot submit a Farm
Household Allowance combined partner online claim. However, nominees:

are able to submit a Farm Household Allowance claim for their principal
as a single claim, or

where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of a
couple, submit individual claims separately, or

where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of a
couple and the couple is eligible to lodge a Farm Household Allowance
combined partner claim,

-   staff can run an ACC for a Farm Household Allowance combined partner
    claim
-   however, the nominee cannot submit the claim online
-   the online claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted

Farmers and their partners who are unable or unsuitable to lodge an
online claim can submit a combined partner paper claim. The combined
claim will be offered at question 3 on the claim form.

Customers should first be assessed to see if they meet farmer
eligibility criteria. If eligible, both members of the couple should be
granted FHA as farmers. Otherwise, one member of the couple can be
granted as a farmer and the other as the partner of a farmer.

Claim assessment in Process Direct

FHA claims are processed in Process Direct by completing an FHA claim
Social Application (SOA) to record the information needed to assess the
claim. When the SOA is assessed in Process Direct, a Social Service Plan
(SSP) will display. The SSP will determine FHA entitlement, generate FHA
payments and finalise the claim.

If a combined partner claim is submitted:

-   online, one SOA will be used to record the information needed to
    assess the claim for each member of the couple. A SSP will be
    created on each customer record in Process Direct
-   via paper Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694) form, a SOA is
    generated for the primary claimant. A SOA shell must be created for
    the partner via the SOA shell application in Process Direct

The FHA claim SOA:

-   is used to check and record claim progress
-   contains information provided by the customer
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   uploads claim data into an FHA claim activity
-   includes staff tasks that must be completed before the claim can be
    finalised

When finalising the SOA in Process Direct, an SSP is generated. Check
this to make sure the determination of the customer's FHA entitlement
and entitlement dates are correct. The SOA and linked SSP must be
finalised to either grant or reject FHA payments. See Resources for the
ESSentials roles required for FHA new claim processing and Quality
Management in Process Direct.

Desktop Electronic Messaging Capability (DEMC)

When customer contact is needed, if the customer is registered for
Electronic Messaging, staff must use the DEMC to generate a pre-call SMS
to improve the chances of a successful call. The message prepares the
customer for a call from Services Australia about their claim.

These messages can be viewed using the Communication History tab in
Customer First. For more information, see Centrelink letters online and
Electronic Messaging.

Start date

FHA is subject to the same provisions as JobSeeker Payment (JSP):

-   If the claim is lodged within 14 days after the cessation date of
    another benefit or pension, the transfer date will be the start date
    for FHA. If the claim is not lodged within 14 days after the
    cessation date, the start date will be the customer's date of claim
    for FHA
-   If the claim is lodged within 14 days of the date of the partner's
    claim, the claim can be backdated to that date if the customer is
    eligible. Separate backdating provisions apply for incapacitated
    customers
-   FHA claimants may be subject to an Income Maintenance Period, Newly
    Arrived Residence Waiting Period, Seasonal Work Preclusion Period
    and Compensation Preclusion Period
-   FHA claimants are not subject to the Ordinary Waiting Period or
    Liquid Asset Waiting Period

Where the customer is transferring to FHA from another payment,
cancellation of the income support payment must be completed before
commencement of claim in Process Direct.

Eligible customers receive payments or concession cards from the date
they submit a claim for Farm Household Allowance. Early claim provisions
do not apply to FHA.

Customers in severe financial hardship may be eligible for a Hardship
Advance when FHA is granted.

Note: different processes apply for customers experiencing
vulnerability, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Mutual obligations

When an FHA claim has been granted and a Farm Household Case Officer
(FHCO) allocated, the customer will be asked to supply a Farm Financial
Assessment (FFA).

The FHCO will request the FFA and is responsible for:

-   determining the due date
-   tracking its progress
-   accepting the completed FFA
-   confirming the financial assessor meets the criteria to conduct the
    FFA when the FFA supplement voucher is submitted

To be eligible for FHA, customers must indicate on their claim they are
willing to undertake compulsory activities. If granted FHA, the customer
will need to enter into a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA). The FIA
is negotiated with the FHCO and lists the activities the customer agrees
to undertake.

If the customer does not meet their mutual obligations, FHA payments may
be stopped or not granted.

Referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

At the time of having their FHA claim assessed, customers must be
offered a referral to the RFCS.

The RFCS:

-   provides free, independent and confidential assistance to farming
    families
-   provides a range of services and information to support farming
    families to better understand their financial situation and plan for
    the future
-   is authorised to sight, certify and copy original documents for the
    purpose of completing linkage as part of the Identity Confirmation
    process for FHA claims. See Identity Confirmation for further detail
-   from 11 June 2020 may meet the criteria as a financial assessor and
    be able to complete the FFA.
    If the RFC completes the FFA, the customer will not be charged for
    this service

A customer does not need to be in receipt of FHA to access the RFCS.

Resources includes links to the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Forestry website for Farm Household Allowance information and the
National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) > Rural Financial
Counselling Service.

Legislative changes affecting claim assessment

11 June 2020

The Farm Household Support Amendment (Relief Measures) Act (No.2) 2019
provides the following changes that affect an FHA claim:

-   a single asset test that combines farm and non-farm assets with an
    asset threshold of $5.5 million
-   changes to the FFA that remove the prescribed adviser requirements.
    The change allows a person with appropriate qualifications or
    expertise (financial assessor) to complete the FFA. An RFC may meet
    the criteria of a financial assessor

16 December 2019

The Farm Household Support Amendment (Relief Measures) Act (no.1) 2019
covers three changes that came into effect on 16 December 2019:

FHA Relief Payment

Farm business losses, replacing the off-farm income offset and the
maximum offset amount increased to $100,000

Changes to the eligibility period from 4 years to 4 years in every
specified 10 year period. The 4 year eligibility period does not need to
be continuous: if FHA payments stop, the count of days towards their 4
years of assistance will stop

-   the first 10 year period is from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2024, and
-   the second 10 year period will commence on 1 July 2024

For more information on the Act, see Resources for a link to the
Parliament of Australia website status update of the Act.

1 July 2019

The Farm Household Support (Forced Disposal of Livestock) Minister’s
Rules 2019 (the Rules) amends the Social Security Act 1991 in order to
exclude amounts received from a forced disposal of livestock from being
assessed as income for the purposes of FHA. Specific conditions
stipulate that all or some of the amount derived from a forced disposal
of livestock is deposited, or is intended to be deposited, into a Farm
Management Deposit account (FMD).

For more details, see Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance
(FHA) and Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

For details, including FAQs, see Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details
-   Department of Agriculture
-   Fisheries and Forestry
-   the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) external websites
-   Email template
-   scripts for FHA new claims
-   roles required for FHA new claiming processing
-   FHA rate calculation examples
-   FHA rejection codes, and
-   historical information

Related links

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Eligibility and payability for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Progress of claim - Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Upload documents service

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Identity Confirmation

How users create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Technical Support Model - boutique work

Process Direct

Cancellation of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
