-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to request, complete and process Farm
Financial Assessments (FFAs).

Purpose of FFA

An FFA is an assessment of the financial position of the farm
enterprise, the customer and their partner. It is completed by the
customer and their financial assessor. The assessment forms part of a
customer's mutual obligations for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and if
not provided, may result in FHA not being paid.

The financial assessor is a person:

-   who has appropriate qualifications or expertise to conduct the
    assessment, and
-   is independent and has no right or interest in the farm, or any
    asset owned by the customer, or the partner of the customer

The Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) when negotiating a Financial
Improvement Agreement (FIA) with the customer will use the FFA.

When an FFA is required

Customers are required to obtain an FFA if:

-   they are claiming FHA for the first time
-   they are reclaiming FHA after a significant break in payment, and
    there has been a change in circumstances for the customer and/or
    farm enterprise
-   they are receiving FHA and there has been a significant change in
    circumstances for the customer or farm enterprise

A previous FFA may be used if the details have not changed significantly
since its completion.

If both a customer and their partner are claiming FHA, they can complete
a single FFA if the customer agrees to link their FFA to their partner.

Requests for an FFA

New claims: After the grant of the new claim and any applicable waiting
periods served, the customer will be allocated to a Farm Household
Contact Officer (FHCO).

Second FFA: A Second FFA may be requested for customers receiving FHA in
instances:

-   where the farm enterprise has undergone significant changes, and
-   continued entitlement to FHA has not been determined

Changes to the farm enterprise may include:

-   significant increases or decreases in size or scale of operations
-   changes in business structure, or
-   change to commodities farmed

FHCO's are to determine if the existing FFA is still appropriate and a
case by case approach is to be applied. Where entitlement to FHA is in
doubt, a review of circumstances is to be undertaken first. Where
entitlement is lost a second FFA is not to be requested. FHCO's can
refer the file via the Notification in change of circumstances Fast Note
to the processing team.

Where a FFA cannot be completed for an extended period (for example 2
months), FHCO's manually initiate the customers first FIA. In these
circumstances, the FFA is not waived but included as an activity in
their FIA.

Customers will receive a letter advising they need to obtain an FFA. The
FFA request is generated after a new claim has been granted.

This letter includes:

-   information on how to complete the FFA
-   FFA supplement voucher for up to $1,500 (GST inclusive) to meet the
    cost of completing the FFA
-   One Time Access Code (OTAC) for their financial assessor to access
    the FFA via the Farm Information Portal on the Services Australia
    website

Note: unless special circumstances exist, the FFA will be completed and
returned to Services Australia within one month of the customer being
assigned to the FHCO. If the customer has difficulty obtaining the FFA
in this time, they should contact their FHCO or the Farmer Assistance
hotline 132  316. One extension may be granted by the FHCO. The
timeframe for the extension is determined by the FHCO based on the
customer’s circumstances. See Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) cases.
From 27 March 2020 the 28 timeframe to complete the FA was removed.
FHCOs determine the due date of the FFA based on the customer's
circumstances.

Failure to provide the FFA may result in their FHA payments being
suspended.

The FFA request can be withdrawn:

-   in extraordinary circumstances, and
-   if the provision of an extension of time is not appropriate for the
    situation

FHCOs can make the decision to withdraw the FFA request in extraordinary
circumstances. Withdrawing the FFA will initiate the customer’s
Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA). The FFA must be included in the
customer’s FIA, to be completed when the customer is able to comply with
the request.

What customers need to do

When requested to provide an FFA, the customer must:

access their Centrelink online account to complete the About you section
(referred to as Part A) of the FFA - See How users create a myGov
account and link services and Using myGov accounts:

-   Online menu option: Payments and Claims > Farm Financial Assessment

identify a service provider who meets the definition of a financial
assessor, for the purpose of completing the FFA. A financial assessor
must:

-   have the appropriate qualifications or expertise to conduct the FFA
-   be independent and have no right or interest in the farm or any
    asset owned by the customer or the partner of the customer

obtain a quote from a financial assessor, for the cost of completing the
FFA and make an appointment. The FFA supplement covers the cost up to
$1,500

attend the appointment with the financial assessor to discuss their
financial position and suggestions for improvement. The customer must
take the following documents to the appointment:

-   their FFA request letter and voucher
-   copies of tax returns and financial statements for the last 3 years
-   any current or recent business, agronomy or financial plans
-   details of their current income (including Centrelink payments,
    off-farm employment income, rental income), any superannuation
    payments, annuities and other income
-   details of their assets and investments
-   details of any personal or business debts
-   details of planned expenditure such as child/ren's education and
    maintenance expenses
-   any additional financial information they provided for their FHA
    claim

If customers do not have reliable internet access, they can complete the
Farm Household Allowance Farm Financial Assessment Part A (SU699).
Customers can ask their financial assessor to help them enter the
information onto their online account as above. The financial assessor
can then access and complete the rest of the FFA. The SU699 is not
returned to Services Australia.

Once the FFA is completed, the financial assessor may prepare an
invoice. The customer must submit to Services Australia:

-   the invoice with their FFA supplement voucher
-   evidence of the financial assessor's qualifications, and current
    membership of a professional body

Role of the financial assessor

During the FFA appointment, the financial assessor will:

-   discuss with the customer (and their partner) their financial
    position and the financial position of the farm enterprise including
    strengths, weaknesses and suggestions for improving the financial
    position of the farm business
-   complete the farm information sections of the FFA in the Farm
    Information portal on the Services Australia website using the One
    Time Access Code (OTAC) provided in the customer's FFA request
    letter

Note: financial assessors have 'Implied Authority', therefore staff are
to help them if they contact in relation to completing a customer's FFA.
The Resources page contains relevant information for staff.

The financial assessors will complete an assessment, which includes:

-   a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis,
-   statement of their professional opinion, and
-   an overall report of the potential financial position and long term
    viability of the farm

The financial assessor is expected to discuss their assessment with the
customer and provide them with a copy of the completed FFA.

If the preparation of the FFA incurs a charge, the financial assessor
will prepare an invoice for the cost of completing the FFA, which the
customer must return to Services Australia within 2 months of the date
on the invoice.

Reviewing the FFA

Once all parts of the FFA have been submitted, it must be reviewed by
the FHCO before being accepted. For payments to continue, the
information in the FFA must support the customer's eligibility for FHA.
Accept the FFA if the information supports the customer's grant of FHA.
Where the FFA does not support eligibility for FHA, refer the file to
the processing team for review. See Change of circumstance for FHA.

Incomplete or inadequate FFA's

If the FHCO identifies the submitted FFA is incomplete or lacks details,
the FHCO escalates the FFA to FHCO National Support. Advice to accept,
reject or follow up the FFA will be provided on a case by case basis.

Customer requests a copy of a completed FFA

If a customer requests a copy of their completed FFA, FHCOs can supply
this at any time, even when a financial assessor prepared the FFA. When
providing this to the customer, staff must:

-   print the FFA, and
-   either mail it or give directly to the customer
-   record it has been provided on the customers record

Note: FFAs must not be emailed under any circumstances due to privacy
restrictions.

Related links

Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) supplement and voucher

Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity test for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Troubleshooting and escalating issues with Centrelink online accounts
and Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
