
Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the assets tests for FHA link to security law
with important differences.

Assets tests

From 11 June 2020 the farm assets test threshold is $5.5 million unless
the customer qualifies under Asset Hardship rules. The definition of a
farm and non-farm asset did not change.

This asset test is the same whether it applies to a single person of a
member of a couple. That is, the couple is subject to a combined asset
test of $5.5 million, not $5.5 million for each person in the
relationship. The asset test is the total of all their farm and non-farm
assets. Assess farm assets must separately for aggregation purposes
before adding to the non-farm assets.

Note: when applying the net farm assets test, farm assets are not the
same as Primary Production assets under social security law. Apportion
liabilities to determine how much of the liability relates to a farm
asset. It is up to the decision maker to determine whether a liability
is related to a farm asset.

Assess primary production assets under Social Security Law. When
assessing farm assets for FHA:

-   family home and curtilage are excluded
-   assets are assessed at their net market value

Note: there are no farm assets exempt from the Net Farm Assets Test.

See Resources for Historical Assets test information.

Definition of farm assets

From 5 April 2017, the definition of farm assets is:

-   any asset that is used or held wholly or mainly for the purpose of a
    farm enterprise. This includes water entitlement rights and shares.
    The exception is cash, bank deposits and farm management deposits
-   so much of a beneficiary loan as is used to purchase an asset
    mentioned above and remains outstanding

Note: cash, bank deposits and farm management deposits are liquid assets
and will be assessed under the assets test for FHA.

See Resources for pre 5 April 2017 definition of farm assets.

Exempt lump sums

Exempt lump sums are defined as exempt because of their characteristics
rather than the source of the income. If a lump sum meets the
characteristics, it is exempt from the Income Test but is an assessable
asset. If a lump sum is invested, it is treated as a financial
investment and deeming rules apply.

Loans from a person to a trust or company

A loan made by a person to a trust or private company may be treated as
a farm asset rather than a financial asset in carefully prescribed
circumstances, where all of the following apply:

-   The loan was used for the purchase of farm and/or farm business
    assets owned by the trustee of the trust or company. Note: the
    appropriate definition of farm assets depending on claim submission
    date, must be considered in making this determination
-   The underlying assets of the entity are illiquid in nature (that is,
    the liquid assets held by the entity are not sufficient to repay the
    loan)
-   The beneficiary loan value does not exceed the original cost of the
    asset

This differs from the treatment of these loans for other Centrelink
payments, and aims to avoid inequity between customers based on business
structure.

Loans that meet these criteria are considered farm assets and are exempt
from the deeming provisions.

Loans from a business entity to a person

In accordance with the FHA guidelines, loans from a business entity to a
person must be proportioned, depending on what the loan funds are being
used to purchase.

Class a loan as a farm asset for assessment under the assets test,
where:

it is used for the purchase of a right or interest in:

-   land used wholly or mainly for the purposes of a farm enterprise, or
-   livestock, crop, plant or equipment that is produced of a farm
    enterprise, or
-   used wholly or mainly for the purposes of a farm enterprise unless
    it is leased out, and

the outstanding amount of the principal of the loan exceeds the value of
the entity’s financial investments

If the loan does not meet the above criteria, class the loan as a
personal financial asset of the customer.

The Acts Interpretation Act 1901 provides the definition of ‘person’.
Specifically, section 2C provides references to persons:

-   In any Act, expressions used to denote persons generally (such as
    ‘person’, ‘party’, ‘someone’, ‘anyone’, ‘no-one’, ‘one’, ‘another’
    and ‘whoever’), include a body politic or corporate as well as an
    individual
-   Express references in an Act to companies, corporations or bodies
    corporate do not imply that expressions in that Act, of the kind
    mentioned in subsection (1), do not include companies, corporations
    or bodies corporate

This means that ‘person’ includes entities as well as individuals.

Superannuation

As with other income support payments, superannuation is not assessable
for FHA customers while in the accumulation phase. The fund will become
an assessable asset once a person reaches pension age or begins to
receive a pension or annuity from the fund.

Self-Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF) for FHA customers may also
include ownership of farm assets such as the farm property or livestock.
Code farm assets separately from non-farm assets to ensure they can be
aggregated. This is done before being added to non-farm assets under the
assets test.

This is different to assessments of superannuation under social security
law where the contents of a superannuation fund are always assessed as
financial assets.

Income from a superannuation fund is non-farm income, for the purposes
of FHA.

Water assets

The value of water assets should be included in the assessment of net
farm assets where there is an open and well-established tradable water
market. Currently the only established tradable water market is in the
Murray Darling Basin. While other markets across Australia are emerging,
they are not mature enough for consistent trading and regular reporting
on water trading prices.

State authorities regulate water assets. There are different rules in
each state and different terminology is used. The Resources page has a
link to the national terminology.

Most water assets can be held and traded separately from land. Assets
can be traded in a regulated water system quite freely on the open
market, because of control over the flow of water. In an unregulated
system, trade may be limited due to geographical location needs of
potential buyers. These factors will affect the value of the asset. Some
water assets are bound to land and can only be traded with the land.
These are assessed differently. See the Process page.

A formal valuation is not required. As with other assets, a customer's
reasonable estimate of the market value will suffice for assessment.
Submit evidence of all water assets held by the customer or their
partner with a claim for FHA. This includes any water licences, water
certificates, water entitlements or water allocations owned by the
customer or their partner. The evidence must provide proof of ownership
and proof that supports their estimate of the asset value.

If there is any charge or encumbrance over the asset, reduce the value
of the asset by the value of the encumbrance to obtain the net market
value.

If a water asset is sold, the income received from the sale of the asset
is treated as the sale of an asset under social security law. Assess the
value as a financial asset under the asset test as a non-farm asset. If
a water asset is gifted, normal gifting provisions apply. If a water
asset is leased, it is no longer held wholly or mainly for the purposes
of the farm enterprise. It becomes assessable under the assets test as a
non-farm asset test. Assess the income stream received as non-farm
income.

Assessment of water assets

The treatment of water assets for FHA recipients is different depending
on:

-   when the claim was submitted, and
-   when the claim was determined

The Resources page contains a table that explains the treatment of water
assets based on claim submission date and when the claim is determined.

Murray Goulburn (MG) shares

MG shares are now separate to the Saputo entity after the sale
transaction went through on 1 May 2018.

As part of the approval by shareholders of the sale transaction, the MG
Constitution changed removing the concept of a share standard. This
meant that previous situation of MG shareholders only being able to sell
MG shares down to their standard was removed.

Another part of the shareholder approval was the Share Trading Platform
to cease operation on 30 June 2018 meaning MG shares can only be
transferred between a buyer and seller via an off market transfer.

Business operating accounts

Cash held to purchase farm assets, money on deposit and farm management
deposits (or other business operating accounts) are not farm assets
(under any definition) and must be recorded as a non-farm asset to be
assessed under the assets test.

Reviews and appeal rights

For FHA, customer reviews and appeal rights are the same as for social
security payments.

If the customer is querying a decision to reject/cancel FHA due to the
value of their farm assets or non-farm assets, see Request for an
explanation, quality check or review (CLK).

Contents

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Business income estimates for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Related links

Exempt lump sums

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Verifying and recording assets changes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
