-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Farm Household Case Officers (FHCO) undertake
the final Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA) review with customers as
they prepare for FHA payments stopping after 4 years.

FHA time limited to 4 years

Eligible farmers and their partners can access up to 4 years of payment
(counted as 1,460 days).in each specified 10 year period. The next 10
year period commences on 1 July 2024. This is designed to give farm
families time to get back on their feet and the opportunity to take
steps to improve their circumstances.

The Activity Supplement of up to $10,000 with a lifetime cap is
available to assist customers undertake activities specified in their
financial improvement agreement (FIA). There is no longer an 'additional
activity supplement', and no need for the customer to undertake 'high
value' activities to access any part of the activity supplement.

When the end of the 4 year entitlement period approaches, the FHCO meets
with customers to discuss their circumstances. The FHCO looks at what
has been achieved, and outlines available options that may assist
customers make the transition to being financially self-reliant.

Customers receive regular reminders that the FHA payment can be made for
a maximum period of 4 years, these include:

-   During the claim process, in both the online claim and the paper
    claim form
-   At the initial meeting with the FHCO, an outline of the programme is
    provided
-   Customers meet with their FHCO at least every 3 months to
    review/check the customer's progress with the agreed activities
-   FHCOs contact the customer within a week of them entering the third
    year on payment, to prepare the customer for their final 2 years of
    activities before payment stops
-   A letter is sent to customers 3 months before the expected end date
    reminding them when payment will stop

A final review is conducted by the FHCO to finalise preparations for the
end of payment. The review is to be no earlier than 3 months, but at
least 2 weeks before payments are due to stop.

On stopping of payment, Services Australia may offer further assistance
to customers to manage the transition off payment. Their circumstances
will determine the options available for them to obtain further
financial support from the Australian Government.

Customers coming off FHA

Customers are only eligible for 1,460 days of payment of FHA. At the end
of this time:

-   customers may be required to report one last time to release the
    final amount of FHA up to the 1,460 day mark
-   this reporting date may be after the Predicted End Date of FHA

When the customer completes their final report, this will release their
final payment and trigger the cancellation of FHA.

Where a customer does not report and their FHA then cancels 'Failed to
Report (FRP)':

-   a debt may be raised for any periods of payment not reported and
    normal processes will apply
-   any periods of time where the customer rate is reduced to zero will
    be added back to the customer's FHA eligibility and the customer can
    then access this time back on FHA

Normal review and appeal processes apply.

Staff must check and ensure customers are aware of:

-   their final reporting requirements for FHA
-   how this impacts the delivery of their final payment of FHA and
    cancellation notification

Staff must remember the:

-   FHA clock will only update once the final report has been processed
-   customer will only receive payment for up to 1,460 days of payment,
    even when their final reporting date is after that time
-   cancellation of FHA will only trigger once the customer has reported
    for the last period

Role of the FHCO

FHCOs meet with customers at least every 3 months to review and test the
customer's progress with the agreed activities.

Most contact with the customer is by phone with at least 2 face-to-face
meetings. Customers will usually have a face-to-face meeting:

-   within the first 2 years of getting FHA
-   when they enter their fourth year of getting FHA

Conducting the final review

When the end of a customer's entitlement is imminent (within 3 months
but no less than 2 weeks from the end of payment), the FHCO contacts the
customer to undertake the final review and prepare them for FHA payments
ceasing. They will look back over their FIAs to see what has been
achieved and discuss options available as they move off FHA.

Preparing the customer prior to the payment ceasing has the benefit of
addressing their concerns in a timely manner and preventing the customer
contacting the agency seeking assistance after eligibility for payment
has ended.

Offer a referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS). If
the customer is already working with a Rural Financial Counsellor, the
service remains available to them after they have completed their 4
years on FHA.

[] FHCOs are to advise customers to access servicesaustralia.gov.au
including assisting them to access the Payment and Service Finder and to
make online claims where appropriate.

Access to other income support payments

Customers are to be advised about the Payment and Service Finder at
servicesaustralia.gov.au. This service will assist customers to check
for the most appropriate services and payments based on their
circumstances. This is an interactive service, which helps people search
for payments they may be eligible to receive from Services Australia.

Customers who exit the FHA programme (regardless of the reason) may be
eligible for other payments and services administered by the agency. A
person can test their eligibility for income support payments such as
Age Pension, JobSeeker Payment or Disability Support Pension, however
all of these are subject to Australian residency requirements and an
income and assets test. As farming families traditionally hold assets
that exceed the relevant threshold, this presents a likely barrier to
them being able to access these payments.

If a customer is thinking about retiring from farming, they may be
considering selling the farm or handing it over to family members.
Customers can see a Financial Information Service Officer (FISO) to get
free information before making any decisions. The FISO can provide
information about succession planning and what to consider when applying
for the Age Pension. Before a customer sells or gives away any assets,
they should find out how the Age Pension payment may be affected.

Note: if the customer intends to exit farming and buy a new home
elsewhere, some of the proceeds of the sale of the farm and principal
home may be exempt from the asset test for up to 12 months. However, the
amount is not exempt from deeming and is subject to the income test. See
Permanent vacation of principal home.

Family Assistance Payments are available for families with children and
while most eligible families are already receiving their entitlement, it
is important to remind them about the availability of this assistance.

Offering Referrals

During the final review meeting the customer might be offered referrals
to specialist services and provided with information about options
available to assist them manage the impending change.

If the customer displays anxiety about what will happen after FHA stops,
they can talk to a Services Australia Social Worker who offer services
to customers who are vulnerable or in hardship.

Referrals can also be made to assist the customer connect with external
providers such as other Australian Government programmes, state and
territory or local government programmes, community organisations,
industry groups or professional associations.

Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

After FHA payments stop, the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)
is the primary point of influence for customers as they continue making
change to improve their farm's financial viability. At each review
meeting during the final year of payment, FHCOs will encourage customers
to take up a referral to the RFCS. This occurs even where previous
referrals have been refused.

The RFCS provide free help to eligible farmers with their long term
financial plans for their farm, or help with short term issues like
negotiating loans, debt mediation and succession planning. The RFC will
continue to assist customers regardless of whether they receive FHA or
not.

Customers already working with the RFCS may agree to have their Rural
Financial Counsellor (RFC) participate with them in the Final FIA
Review. This will assist the customer to maintain an active relationship
with the RFC as they continue enacting their improvement activities and
plans into the future. While this should not be viewed as a hand-off
from the FHCO to the RFC, it is an opportunity to share information
relevant to the customer's future goals and plans.

Note: the customer must give their consent to have the RFC attend the
Final Review.

The Resources page includes a link to the National Emergency Management
Agency website for information about the RFCS.

The Resources page contains copies of letters to customers and links to
the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website, the
National Emergency Management Agency, Services Australia website and
other providers for assisting farm households.

Related links

Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Apply for a payment or concession card online

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Social work services

Social work service referral

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Referral to external support services

Health Care Card (HCC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

General information about debts

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
