
Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) cases 002-02070030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

On this Page:

External Websites

Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment - Rural Financial
Counselling Service

FarmHub

Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) not allocated email template

The FHCO not allocated email template is for internal use only.

It must be emailed to Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO).

The template is only to be used where an FHCO has not been assigned to a
customer and it has been more than 14+ days since the customer’s claim
was granted.

[]Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) not allocated email template

Request for an alternative Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) email template

The request for alternative Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) email
template is for internal use only.

It must be emailed to Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO).

Note: use 'Save As' workaround to download/use attachment.

[] Alternative Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) email template

The request for Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) contact email template

The request for Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) contact email
template is for internal use only.

It must be emailed to Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO).

Note: use 'Save As' workaround to download/use attachment.

[] Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) contact email template

FHA claim day 1-3 Key Messaging Script for FHCOs

The scripted messaging is to be used when contacting customers to offer
referral to the RFCS following lodgement of FHA new claims.

Note: use 'Save As' workaround to download/use attachment.

[]FHCO claim day 1-3 Key Messaging Script for FHCOs

RFCS referral facsimile template

The RFCS referral facsimile template is used to notify the RFCS of the
details of a customer who has been referred to them.

It must be faxed to the Rural Financial Counselling Service.

Note: use 'Save As' workaround to download/use attachment.

[]RFCS referral facsimile template

Office Locator

Office Locator

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
