
Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity test for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers 002-02070000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains mutual responsibilities for farmers and their
partners receiving Farm Household Allowance (FHA). It also explains the
activity test compliance framework, reasons for granting an exemption
from the activity test, and assessing failures.

Changes from 11 June 2020

From 11 June 2020:

Financial assessors undertaking the Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) need
to have appropriate qualifications or expertise. This includes Rural
Financial Counsellors (RFC)

Financial assessors do not need to be a member of a professional body

If a customer elects to have an RFC complete their FFA there will not be
any fee charged

The activity supplement:

-   will be increased to $10,000 and is a lifetime cap
-   will not be reset if there is a change to the customer’s FHA clock
    days
-   can be used to pay for reasonable travel and accommodation costs
    associated with an activity

There will no longer be an additional activity supplement

Mutual obligations

Customers eligible for FHA may be asked to submit a Farm Financial
Assessment (FFA). Their FHA will cancel if the FFA is not provided as
requested. An FFA supplement is available to help with the cost of
preparing the FFA.

From 11 June 2020, the person preparing the FFA is a financial assessor
who has appropriate qualifications or expertise to conduct the
assessment. A financial assessor does not need to be a member of a
professional body.

FHA customers need to undertake activities aimed at helping them to
improve their financial self reliance. They are supported by their Farm
Household Case Officer (FHCO), who will help them decide on the best mix
of activities they can undertake to achieve financial independence
before the end of their FHA entitlement.

Customers must enter into a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA), which
they negotiate with their FHCO. The FIA includes the activities the
customer agrees to undertake in order to improve their capacity to
generate income and achieve financial independence. An activity
supplement can be paid to partially or fully cover the cost of an
activity in the customer's FIA. From 11 June 2020, customers can access
the activity supplement to pay for reasonable travel and accommodation
costs associated with the activity.

If granted an exemption from the activity test, the customer must still
enter into an FIA but their compliance with the activity test is not
tested during the exemption period. Failure to undertake agreed
activities, meet agreed timeframes or misconduct can result in a failure
being imposed, which will affect their payment.

At least once every 13 weeks, the FHCO will review how the customer is
meeting the requirements of their FIA and if necessary renegotiate the
FIA with the customer.

Activity testing and compliance failures

A compliance framework ensures that customers are taking action to
improve their situation while receiving FHA payments. In general,
customers are subject to an activity test to make sure they are
complying with their obligations as agreed in their Financial
Improvement Agreement (FIA).

Unlike JobSeeker Payment (JSP), there is no requirement for FHA
customers to undertake activities for a minimum number of hours to
satisfy the activity test. This recognises the substantial workload of
running a farm.

Customers need to notify the agency within 14 days if they are unable to
comply with their activity test requirements.

If a customer does not have an exemption or a reasonable excuse, failing
to meet their obligations can result in a:

-   qualification failure if they do not enter into or comply with the
    terms of their FIA. Payments will be suspended until the customer
    complies with the requirement. If the customer does not comply
    within 13 weeks, payment will be cancelled
-   conduct failure, for example due to misconduct while undertaking an
    activity in their FIA, or becoming unemployed due to misconduct. An
    8 week non-payment period will be applied. This may be waived if it
    would cause the customer severe financial hardship

A customer may continue to be paid due to severe financial hardship
pending review in certain circumstances.

Exemptions

An exemption from the activity test for FHA customers may be granted for
the following reasons:

-   essential farm activities
-   temporary incapacity due to illness or injury
-   pregnancy and childbirth
-   Australian Defence Force Reserves service or training
-   domestic violence
-   care of disabled children
-   special circumstances where the Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO)
    is satisfied the circumstances are beyond the customer's control
    and/or it would be unreasonable to expect the customer to satisfy
    the activity test

The maximum period of the exemption varies depending on the reason.

The Process page has more details about each exemption reason.

Rural Financial Counselling Service

The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) provides free,
independent and confidential help to eligible farmers to help them
better understand their financial situation. They offer a range of
services and information to support customers assess their business
finances, and plan for the future. They help customers to access
government and industry programs as well as help with short term issues
like negotiating loans, debt mediation and succession planning. They can
even help customers prepare and lodge claims for FHA. A Rural Financial
Counsellor (RFC) is authorised to sight, certify and copy original
documents and complete linkage as part of the Identity Confirmation
process.

The RFCS can also help customers access professional services to help
them manage and cope with stress. From 11 June 2020, the RFCS can
undertake the FFA for customers.

Customers may consent to have their RFC attend meetings with them and
their Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO). This will make sure they
receive support from both services that complement each other as the
customer works to improve their financial situation.

A person does not need to be receiving FHA to be referred to and access
the services of the RFCS.

Wherever possible, customers will also be linked with an RFC who will
need to have Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) authority.

Contents

Farm Financial Assessments (FFA)

Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) supplement and voucher

Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) cases

Financial Improvement Agreements (FIA)

Activity supplement and voucher for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Related links

Continuing payments pending review

Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
