
Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) cases 002-02070030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer is
assigned to a Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO), and how to view the
FHCO assigned to an FHA customer case.

Role of the FHCO

The FHCO role is to help customers after FHA has been granted. A
customer can receive FHA for 4 years (1,460 days) in specified 10 year
periods. The next 10 year period commences on 1 July 2024. The FHCO
conducts reviews every 13 weeks whilst the customer is on payment.
Customers who have already received 4 years of FHA can reapply from 1
July 2024.

FHCOs assist customers by:

-   providing a dedicated case management service
-   developing and maintaining relationships with Rural Financial
    Counselling Service (RFCS)
-   making appropriate and timely referrals to help improve their
    circumstances
-   making sure FHA is only accessed in times of genuine need
-   developing Financial Improvement Agreements (FIAs) in consultation
    with the customer and where possible RFCS
-   ensuring that FIAs adhere to these principles and that customers
    take action in accordance with their FIA to maintain qualification
    for FHA
-   imposing compliance failures by suspending payment of FHA
-   actioning day 1-3 contacts following lodgement of FHA new claims to
    offer a referral to the RFCS

FHCO liaison with customer

The FHCO's initial contact with the customer is at day 1-3 after the
claim has been lodged.

The FHCO offers a referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service
(RFCS). If the customer consents, they will arrange for the RFCS to
contact the customer.

FHA claims are managed by the Farmer Assistance hotline. FHCOs do not
manage:

-   the claim process for customers
-   enquiries regarding the claim process

Case management by FHCOs commence when FHA is granted. Do not provide
contact details of the FHCOs until FHA is granted.

The allocated FHCO contacts the customer to:

-   introduce themselves
-   explain their role
-   outline the requirements of the program

The FHCO sends a request to the customer to complete the Farm Financial
Assessment (FFA). When this is completed, the FHCO will:

-   Negotiate a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA) with the customer.
    The FIA is based on information and assessment in the FFA. The
    customers may consent to have their Rural Financial Counsellor (RFC)
    attend this meeting and subsequent review meetings
-   Meet with the customer to review the FIA at least every 13 weeks (or
    more often if required) to check the customer’s progress with their
    mandatory activities and review the current estimate

For enquiries relating to their FFA or FIA, customers should call the
FHCO directly. If the customer does not have their FHCO's contact
details, contact the FHCO by:

-   obtaining their contact details in Office Locator
-   email
-   MS Teams

Note: do not send ACTDOCs and CALLDOCs to the FHCO network, they will
not be actioned.

Assigning an FHCO to customer

When FHA is granted, the customer is assigned an FHCO. The FHCOs name
will display on the Farm Customer Summary (FCS) screen in Process Direct
on the customer's record.

The FHCO will be located in the same zone as the customer, where
possible. Staff workload may mean allocation to an FHCO in another
location.

FHA cases are assigned by:

-   FHCO
-   FHCO's line manager

Role of the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

The Australian Government funds RFCS to provide free, independent and
confidential assistance to eligible farmers to help them better
understand their financial situation. There are several services located
in each state.

They offer a range of services and information to help their clients
assess their business finances and plan for the future. They help
farmer's access government and industry programs as well as helping with
short-term issues like negotiating loans, debt mediation and succession
planning.

The RFCS help their clients manage and cope with stress by helping them
access professional services. A person does not need to be receiving FHA
to be offered a referral and access the services of the RFCS. The RFCS
also help people prepare and lodge claims for FHA.

Services Australia customers may consent to have their Rural Financial
Counsellor (RFC) attend meetings with them and their FHCO. This makes
sure the customer gets support from both services while they work to
improve their financial situation.

The RFC may be able to either complete, or assist the customer with the
lodgement of their FFA. The financial assessor completing the FFA must
have appropriate qualifications or experience. The FFA supplement is not
available for payment to an RFC if they conduct the FFA because the RFCS
is a free service. For more information, see Farm Financial Assessments
(FFA).

A customer must provide express consent for the agency to disclose their
personal information to the RFCS and for them to attend meetings with
the FHCO. Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) is a minimum requirement for
sharing information from the FFA and Financial Improvement Agreements
(FIA).

If the customer requests the RFCS to complete the FFA, implied authority
is applied to the RFCS accessing the customer's personal information for
the purpose of completing the FFA only.

The RFC may offer suggestions for activities to be included in the
customer’s FIA. They do not:

-   agree, authorise, and approve any activities in the FIA
-   undertake the activity test, or
-   approve payment of the Activity Supplement

The Resources page contains links to the National Emergency Management
Agency, Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) referral template,
FarmHub, Office Locator and the Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) email
templates and messaging script.

Related links

Eligibility and payability for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Mutual obligations, exemptions and failures from the activity test for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Farm Financial Assessments (FFA)

Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) supplement and voucher

Financial Improvement Agreements (FIA)

Activity supplement and voucher for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
