
Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers claim Farm Household Allowance
(FHA), the online claim process, and documentation required to support
an FHA claim. FHA can be paid to farmers and their partners. Members of
a couple must submit separate claims to receive FHA payments. Customers
claiming online can use the online combined partner claim.

Claiming FHA

Customers can use the Payment and Service Finder on the Services
Australia website to identify if FHA is the appropriate service offer.

Online claim

[] Customers registered online with an active account start their claim
by:

-   signing into myGov and accessing their linked Centrelink online
    account
-   select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim from the menu
    option
-   from the Make a claim page, select Get started under the Other
    category, followed by Apply for Farm Household Allowance

When they submit their completed claim online, the Next steps page will
advise them of any further information or documentation required for
their claim to be finalised.

Online combined partner claim information

Farmers and their partners can submit an online combined partner claim.

To do this both customers must:

-   be linked as a couple with Centrelink prior to starting their claim
-   have Partner Permitted to Enquire (PPE) on both records
-   have at least 1 bank account recorded in joint names
-   be registered for online services
-   be subscribed to Electronic Messaging

The combined partner claim is offered at the Review and Confirm stage of
the claim.

The claim will be on hold until the partner actions the partner review
task. This task must be completed within 3 days. A notification is sent
to their phone and myGov inbox.

If the partner task is not completed within 3 days, the primary customer
must:

-   manually log back into their online account, and
-   submit the claim as an individual

The partner will then need to lodge an individual claim.

Paper claim

From 18 August 2020 a combined partner paper claim is available for
customers who are unable or unsuitable to claim online. Customers can
complete and lodge the following forms:

-   Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694)
-   Income and assets (SA369)

Additional information may need to be provided using separate forms, for
example, Real estate details (MOD R), Private Trust (MOD PT) and Private
Company (MOD PC).

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers can offer to run an ACC:

-   With the customer
-   For a combined claim where the customer is eligible
-   For the partner of an FHA combined partner claim

A Service Officer can start a claim in ACC and encourage the customer to
complete the claim online. Customers can monitor the progress of their
completed claim through:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   their Express Plus Centrelink Mobile app

Claims cannot be submitted online or via ACC until:

-   all required mandatory questions have been answered
-   all required documentation has been provided

Once the Service Officer has completed the ACC, the customer must
either:

-   submit their claim through their Centrelink online account, or
-   accept the verbal declaration read to the customer by the Service
    Officer

If not submitted, a started ACC claim will expire after 13 weeks. The
customer must start a new claim.

Date from which a claim is assessed

Eligible customers receive payments from the date they lodge a claim for
FHA. Previous 'deemed date of claim' provisions were abolished on 1 July
2018 for customers other than those in vulnerable circumstances. For
information about customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Contact in
relation to an intended claim (CLK).

If the customer does not provide the required documents within 14 days
of submitting the claim, the claim is rejected unless an additional
request for documents has been made, see Streaming and processing a new
claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Rural Financial Counsellors (RFC)

RFCs may assist farmers and partners of farmers in the preparation and
lodgement of claims for FHA. Paper claims (SU694) from the Rural
Financial Counselling Service (RCFS) can be lodged and accepted.

An RFC is authorised to sight, copy and certify original identity
documents for the purpose of completing linkage with the customer as
part of the Identity Confirmation process for FHA claims.
See Sighting, recording and returning original documents.

Offer customers a referral to the RFCS as they may benefit from the free
confidential services available. A person does not need to be receiving
FHA to access the services of the RFCS. This service supports farming
families to better understand their financial situation and plan for the
future. RFCS can help customers prepare and lodge claims for FHA. See
Resources for information about RFCS on the National Emergency
Management Agency website.

Nominees do not have access to lodge online claims, therefore
correspondence nominees are to be offered a paper claim (SU694) when
they want to apply for FHA on behalf of their principal.

Resources includes links to contacts, SU694 and related forms and to the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry and National Emergency
Management Agency websites for information about Farm Household
Allowance and the Rural Financial Counselling Service Program
respectively.

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Customers who are registered members of the PBS will not be eligible for
a Pension Bonus if they have been paid FHA. Service Officers should
recommend the customer contact a Financial Information Service (FIS)
Officer before they lodge their claim for FHA.

Required documentation

To support their FHA claim, customers may be requested to provide:

identity confirmation

copies of the latest financial documents for each farm business

proof of their bank balance

evidence of income and assets, including water assets (an estimate of
the value of water assets must also be provided), see Assessing assets
for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and Assessing income for Farm
Household Allowance (FHA)

the following may also be needed:

-   proof of Australian residence if they are not an Australian citizen
    born in Australia
-   proof of ceasing work such as an Employment Separation Certificate
    form (SU001)

Documents can be submitted:

-   Using [] Upload documents via their Centrelink online account or the
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   by Post, see the Resources page for a link to the Services Australia
    website, Claiming Farm Household Allowance
-   in person at a service centre, Rural Agent or Access Point

Note: do not accept documents sent to a personal or positional Services
Australia email address. Customers must only provide documents as
described in the list above.

What happens next

If further details are required to assess the customer's claim, the
Smart Centre FHA Processing team issue a Request for Information letter.
Use Process Direct to issue the letter and view it via Outbound
Correspondence on the customer record.

The customer is sent a letter to advise the outcome of their claim.

Once FHA has been granted, the Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) will
contact the customer to:

-   offer a referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)
-   request a Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) with a financial assessor.
    A supplement of up to $1,500 is available to cover the cost of
    completing the FFA

The customer can choose to complete the FFA with a person who has
appropriate qualifications or expertise to conduct the assessment. The
FFA supplement will not be paid when the FFA is completed by a Rural
Financial Counsellors (RFC) as this is a free service.

Customers must meet their mutual obligations, or FHA payments may be
stopped or not granted.

Customers in financial hardship

When FHA is granted, customers in severe financial hardship may be
eligible for a Hardship Advance.

For information about urgent payments and advance payments, see Rate and
payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) may be able to assist
customers experiencing financial hardship.

Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

The RFCS provides free, independent and confidential assistance to
eligible farmers to:

-   help them better understand their financial situation
-   offer a range of services and information to support customers
    assess their business finances and plan for the future
-   access government and industry programs as well as help with short-
    term issues like negotiating loans, debt mediation and succession
    planning
-   prepare and lodge claims for FHA
-   access professional services to assist them manage and cope with
    stress

The RFCS can complete the Farm Financial Assessment (FFA).

Customers may consent to have their Rural Financial Counsellor (RFC)
attend meetings with them and their FHCO. This ensures they receive
support from both services that complement each other as the customer
works to improve their financial situation.

A person not receiving FHA can be offered a referral to RFCS to access
their services without.

Resources includes a link to the National Emergency Management Agency >
Rural Financial Counselling Service Program.

Inappropriate and incorrect claims

If a customer makes an inappropriate claim for FHA and subsequently
makes a claim for another more appropriate payment for which they are
eligible, the date of claim is taken to be the same date as the
inappropriate claim.

If a customer has made an incorrect claim followed by a subsequent claim
for FHA, the claim for FHA can be taken to have been made the day the
first claim was made if it was reasonable to do so, and all relevant
factors have been considered.

Withdrawn claims

A customer may withdraw their claim for FHA at any time during the claim
assessment. A withdrawn claim is taken to not have been made.

[] Customers who have submitted an online claim can withdraw their claim
online.

If requested by the customer, Service Officers can withdraw an
undetermined claim.

Combined partner claim

If either one of the couple withdraws the combined partner claim, it
will automatically be withdrawn for both. A message will show advising
that both claims have been withdrawn.

Resources contains links to the Services Australia website, contact
details, Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694) and related forms,
the Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry for Farm House
Allowance information and the National Emergency Management Agency for
information on Rural Financial Counselling Services Program (RFCS),
email template for notification of referrals to RFCS and a checklist for
claiming FHA.

Related links

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Upload documents service

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Eligibility and payability for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Identity confirmation

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Progress of claim - Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Confirming a partnered relationship

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
