-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Contact details

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) Rural Network Support mailbox

Letters

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png] FIA
face-to-face appointment letter

Services Australia website

Centrepay - not currently available for FHA but can be utilised for
other income support payments and Family Tax Benefits.

Child Dental Benefits Schedule - financial support for basic dental
services for children aged between 0 and 17 years.

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme - helps with the cost of treatment for
cleft lip and cleft palate conditions.

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - helps meet some of the costs associated
with continence and continence related products for permanent and severe
incontinence.

Crisis and special help - information about payments to help in a
crisis, additional help and links to other government and community
support services.

Family and Domestic violence - Services Australia can provide payments,
social work counselling and third party referrals.

Financial Information Service - helps customers make informed decisions
about investment and financial issues for their current and future
needs.

Medicare Safety Net - financial assistance for high costs for out of
hospital medical services that attract a Medicare benefit. Visiting a
doctor or having tests may cost less once the Medicare Safety Net
threshold is reached.

Multicultural Service Officers - specialists who help migrant and
refugee communities connect with the agency services.

Multilingual Phone Service.

National Bowel Cancer Screening Register - the program aims to detect
cancer early and reduce cancer related deaths.

Payment and Service Finder - [] A combination of 3 online services -
Payment Finder, Service Finder and Rate Estimator into one holistic
service to assist people to find, estimate and compare payments and
services in the same place.

PBS Safety Net - reduces the cost of prescription medicines for
individuals and families once the PBS Safety Net threshold has been
reached.

Self service - [] customers can complete most of their Centrelink,
Medicare and Child Support business themselves by using Express Plus
mobile apps, online services and phone self service.

Services for Indigenous Australians - outlines financial assistance as
well as other support services.

Simple Money Manager - (available in 9 languages) is a budgeting tool to
help track spending.

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) - assists job seekers aged 15
to 64 inclusive who have low/lower levels of language, literacy and
numeracy.

Support for non parent carers - Services Australia provides payments and
services to grandparents, legal guardians and other family members who
provide full time care for a child.

Support to help find work - Workforce Australia providers, Disability
Employment Services or Community Development Programmes provide tailored
services and programmes to help job seekers in their transition to
employment based on their needs.

What to do following a death - information about payments, counselling
and financial services to help people adjust to life after someone close
to them has died.

Australian Government assistance

FarmHub

FarmHub connects Australian farmers with services and support during
tough times, such as drought. This is an Australian Government
initiative administered by the National Farmer's Federation.

National Emergency Management Agency

National Emergency Management Agency - Rural Financial Counselling
Service Program.

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry

Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry - Customers can find
the link to the Farm Household Allowance exit survey.

Drought and rural assistance - Customers can find information about
several Australian Government rural assistance measures at
agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/drought.

These measures provide support to farm families, farm businesses and
rural communities to prepare for, manage through and recover from
drought and other hardship.

Measures include:

-   Dairy Support Package
-   Farm Household Allowance
-   Farm Management Deposits (FMD)
-   Taxation measures
-   Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)
-   Farm Business Concessional Loans Scheme
-   Drought-related Concessional Loans
-   Drought Communities Programme
-   Managing Farm Risk Programme
-   Enhanced social support
-   Pest and weed management

Australian Securities & Investments Commission

Australian Securities & Investments Commission

Moneysmart helps Australians young or old, rich or poor, investing or
paying off debt. The website offers free, independent guidance to help
Australians make the most of their money.

Department of Industry, Innovation and Science

Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources

business.gov.au is an online government resource for the Australian
business community and offers a simple and convenient access to
government information, assistance, forms and services. It is a
whole-of-government service providing essential information on planning,
starting and growing a business.

Department of Social Services

Department of Social Services

Personal Helpers and Mentors (PHaMs) is a program that aims to increase
recovery opportunities for people whose lives are severely affected by
their experience of mental illness. PHaMs services help participants
better manage their daily activities and reconnect with their community.

Broadband for Seniors helps senior Australians get the skills they need
to use computers and access the Internet to assist them moving into a
digital environment.

Department of Veterans' Affairs

Department of Veterans' Affairs

Delivers government programs for war veterans, members of the Australian
Defence Force and the Australian Federal Police and their dependants.
Support is provided through a range of benefits.

Department of Health and Aged Care

Department of Health and Aged Care

Better Access to Psychiatrists, Psychologists and General Practitioners
through the Medicare Benefits Schedule (Better Access) initiative aims
to improve outcomes for people with a clinically-diagnosed mental
disorder.

Hearing Services Program provides eligible people with access to hearing
services.

Department of Education

Department of Education

StudyAssist consists of 4 loans schemes to assist with the cost of study
fees for example, VET Student Loans and Trade Support Loans.

State and territory government assistance

State or territory governments provide programs and services to assist
farm families. For example, advice relating to budgeting, biosecurity,
business and resource management as well as drought and emergency
assistance.

The contact details for each state and territory primary
industry/agricultural agencies are available at Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Drought assistance contacts.

Other services available may include:

-   Legal information and services - advice/information/trustees
-   Business and trade - licensing/contracting
-   Housing & property
-   Education & training (TAFE)
-   Small Business Councils
-   Landcare
-   Mental Health Services
-   Financial Counselling Services

Queensland Department of Science, Information Technology and Information

The Long Paddock

External websites

Some customers may require more intensive assistance. The following
community organisations may be able to provide this support.

Lifeline

13 11 14 (24 hour crisis hotline)

Kids Help Line

1800 55 1800

Online counselling available

Mensline

1300 78 99 78

Suicide Call Back Service

Free nationwide counselling 1300 659 467

ServiceSeeker - an extensive directory of community support services
providing access to 358,137 health, welfare and community service
records.

Dementia Australia - provides services and programmes across Australia.
There are links available on this site for national services and
programmes as well as each state and territory for example, Rural and
regional services in NSW.

More information to help farmers can be found at the following websites.

Australian Farmers - The National Farmers' Federation (NFF) is the peak
national body representing farmers and, more broadly, agriculture across
Australia.

The Farm Table - a central, online toolbox - the platform connects
producers, students, agribusiness professionals, and others involved or
interested in the industry, to information quickly and easily in a
user-friendly format.

Dairy Farmer Central - The central source of information for programs,
initiatives and events available for dairy farmers and their
communities.

National Centre for Farmer Health a website for the National Centre for
Farmer Health (NCFH). The Centre provides national leadership to improve
the health, wellbeing and safety of farm men and women, farm workers,
their families and communities across Australia.

Grains Research & Development Corporation 'Planning Guide for Farmers
Recovering from Drought

MLA Drought Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
