
Remote Area Allowance (RAA) eligibility and payment 002-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Office Locator

Office Locator

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) Australia zone list

ATO Australian zone list

This list is maintained by the Australian Taxation Office and is
location based and doesn’t reference postcodes

Information and indicators to determine usual place of residence

The meaning of 'usual place of residence' has been considered by the
Federal Court and by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

The AAT defined the concept of 'usual place of residence' as more
restrictive than the general legal concept of residence. A person could
be the resident of more than one locality. However, the 'usual place of
residence' is one locality, namely the locality where the customer
ordinarily eats, sleeps and lives. Note: the usual place of residence
differs for ABSTUDY customers who live away from home. As per Chapter
79.3.1 of the ABSTUDY Policy manual, the 'usual place of residence' is
defined as their 'permanent home'. The 'permanent home' is the place in
which the customer normally resides when they are not studying or
training.

In order to change their 'usual place of residence' the customer would
have to abandon the previous place of residence altogether. (Abandonment
of the previous place of residence would include the renting out or
selling of a house owned in the previous place of residence.)

A person would need to have an intention to make the RAA Specified Area
the usual place of residence. An intention is defined as a fixed and
settled course of action and not a mere desire to do something.

A number of indicators may assist in determining if the RAA Specified
Area is indeed the 'usual place of residence'. These indicators can
assist in determining those cases where the customer states that the
length of stay in the RAA Specified Area will be 'indefinite'. They can
also assist in determining the strength of the person's intention to
make the RAA Specified Area the usual place of residence.

Some indicators are:

-   Reasons for travelling to the RAA Specified Area are consistent with
    an intention to make their home in the RAA Specified Area. (Examples
    include, but are not restricted to, improved employment prospects,
    to be near family, medical reasons or continuing education)
-   The length of the expected residence in the RAA Specified Area
    should generally be consistent with something other than a mere
    passing purpose such as a holiday
-   The sale or termination of a rental agreement on a house or other
    accommodation outside the RAA Specified Area
-   The obtaining of long term accommodation, for example, the purchase
    or rental of a house or other accommodation in the RAA Specified
    Area
-   If renting accommodation, the length of the rental agreement
-   Whether the partner or children, if applicable, have moved to the
    RAA Specified Area (assuming the couple are not separated)
-   Enrolment of children in a school within the RAA Specified Area
-   Establishment of an address for the purpose of receiving mail
-   The opening of a bank account or accounts with a bank branch within
    the RAA Specified Area

For some customers it may be difficult to establish a usual place of
residence. The onus is on the customer to provide evidence to support
eligibility for RAA. Persons travelling from a residence within an RAA
Specified Area to a different location within an RAA Specified Area
remain eligible for RAA.

Contact details

Payment Summaries, Allowances and Supplements team

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
