
Access Support Centres (ASC) 002-01020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of the ASC and details the process for
Service Officers to follow before they contact the ASC for help.

Role of ASC

The ASC is a virtual support service for Service Officers and other
staff in service centres to gain real time help with non-complex Access
Services queries.

ASCs are operational across all areas for the Families, Seniors, Carers,
Students, Disabilities, Cashless Debit Card Trial and Income Management
program lines.

Unresolved enquiry

If a Service Officer has an access enquiry they cannot answer, they
should refer to available reference material such as:

-   Operational Blueprint
-   Operational Blueprint - Operational Messages
-   A Team Leader, if available, before contacting the ASC

If the enquiry cannot be resolved after checking available sources, the
Service Officer can contact the ASC. This is usually done with the
customer present. It is important that the Service Officer determines
the most appropriate channel of support to ensure any follow up
explanation can be confidently relayed back to the customer.

Escalating an enquiry

If the complexity of the access enquiry is beyond the capacity of the
ASC, it will need to be escalated by the Service Officer to the
appropriate Level 1 Support Staff according to Zone protocols.

If the complexity of the enquiry is beyond the capacity of appropriate
support staff, the support staff should escalate it to the Service
Support Officer (SSO) according to Zone protocols.

Income Management enquiry

ASC assistance for Income Management enquiries is to provide support to
staff who have not received Income Management training, including staff
in Placed Based Income Management areas.

Staff trained in Income Management (IM) service delivery, and Smart
Centre Capability Call Operations Service Officers, should contact the
ASC for urgent IM payment enquiries or to follow up existing manual
payments only, but, must use existing escalation procedures for all IM
technical and policy enquiries.

Note: under no circumstances should a customer be connected to the ASC,
or given the number.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about payments and services and access to forms, and
intranet links to mySupport, Access Support Centre, Access Services and
Office Locator.

Related links

Identifying services available to newly arrived residents

Social Work Services

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Multilingual Phone Service (MPS)

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
