
DRA and NZ DRA 003-03000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the purpose of Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
(subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). NZ DRA was known as ex-gratia DRA.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

Government intent

The purpose of DRA and NZ DRA is to help eligible individuals who can
demonstrate they have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of
a major disaster.

What is DRA?

DRA is a payment made available under the Social Security Act 1991 that
provides short term income support to help eligible Australians who can
demonstrate they have suffered a loss of income as a direct result of a
declared major disaster.

DRA is payable for a maximum of 13 weeks from the date a customer has or
will have a loss of income as a direct result of the disaster.

What is NZ DRA?

NZ DRA (previously ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance) is a similar
payment to DRA however is for New Zealand citizens who live and work in
Australia, and are non-protected Special Category visa (subclass 444)
holders. See Grants and ex-gratia payments.

Authority to pay DRA/NZ DRA

DRA can only be paid when the relevant Minister has made a determination
that a major disaster, whether naturally occurring or otherwise, has
occurred.

DRA cannot be paid without this authority. If there is no ministerial
declaration to pay DRA, another social security payment may be payable
to meet the needs of people affected by a disaster. For example Youth
Allowance (job seeker), Crisis Payment (CrP) or Special Benefit (SpB).

Under similar circumstances, NZ DRA may be authorised under the
Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act 1997, for New Zealand
citizens who live and work in Australia and are non-protected Special
Category visa (subclass 444) holders.

When a disaster is declared, a new active event procedure will be
created containing relevant information. See Emergency management
events.

Rate Calculator

The Rate Calculators are the instrument that details how the rate of
DRA/NZ DRA is to be calculated. The rate is part of the eligibility
criteria.

The date of the declaration of the disaster determines which Rate
Calculator is applied.

Payment rates

See Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA for further details.

Method of payment

Eligible DRA customers will receive payments in their nominated
Australian bank account.

Eligible NZ DRA customers will receive payments in their nominated
Australian bank account.

DRA/NZ DRA is not subject to compulsory income management.

Taxation

The event will determine if DRA/NZ DRA is tax free or taxable. DRA/NZ
DRA is:

-   tax free for all bushfire events starting in the 2019-20 financial
    year. Note: NZ DRA was known as ex-gratia DRA for these events
-   taxable, for all other events (such as flood, storm, cyclone)
    starting in the 2019-20 year
-   taxable, for all events starting outside the 2019-2020 financial
    year

DRA/ex-gratia DRA is tax free for the following bushfire events starting
in the 2019-20 financial year:

-   Australian Capital Territory Bushfires, December 2019
-   Tasmanian Bushfires, December 2019
-   Victorian Bushfires, December 2019 (not Victorian Bushfires,
    February 2019 as this event started in the 2018-19 financial year)
-   Eastern Queensland Bushfires, November 2019
-   South Australian Bushfires, November 2019
-   NSW Bushfires, September 2019
-   Queensland Bushfires, September 2019

For more information, see:

-   Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA claims, and
-   Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First
-   Processing DRA claims in Process Direct

Customers can request voluntary tax deductions to be withheld from their
taxable DRA payments.

Customers receiving Family Assistance payments may need to revise their
income estimate.

Taxable DRA/NZ DRA is a rebatable benefit subject to the Beneficiary Tax
Offset scheme. Taxpayers who receive taxable DRA/NZ DRA may be entitled
to a Beneficiary Tax Offset. See the Resources page for a link to the
Australian Taxation Office website for more information regarding
beneficiary tax offset.

Allowable periods of absence

DRA/NZ DRA is payable during the following absences:

-   overseas (provided the customer continues to meet residency
    requirements)
-   imprisonment
-   psychiatric confinement

Customers must meet their reporting requirements during their allowable
absences.

A recoverable payment

Services Australia undertakes checks to identify fraudulent claims. If
the agency does not have power under the Social Security Act 1991 to pay
an amount of DRA or NZ DRA to a customer, then the relevant amount is a
debt due to the Commonwealth by the customer, and may be recovered.

For DRA, if an Assurance of Support (AoS) is in place then the debt is
recoverable from the assuree.

Payments to a deceased person

DRA is only payable up to the day before a customer passes away. Any
payments made after the date of death are calculated as overpayments and
may be recovered. This does not apply to NZ DRA. For NZ DRA, contact
Technical Peer Support who will escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk using the payment query template.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has a link to the Services Australia website about
help available for declared disasters, and how to claim disaster
payments. It also has links to the Australian Taxation Office for
beneficiary tax offset information, the Disaster Assist website and the
Australian Government’s Emergency Management page.

Contents

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

Claiming emergency payments

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Managing DRA and NZ DRA payments after grant

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Evacuation and Recovery Centres during emergency events

Related links

Current emergency management events

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
