-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document explains the Services Australia social workers role in
assessing claims for Crisis Payment (CrP) for family and domestic
violence (CrP-EXV). Assessing CrP-EXV is an opportunity to offer the
customer appropriate help and referrals to other support services.

The role of social workers

Social workers are responsible for assessing if a domestic or family
violence situation exists. Social workers use this delegation when
determining the customer’s entitlement to CrP-EXV.

A social work assessment for CrP-EVX is required if a customer:

-   has left their home due to family and domestic violence, or
-   is remaining in the home after the actual or alleged perpetrator has
    left, or been removed from the home, or
-   is the alleged or actual perpetrator of violence, and they have been
    removed and/or legally prevented from returning to the home

Services Officers must assess the customer for basic eligibility
criteria for CrP-EXV before referring to a social worker.

A Service Officer must not refer a CrP-EXV claim to a social worker if
the customer:

-   has not met the basic eligibility criteria for CrP-EXV, or
-   has advised they do not want to speak to a social worker for the
    purpose of the assessment

Assessing eligibility for CrP-EXV

To establish entitlement for CrP-EXV the Service Officer and social
worker must work together. The customer’s first point of contact may be:

-   online,
-   via phone, or
-   in person

For more information on qualification criteria for CrP-EXV see New claim
for Crisis Payment for extreme circumstances family and domestic
violence.

Social workers are the only staff delegated to assess if a family and
domestic violence situation occurred. Social workers use this delegation
when determining entitlement to CrP-EXV.

Claim process

When a CrP-EXV claim is lodged, the possible outcomes to the claim are:

-   granted
-   rejected, or
-   withdrawn

Intent to claim provisions may apply. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers.

Note: If possible, Service Officers should complete the ACC before warm
transferring the customer to the social worker for an assessment.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Related links

Family and domestic violence

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

Recording Crisis Payment (CrP) assessments – social work

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
