-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the role of Services Australia social workers in
the referral of young people to State or Territory Welfare Authorities.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Referral for protective assessments

A protective assessment by the appropriate State or Territory Welfare
Authority is needed if young people under the age of 18 falls into one
of the below 3 categories:

young people under 15 years of age who are homeless or unsupported

young people aged 15 to 17 years (inclusive) who are considered to be at
risk of abuse, serious harm or violence, and

young people under 18 years of age who:

-   are in the guardianship, care or custody of a state/territory
    welfare department, and
-   advise the State or Territory Welfare Authority is not adequately
    supporting them

Young people under 15 years of age who have requested an unreasonable to
live at home (UTLAH) assessment are considered homeless and unsupported
regardless of their current living circumstances. A youth protective
assessment is needed for these customers.

State and Territory Welfare Authorities are responsible for undertaking
protective assessments with young people that fall into these target
groups.

Social workers are the liaison and referral agents between Services
Australia and the relevant State or Territory Welfare Authorities.

A referral should also be made to the appropriate State or Territory
Welfare Authority if the social worker has serious concerns about risk
to:

-   siblings under 18 years
-   dependent children for whom Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is being sought
    by a non-family member

Roles and responsibilities

States and Territory Welfare Authorities are responsible for ensuring
the care and protection of children and young people in accordance with
State and Territory legislation.

States and Territory Welfare Authorities consequently have
responsibility for providing care, protection and associated services to
young people who are assessed as being at risk and homeless, and who
are:

-   16 years of age and under in Victoria, or
-   17 years and younger in all other states and territories. This is
    according to the current State and Territory school leaving ages

The Commonwealth is responsible for the provision of income support to
homeless and unsupported young people above the minimum school leaving
age.

The Commonwealth retains the discretion to provide income support to a
homeless person less than the minimum school leaving age in exceptional
circumstances. The Commonwealth is also responsible for timely and
appropriate referrals to State and Territory Welfare Authorities for a
risk assessment.

Reasonable time frame for a response from the State/Territory Welfare Authority

In some cases, social workers will be waiting on a response from a State
or Territory Welfare Authority to inform their assessment of whether the
customer meets unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) criteria for claim
purposes. A 'reasonable' timeframe for a response is based on a social
worker's discretion. The social worker will consider:

-   the young person's situation
-   the circumstances of the case, taking into account all of the
    factors about the young person, such as safe and secure
    accommodation, and their level of support
-   the local relationship with the State or Territory Welfare Authority

The social worker:

-   should make reasonable attempts to get a response from a State or
    Territory Welfare Authority within 5 working of requesting the
    protective assessment
-   must document these attempts on the customer's record

An unreasonable delay in finalising a claim may pose a risk to an
unsupported young person. If an appropriate response is not received
within 30 days or the case is complicated, social workers must consult
with a Social Work Support Manager. On occasion, it may be appropriate
to finalise the UTLAH assessment before the outcome of the Youth
Protective assessment being known. If this occurs, offer young people
on-going support/advocacy through a Social Case work intervention.

Case consultation

As young people referred for a Youth Protective Assessment are
particularly vulnerable, social workers are expected to case consult
with their Social Work Support Manager more regularly during a UTLAH
assessment.

Case Consultations with an EL1 Social Work Support Manager must occur as
soon as possible after the Youth Protective Assessment referral has been
made. Ongoing consultation with an EL1 Social Work Support Manager
should continue regardless of the likely UTLAH decision, when:

-   the assessing social worker is undelegated
-   the young person is aged under 15
-   the situation is complex
-   an unreasonable delay in response is affecting a UTLAH payment
    decision

Additionally, consultation with an EL2 Social Work Manager must occur
regardless of the likely UTLAH decision, as soon as possible when the:

-   young person is aged under 15
-   response to the Youth Protective Assessment has not addressed the
    risk issues or put in place adequate support for the young person

Assessing social workers must consider the case direction provided by
EL1 Social Work Support Managers and EL2 Social Work Managers in making
any further decisions, particularly about UTLAH eligibility.

Outcomes of the case consultations must be recorded in a SWIS report.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Assisting a customer aged under 16

Conducting a social worker unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
