
New South Wales North Coast Floods, February 2021 003-21041508

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the help available for the New South Wales North
Coast Floods, February 2021.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details, see Operational Blueprint - Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Only staff with the relevant accesses are to assess and finalise claims
for this event.

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

Emergency payments

On 16 April 2021, the Australian Government made a determination under
the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster occurred. Payments
activated for this event:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For the New South Wales North Coast Floods, February 2021, major
disaster means:

the heavy rainfall and associated flooding that started on 24 February
2021 and continued until the 28 February 2021 in New South Wales,
affecting the localities of:

-   localities for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   localities for DRA and NZ DRA

Only staff with the relevant accesses are to assess and finalise claims
for this event.

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP claims. See the Resources page for
    questions to ask the customer to assess major damage
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

A customer may meet the eligibility criteria for this event, and the New
South Wales Floods, March 2021 if they were impacted on these 2 separate
occasions:

-   flooding that started on 24 February 2021 and continued until 28
    February 2021 (New South Wales North Coast Floods, February 2021),
    and
-   flooding that started on 10 March 2021 (New South Wales Floods,
    March 2021)

When discussing date of impact with a customer, do not provide any dates
or date ranges. Use careful questioning such as

-   What date was your principal place of residence impacted?
-   What damage occurred on this date?

If a customer has a claim held for the New South Wales Floods, March
2021, staff will not be able to run the workflow and finalise a claim
for the New South Wales North Coast Floods, February 2021.

The New South Wales Floods, March 2021 claim must be cancelled and
re-run/continued after the claim for the New South Wales North Coast
Floods, February 2021 has been finalised. For the process to follow and
to record and code claims, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

Specific localities for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Typically, Local Government Areas (LGAs) are declared for emergency
events.

For this event only, the following localities in the LGA of Coffs
Harbour have been declared:

-   Upper Corindi
-   Corindi Beach
-   Red Rock

See the Resources page for maps of the affected areas. Use these to
confirm if an address provided by a customer is in a declared locality.

Do not use Office Locator.

Specific localities for DRA and NZ DRA

Typically, Local Government Areas (LGAs) are declared for emergency
events.

For this event only, the following localities in the LGA of Coffs
Harbour have been declared:

-   Upper Corindi
-   Corindi Beach
-   Red Rock

See the Resources page for maps of the affected areas. Use these to
confirm if an address provided by a customer is in a declared locality.

Do not use Office Locator.

NZ DRP and NZ DRA tax participation

For NZ DRA and NZ DRP, a customer must have participated in the
Australian taxation system for at least 1 year in the past 3 financial
years:

-   2017-18
-   2018-19
-   2019-20

If they have not, they must do so before 16 April 2022.

Claiming period

Claims must be lodged by 15 October 2021.

Customers can only claim after this time if special circumstances apply.

How to claim

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

Claim forms are on the Services Australia website and intranet.

For this event only, as staff have been specifically trained for this
event, complete a warm (announced) transfer to:

AGDRP/NZ DRP claims

-   internal transfer number 176 881
-   full number 02 8566 6037 - do not give this number to customers. Use
    only if the internal transfer number cannot be used

DRA/NZ DRA claims

-   full number 03 9250 5346 - do not give this number to customers.
    There is no internal transfer number

For staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments,
before transferring the customer to the correct phone queue, see
Claiming emergency payments.

Rejecting claims for this event

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

Formal approval has been given to reject claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria. This includes claims for:

-   declared localities, and
-   non-declared localities (claims held with the keyword NOTLGA)

Before rejecting any claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim Fast
Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure the
customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected. See the Rejecting claims table in either:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Rejecting claims - New South Wales Floods, March 2021

Only staff with the relevant accesses will be allocated the below claim
types.

Staff may need to contact a customer to discuss a pending rejection for
the New South Wales Floods, March 2021, as the customer:

-   may have been impacted by the disaster between 24 February and 28
    February 2021 (not from 10 March 2021), and
-   is eligible to receive a payment for the New South Wales North Coast
    Floods, February 2021

Follow processes in the Rejecting claims table of either:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

When speaking with the customer, tell them they will receive all of the
following:

-   an unsuccessful letter for the New South Wales Floods, March 2021 as
    they were impacted between 24 February and 28 February 2021.
    (Therefore, they do not meet the criteria for the New South Wales
    Floods, March 2021)
-   a successful letter for the New South Wales North Coast Floods,
    February 2021 (as they meet the criteria for this event)
-   funds in their nominated Australian bank account for the New South
    Wales North Coast Floods, February 2021

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

If the customer wants to apply for ACCS, complete an announced (warm)
transfer to the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue using Services
Australia Workspace.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are
Department of Home Affairs policy documents for each payment. Documents
include details for this event and customer scenarios.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) rate
    thresholds
-   maps of affected areas
-   links to forms, scenarios and the Services Australia website

Related links

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and ex-gratia
Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP)

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Recording and coding a DRA and NZ DRA claims

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster
Recovery Allowance (DRA) and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Claiming Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP),
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or ex-gratia equivalent payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Payment rates for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
