
Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First 003-20090748

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the eligibility criteria for the Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment and how to record and code claims in Customer First.

The EM252 Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form is no longer
available. Customers must call 180 22 66 to lodge a claim.

Do not follow this procedure for self-isolation, quarantine or caring
periods, or second or subsequent claim periods that start on or after 18
January 2022. See Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
Process Direct and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer
Claims.

For claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, the claiming
period has now closed. Late claims will not be accepted.

Claim periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

All claims received for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring,
or second or subsequent claim periods that start on or after 18 January
2022 will be processed in Process Direct. For

-   eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   phone claims, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted
    Customer Claims
-   processing, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
    Process Direct

The Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form (EM252) is no longer
available, and was only valid for self-isolation, quarantine or caring
periods that start on or after 9 December 2021 and up to and including
17 January 2022. For EM252 claim forms received for self-isolation,
quarantine or caring periods, or second or subsequent claim periods that
start on or after 18 January 2022 see the process for invalid claim
procedures.

To assess and code claims for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring that start on or before 17 January 2022, continue following this
procedure.

Eligibility

All claims must be fully assessed before they are coded.

Different eligibility criteria applies depending on a customer’s period
of self-isolation, quarantine or caring.

For eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

Timeframes for claiming

A customer’s period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring must start
on or before 30 June 2022.

They have until 28 July 2022 to claim. No claims will be accepted from
29 July 2022.

Identity requirements

The payment is subject to Identity Confirmation requirements.

However, Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment can be paid before a customer
has completed linkage or an alternative identity assessment.

Staff must be satisfied the person making the claim is:

-   who they say they are, and
-   eligible to receive the payment

If a customer has a confirmed identity status (check the Identity Status
field shows confirmed on the Customer Summary screen in Customer First),
or a confirmed transitional identity status, they meet the identity
requirements for the payment. No further identity documents need to be
verified.

There are different identity process depending on how the activity is to
be undertaken or how the customer is lodging their claim.

For claims lodged

-   via the customer’s Centrelink online account, using the Claim for
    Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form (EM252) (which is no longer
    available) or
-   over the phone that were previously selected for follow-up and have
    come off hold

If the customer meets all other eligibility criteria, their claim can be
granted.

No follow up is needed by staff.

Staff must not:

contact customers to confirm identity requirements

-   all claims completed using the Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster
    Payment form (EM252) and lodged using the customer’s Centrelink
    online account meet the identity requirements for payment

try to verify any documents through the Document Verification Service
(DVS)

create any identity exemptions or identity manual reviews

For claims lodged

using the Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form (EM252)

-   in person at a service centre or agent or access point
-   faxed to the Agency
-   mailed to the Agency, or

over the phone

If a customer does not a confirmed identity status or a confirmed
transitional identity status, they will need to provide one original
document from each category:

Commencement of Identity (CoI)

-   A customer can demonstrate CoI in Australia by providing documents
    that confirm their birth in Australia or proof of arrival in
    Australia, establishing the customer's existence in Australia
-   If a customer cannot provide a CoI document, see Commencement of
    Identity

Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
These documents are generally government issued and most contain a
photograph and security features

Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)
These documents can be government or non-government issued and show use
of identity in the community

Each identity document will be coded and verified in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct. Do not code any reviews in
Process Direct.

Customers must provide consent before documents can be verified through
the DVS.

If the customer can provide one original document for each category and
the documents can be verified:

payment will be made if all other eligibility criteria are met, and

a 112 day review period will be coded manually in Customer First to
attend in person to complete (if they cannot attend in person, see
Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person):

-   linkage (provide an approved photographic identity document), and/or
-   an alternative identity assessment

If a customer cannot provide one original document for each category or
the documents cannot be verified, ask the customer extra questions as
per the Pandemic Leave Disaster - Identity Fast Note.

If staff have concerns about the responses to these questions:

complete a fraud tip-off form

payment will not be made until:

-   a CoI, PUiC and SUiC document is verified through the DVS, or
-   the customer completes full identity confirmation requirements

If staff do not have concerns about the responses to the questions, and
are satisfied the person is who they say they are:

payment will be made if all other eligibility criteria are met, and

a 112 day review period will be coded manually in Customer First to
attend in person to complete (if they cannot attend in person, see
Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person):

-   linkage (provide an approved photographic identity document), and/or
-   an alternative identity assessment

Evidence

Customers will make a verbal or written self-declaration. A written
self-declaration can be made by a Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment paper
claim form. See the state or territory details.

A customer may be asked to give evidence to Services Australia:

-   at a later date, or
-   if there are concerns the customer's claim may not be valid or
    genuine

Customers can give evidence such as:

-   their residential address, for example a driver licence
-   employment details and address of employers, for example payslips,
    letter of employment, letter of offer
-   instructions from the required authority to self-isolate or
    quarantine
-   evidence of a positive test result for COVID-19

Signs of a fraudulent call

There are many warning signs that a call may be fraudulent. It may be an
odd feeling or inconsistencies in what the caller says.

Some signs may include if the customer:

-   has difficulty answering basic Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO)
    questions
-   wants to change recently updated contact details such as address
    (for example, moving from one state or territory to another state or
    territory)
-   wants to change a payment destination
-   cannot give verifiable contact details for the employer
-   insists on an urgent payment
-   has an inconsistent story (for example, claiming to be a delivery
    driver but cannot give driver licence details)
-   has contact phone numbers that are currently linked to other
    customers

This is not a complete list. If there are any doubts that the call is
legitimate, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

See Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Internal review process

If a customer does not understand or agree with the reason/s for a
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment decision, they can ask for an
explanation of the decision.

A review cannot be undertaken by:

-   an Authorised Review Officer (ARO), or
-   the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

See Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process.

Payment methods

Eligible customers will receive payments in their nominated bank
account.

Available payment methods are:

-   direct credit into a customer's bank account - payment made the next
    business day
-   New Payment Platform (NPP) - funds are available almost instantly
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) - funds can be available almost
    instantly
-   Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) cards - customers can only access
    funds using an ATM not by EFTPOS facilities

The preferred method of payment is by NPP or RTGS.

These payment options help customers to receive payments faster. Offer
these to customers who advise they are in financial hardship.

Discuss with the customer which method best suits their circumstances.

Digitally Enabled Processing (DEP)

Claims lodged using the Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form
(EM252) may have been assessed by Digitally Enabled Processing (DEP).

-   DEPs are no longer assessing these forms
-   DEP DOCs may still be on a customer’s record that provide details of
    a customer’s previous claim

Recording and coding a claim and access needed

All claims must be coded in the Flexible Support Payment (FSP)
subsystem. See Resources for the How to access ISS subsystems task card.

Staff process claims using the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow
on the customer's Centrelink record. This includes unsuccessful claims.

In the workflow, staff must select the payment that corresponds to:

-   the customer’s state or territory
-   the customer’s residence status, that is Australian resident or
    non-Australian resident

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start on or
after 9 December 2021 (including changes on or after 10 January 2022),
select:

[Name of state or territory] Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09
December 2021 to 17 January 2022) - AU Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

[Name of state or territory] Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09
December 2021 to 17 January 2022) - Non-AU Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start before 9
December 2021 (that is, a period up to and including 8 December 2021),
select:

[Name of state or territory] Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment -
Australian Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

[Name of state or territory] Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment -
Non-Australian Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

Lodging claims

There are different claiming options depending on the period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring a customer is claiming. See Lodging
claims.

Verbal claims

Staff must only take a verbal claim (using the relevant verbal claim
template) where the customer is claiming a self-isolation, quarantine of
caring period that starts:

-   on or after 9 December 2021 and up to and including 17 January
    2022 - and is unable to submit their claim form online or via fax,
    or
-   before 9 December 2021 (that is, up to and including 8 December
    2021)

Note: if the customer’s self-isolation, quarantine or caring period, or
second or subsequent claim period starts on or after 18 January 2022, do
not use the verbal claim template, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment -
Assisted Customer Claims.

Document standards

When taking a verbal claim from a customer, staff must complete, for
periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that starts:

on or after 10 January 2022 and up to and including 17 January 2022
(where the customer is unable to submit a claim form online or via fax):

-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Verbal claim template – From 10
    January 2022 and up to and including 17 January 2022 and up to and
    including 17 January 2022

on or after 9 December 2021 and up to and including 9 January 2022
(where the customer is unable to submit a claim form online or via fax):

-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Verbal claim template – From 9
    December 2021 and up to and including 9 January 2022

before 9 December 2021 (that is, a period up to and including 8 December
2021):

-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Verbal claim template – Before 9
    December 2021

Once completed, it is then copied and pasted into the Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment Verbal claim Fast Note.

Customer records must be documented for all claim forms lodged, see
Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs).

For successful (granted) claims, complete the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment Grant Fast Note.

For unsuccessful (rejected) claims, complete the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment Reject Fast Note.

If a CoI, PUiC and SUiC document cannot be verified through the Document
Verification Service (DVS), complete the Pandemic Leave Disaster -
Identity Fast Note to help in the identity assessment.

For multiple claims, complete the Display on Access (DOA) DOC. Note:
when the DOA box is ticked, the auto text will default to Special
Contact Consideration with a pre-filled expiry date. Staff do not need
to enter an expiry date.

Rejecting claims

Approval to reject claims that do not meet eligibility criteria has been
given for all states and territories.

Quality On Line (QOL) checking

QOL checking for this payment is as per standard procedure.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer may need a third party (a person or organisation) to act on
their behalf when claiming the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. See
Appointing nominees and Obligations of nominees.

A nominee’s identity must be established before an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form is
processed.

If there are concerns about a nominee’s identity or claim information
provided by a nominee, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

Support for customers

Refer customers to a social worker if they:

-   are at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   are a young person without adequate support
-   are experiencing family and domestic violence
-   present with highly complex circumstances

The Services Australia website has more information about ongoing
financial help.

Payment and Service Finder can be used to get details for external
organisations that can provide additional support to customers.

Support for staff

Eligibility criteria

Contact the Technical Peer Support. See Service Officer role when
seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres.

If needed, the claim will be escalated by Emergency Management Technical
Peer Support. They will contact the Level 2 Helpdesk using the Payment
Query Template.

See the Escalating claims table.

System issues/errors

Contact the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Service Support Officer
(SSO). Talk to a Team Leader about how to access this SSO.

State or territory details

See:

-   New South Wales
-   Queensland
-   South Australia
-   Tasmania
-   Victoria
-   Western Australia
-   Australian Capital Territory
-   Northern Territory

The Resources page has links to the Verbal claim template, forms, to the
Payment query template, the How to access ISS subsystems task card, Visa
subclass numbers, contact details, the Services Australia website and
external websites. It also has scenarios, examples to support some
scenarios and keywords.

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment in Process Direct

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Tasmania

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Victoria

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Western Australia

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - New South Wales

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Queensland

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - South Australia

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Australian Capital Territory

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Northern Territory

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Identity Confirmation

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Social work service referral

Upload documents service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
