
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) 003-04000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines AVTOP.

What is AVTOP?

The Social Security Amendment (Supporting Australian Victims of
Terrorism Overseas) Act 2012 allows the Prime Minister to declare that
an overseas terrorist act is one to AVTOP applies.

The Australian Government's AVTOP is the first comprehensive scheme that
covers Australian victims of overseas terrorism.

The scheme does not extend to domestic terrorism, domestic crime, other
Commonwealth crimes or natural disasters.

Intention of AVTOP

For the March 2019 Christchurch attacks only, customers who have been
harmed as a direct result of the declared overseas terrorist act i.e.
primary victims can be an Australian citizen on the day the terrorist
act occurred. The Australian residency criteria that normally applies to
primary victims is not a requirement for the March 2019 Christchurch
attacks.

The purpose of AVTOP is to provide financial assistance to Australian
residents who have been harmed as a direct result of a declared overseas
terrorist attack, or who are a close family member of a person who has
died as a direct result of a declared overseas terrorist attack.

The AVTOP is a non-taxable payment and is not treated as compensation.

Who can claim AVTOP?

For the March 2019 Christchurch attacks only, customers who have been
harmed as a direct result of the declared overseas terrorist act i.e.
primary victims can be an Australian citizen on the day the terrorist
act occurred. The Australian residency criteria that normally applies to
primary victims is not a requirement for the March 2019 Christchurch
attacks.

AVTOP is available for:

-   primary victim - a person who was harmed as a direct result of a
    declared overseas terrorist act, and/or
-   secondary victim - a person who is the close family member of a
    deceased person, who died as a direct result of a declared overseas
    terrorist act

To qualify for AVTOP, the person must be a primary victim or a secondary
victim as defined above, and:

-   an Australian resident, or had a qualifying residence exemption, on
    the day of the terrorist act, and
-   in the place where the terrorist act occurred and have been harmed
    (primary victim), or be a close family member of someone who died
    (secondary victim) as a direct result of the declared terrorist act,
    and
-   not involved in the commission of the declared overseas terrorist
    act (either themselves or a close family member)

Amount payable

AVTOP is a one-off payment of up to $75,000.

Schedule 1 of the Social Security (Australian Victim of Terrorism
Payment) Principle 2013 and Item 296 and Policy Register provide
guidance to the decision maker on determining the amount payable to a
primary victim. The References page contains a link to the Schedule. The
Resources page contains a link to Item 296 and Policy Register.

The type of injury/impact determines the rate for primary victims. For
example:

-   a person who has lost an index finger may receive $30,000
-   a person who has suffered extensive burns may receive the full
    amount of $75,000

Where more than one person lodges a secondary victim claim for the death
of a close family member, there is a hierarchy of close family members
that is applied to determine who is eligible and the percentage of the
payment they can receive. For example:

-   two siblings who have lost both parents may receive $75,000 each
-   where only one parent is lost, the partner of the deceased may
    receive 50% and the children may receive the remaining 50% between
    them

Services Australia will endeavour to identify all secondary victims who
may be eligible. If additional secondary victims are identified, the
agency may invite them to lodge a claim. If invited, the additional
secondary victims must lodge their claim within the specified timeframe
on the notice given to them to be considered for a share of the payment.

Activation of AVTOP

AVTOP is activated when the Prime Minister of Australia makes a
declaration under the Social Security Act 1991 that the particular
overseas terrorist incident is a declared overseas terrorist act within
the definition included in the Criminal Code Act 1995.

Effect on other payments

This payment is intended to be a helping hand by the Government and is
not designed to replace any existing payments or benefits.

A payment under this scheme will not:

-   affect insurance and workers compensation
-   require recipients to reimburse the Government for Medicare benefits
    received in relation to the injury
-   be subject to income tax
-   be income for social security purposes
-   be treated as damages or compensation under Commonwealth law

However, if invested, such payments could generate income which would be
relevant for the purposes of the Social Security income test.

This reflects the reality that while the payment is designed to support
victims of overseas terrorism, no amount of financial assistance can
fully overcome the horror of being a victim of a terrorist act.

Other assistance after overseas terrorist attacks

A person may qualify for other forms of assistance in relation to the
person's more immediate financial needs resulting from a declared
overseas terrorist act. If still overseas, Australians can refer to the
Consular Service Charter provided by the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (The Resources page contains a link to this charter). If in
Australia, victims can test their eligibility for income support
payments such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Disability Support Pension.

Assistance is also available for health related out-of-pocket expenses
under Special Assistance Schemes.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
updated claim forms and Special Assistance Schemes information. It also
contains a link to the Disaster Assist website, Consular Services
Charter on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade website and to
the attachment Item 296 and Policy Register.

Contents

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Related links

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Current emergency management events

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
