
Western Australia Tropical Cyclone Seroja, April 2021 003-21041310

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details, see Operational Blueprint - Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

This document explains the help available for the Western Australia
Tropical Cyclone Seroja, April 2021.

Emergency payments

On 13 April 2021, the Australian Government made a determination under
the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster occurred. Additional
Local Government Areas were declared on:

-   16 April 2021

Payments activated for this event:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For Tropical Cyclone Seroja, April 2021, major disaster means:

Tropical Cyclone Seroja that occurred in Western Australia on 11 April
2021, affecting the Local Government Areas (LGAs) of:

-   LGAs for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP claims. See the Resources page for
    questions to ask the customer to assess major damage
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

To record and code claims, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

Local Government Areas (LGA) for AGDRP and NZ DRP

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets the criteria.

LGAs declared on 13 April 2021:

-   Northampton

LGAs declared on 16 April 2021:

-   Carnamah
-   Chapman Valley
-   Greater Geraldton
-   Mingenew
-   Morawa
-   Perenjori
-   Three Springs

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas to confirm if an
address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA.

Do not use Office Locator.

LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets the criteria:

LGAs declared on 13 April 2021:

-   Northampton

LGAs declared on 16 April 2021:

-   Carnamah
-   Chapman Valley
-   Greater Geraldton
-   Mingenew
-   Morawa
-   Perenjori
-   Three Springs

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas. Use these to confirm
if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA

Do not use Office Locator.

NZ DRP and NZ DRA tax participation

For NZ DRA and NZ DRP, a customer must have participated in the
Australian taxation system for at least 1 year in the past 3 financial
years:

-   2017-18
-   2018-19
-   2019-20

If they have not, they must do so before 16 April 2022.

Claiming period

Claims must be lodged by 15 October 2021.

Customers can only claim after this time if special circumstances apply.

How to claim

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

Claim forms are on the Services Australia website and intranet.

If a customer calls another agency phone number, complete a warm
(announced) transfer to:

-   internal transfer number for this event only is 176 571
-   full number for this event only is 02 8566 5809 - do not give this
    number to customers

For this event only, for DRA or NZ DRA claims, (as staff have been
specifically trained for this event and payment type) complete a warm
(announced) transfer to:

-   internal transfer number 171 536
-   full number 02 8440 2626 - do not give this number to customers. Use
    only if the internal transfer number cannot be used

For staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments,
before transferring the customer to the correct phone queue, see
Claiming emergency payments.

If a customer needs an Indigenous Interpreter, see Accessing Indigenous
interpreter.

Rejecting claims

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

Formal approval has been given to reject claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria. This includes claims for:

-   declared LGAs, and
-   non-declared LGAs (claims held with the keyword NOTLGA)

Before rejecting any claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim Fast
Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer's record to make sure the
customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected. See the Rejecting claims table in either:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

If the customer wants to apply for ACCS, complete an announced (warm)
transfer to the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue using Services
Australia Workspace.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are
Department of Home Affairs policy documents for each payment. Documents
include details for this event and customer scenarios.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) rate
    thresholds
-   suburbs in declared LGAs
-   maps of affected areas
-   links to Operational Messages, forms, scenarios and the Services
    Australia website

Related links

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and ex-gratia
Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP)

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Recording and coding a DRA and NZ DRA claims

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster
Recovery Allowance (DRA) and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Claiming Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP),
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or ex-gratia equivalent payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Payment rates for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
