[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only

This document explains recording reviews/reconsiderations for Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notice in the Social Work Information
System (SWIS). Under the VWPR policy, social workers can put Income
Management in place for up to 12 months (this is called a VWPR Notice).
The social worker can review this at any time (but a review is mandatory
before the end of the Vulnerable Notice).

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See, Risk identification and management of
threats to the safety or welfare of a child.

Review and SWIS Report

A review of the vulnerable determination must be supported by a Social
Work Information System (SWIS) report.

A review of the customer's wellbeing, not resulting in a reassessment of
the vulnerable determination, does not need a SWIS report; however,
outcomes should be recorded in SWIS case notes.

A customer may also request that a social worker 'reconsider' their
current circumstances and the vulnerable determination.

This process is not to be followed for a customer who is subject to the
VWPR Youth automatic triggers. Refer to related links for Youth
Exclusion assessments.

Related links

Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
(VWPR) Notices by social workers

Recording referrals for customers on Income Management (non delegated)
in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notice
assessments - social work

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments - social work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
