
Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) 003-04020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the claiming process for AVTOP.

Claiming

Claims should be made in one of the following ways:

-   an AVTOP claim form (which can be obtained via
    servicesaustralia.gov.au/help in an emergency), or
-   contacting the AVTOP processing team and speaking with an operator

Claiming period for AVTOP

A primary victim has 2 years from the date of the declaration by the
Prime Minister to make a claim

A secondary victim has 12 months from the date of death of a close
family member, where the close family member died as a direct result of,
and within 2 years of, the day the declared terrorist act occurred

If a claim is lodged outside of the allowable claiming period, Service
Officers should refer the claim to the Emergency Management Level 2
Helpdesk, for consideration. A decision must be made to accept the claim
prior to any assessment of the claim being undertaken.

When referring the claim by email, please include the reason the
claimant lodged the claim outside of the claiming period.

Assessment of a child under 16 years

A child aged under 16 years may be eligible for the AVTOP as a primary
or secondary victim. The claim must be lodged by a legal guardian.

Assessment of a person 16 years and over

A person 16 years and over may be eligible for the AVTOP as a primary or
secondary victim. The claim must be lodged in their own right.

Making an AVTOP claim

Claims should be made in one of the following ways:

-   Phone via the dedicated Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas
    Hotline, or
-   Post

For contact details, see Emergency payments - claiming - AVTOP.

Ensure all required documents are submitted with the completed claim
form. For example, identity documents (where required) and medical
evidence of injuries sustained as a direct result of the terrorist act.

Identity requirements for an AVTOP claim

Different levels of identity must be provided, depending on the age of
the claimant:

Child Under 16 years:

-   1 Commencement of Identity document, or
-   sufficient identity documents to satisfy the Service Officer of the
    child's identity (for a list of documents see Confirming your
    Identity (SS231))

Over 16 years:

-   1 Commencement of Identity document
-   1 Primary Use in Community document, and
-   1 Secondary Use in Community document

Note: an identity document cannot be used multiple times. For example, a
document used as Commencement of Identity, cannot be used again as a
Primary or Secondary Use in Community document. For a list of documents
see Confirming your identity (SS231).

For claimants unable to send original documents, claimants or legal
guardians can send certified copies (this procedure is only available to
AVTOP claimants).

Certified true copies must be annotated as follows:

Certified True Copy of Original Document

-   Signed....................................................
-   Name.....................................................
-   Position..................................................
-   Date.......................................................

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
updated claim forms, the internal Emergency management events page for
disaster information, links to the Disaster Assist website and Disaster
Health Care Assistance Scheme, and the contact details.

Contents

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Related links

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Identity Confirmation

Commencement of Identity

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
