
Assessing claims for Emergency payments for Far North Queensland Floods, February 2019 003-19020327

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details see Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time
limit.

This document outlines how to determine if Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or
the associated ex-gratia payments can be paid to customers affected by
activated emergency events.

Emergency payments

The following payments, administered by Services Australia, have been
activated for Far North Queensland Floods, February 2019 as the federal
Government has made a determination under the Social Security Act that a
major disaster has occurred.

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   NZ Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP) - for New Zealand non-protected
    Special Category visa (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent
    of AGDRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   NZ DRA - for New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa
    (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent of DRA

Affected Local Government Areas (LGAs)

The determination will specify which LGAs will be included for
eligibility for the relevant emergency payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Burdekin
-   Burke
-   Carpentaria
-   Charter Towers
-   Cloncurry
-   Cook
-   Doomadgee
-   Douglas
-   Flinders
-   Hinchinbrook
-   McKinlay
-   Palm Island
-   Richmond
-   Torres
-   Torres Strait Island
-   Townsville
-   Winton
-   Wujal Wujal

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Eligibility for payments

To be eligible to receive a payment, a customer must have been impacted
on any day of the major disaster, which commenced on 25 January 2019.

For more information on assessing eligibility see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

The above links also provide information about reviews and appeals.

Lodgement of claims and claiming periods

Claims must be made within 6 months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply. See
Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

For information on how a customer can claim, steps relating to initial
contact and Callback DOCs and ACTDOCs, see Claiming emergency payments.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website, see the
Resources page for a link.

Staff can access the claim form from the Services Australia Forms on the
intranet.

Customers can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to:
    Emergency Processing Centre
    Reply Paid 7815
    Canberra BC, ACT 2610
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at their nearest service
    centre, agent, access point or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760

If a customer provides their claim form and supporting documents to a
service centre, scan this information onto the system, or fax them to
1300 727 760. See Scanning a document and Storing documents. For further
information on how to manage paper claims, see Claiming emergency
payments.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Rejection of claims

From 22 March 2019, all claims can be rejected.

-   See the Rejecting AGDRP/NZ DRP claim table in Processing AGDRP and
    NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   See the Rejecting DRA/NZ DRA claim table in Recording and coding DRA
    and NZ DRA claims

Payment methods

There are a range of payment methods available for customers. These
include the New Payments Platform (NPP) and Real Time Gross Settlement
(RTGS) payments. If the customer advises they are in financial hardship,
NPP or RTGS may be available payment methods for them for the Far North
Queensland Floods, February 2019. Discuss the preferred method of
payment for the customer. NPP and RTGS will ensure the speed of the
delivery of payments to customers adversely affected by the floods.
Note: NPP is not available for all banks including Bank of Queensland
and Suncorp, however RTGS is available for most banks. Check which
payments methods are available before discussing payment options with
the customer.

The AGDRP claim must be finalised before using the NPP. For further
information see Immediate payment by payment method New Payments
Platform (NPP)

The References page contains a copy of the Operational Instructions,
that is the policy documents for each payment from the Department of
Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains tables with the relevant DRA and DRA
ex-gratia income cut-off points for Newstart Allowance (NSA) and Youth
Allowance (YA). There are also links to Operational Messaging, Payment
and Service Finder, forms and the Emergency Management Teams' contact
details.

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning a document

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Grants and ex-gratia payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
