-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If you have concerns about a child's safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

This document outlines how to respond to customers aged under 16 years
when they contact Services Australia. Customers under 16 must always be
referred to a social worker if they are not living with a parent or
guardian. The social worker will assess their circumstances and check
their eligibility for income support.

Eligibility for income support payments

People under 16 may qualify for Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY under an
Independent category if they are:

-   above the minimum school-leaving age for the State or Territory
    where they live, or
-   formally exempt from school

This includes Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) provisions.

They may qualify for Special Benefit (SpB) under an independent category
if they are:

-   below the minimum school leaving age for the State or Territory
    where they live
-   not formally exempt from school, and
-   not living with a parent or guardian

This includes UTLAH.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) paid to another adult may be appropriate.
However, the adult must have responsibility for the day-to-day care,
welfare and development of the child. The adult’s involvement with the
child must allow them to influence their day to day welfare and
development. Do not assume a person is a dependent child of another
adult simply because they live in their home. The adult must have
appropriate care of the child to quality for FTB. If there is any doubt,
the customer should lodge a claim for SpB for a full assessment.

SpB may be paid to an Australian Citizen Child (ACC) or a child who is a
permanent visa holder whose parents/guardians are unable to get any
income support payments or FTB.

Social Work role

Refer people under 16 who do not live with a parent or guardian to a
social worker. The social worker will help with determining payment
eligibility and offer support through social casework.

If a young person has applied for an income support payment under UTLAH
provisions, a full assessment will occur. This includes contact with
parents/guardians as appropriate and referral to the relevant State or
Territory Welfare Authority if required.

When a person under 16 has applied for Special Benefit, the social
worker will also assess their current living circumstances. This is to
make sure the young person is not at risk. The social worker will help
decide if the person is a dependent child of another adult who:

-   is providing care, and
-   can apply for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

A person can be a dependent child, even when the adult is not eligible
for FTB. Consider the nature and intent of the support provided. A
social worker must outline in a report the reasons for deciding the
person is a dependent child of another adult.

People in this age group are vulnerable. Social workers should consult
with their EL1 Social Work Support Manager or EL2 Social Work Manager.
See Conducting a social worker UTLAH assessment.

The Resources page has a link to the Level 2 Helpdesk Special Benefit.

Related links

Social work services

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Social casework

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Processing a Special Benefit (SpB) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
