
Grants and ex-gratia payments 003-01060000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document explains grants and ex-gratia payments and explains who is
responsible for developing the guidelines for these payments.

Grants

The Australian Government makes grants to individuals, families and
businesses following specific major disasters or events that warrant a
special payment. Amounts paid and eligibility criteria are defined by
the minister(s) whose portfolio(s) have been affected by those major
disasters/events. Grants were previously known as ex gratia payments.

The most commonly known grants are:

-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP). This was known as ex-gratia
    DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was known as ex-gratia
    DRA

These payments are very similar to the Australian Government Disaster
Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) but are
targeted to New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa (subclass
444) holders.

For more details on:

-   NZ DRP, see AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   NZ DRA, see DRA and NZ DRA

Other examples of grants include:

-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   MH17 Family Support Package

Legislation

Grants (previously known as ex-gratia payments) are administered under
the Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act 1997.

As grants are not covered under relevant legislation, customers cannot
request a review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). The
References page contains a link to the Financial Framework
(Supplementary Powers) Act 1997.

Eligibility criteria, review and appeal rights

These details vary, depending on the type of grant. See:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims
-   Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims
-   Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First

Note: grants cannot be reviewed by the Administrative Appeals Tribunals.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website for
disaster specific information and claim forms.

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

DRA and NZ DRA

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

AGDRP and NZ DRP claims for an immediate family member who has died or
is missing

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Current emergency management events

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Family and domestic violence

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

MH17 Family Support Package

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
