
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Victoria - before 18 January 2022 003-20082529

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details specific to the Victorian Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment.

Different eligibility criteria applies depending on a customer’s period
of self-isolation, quarantine or caring. Confirm the period the customer
is claiming before assessing their claim.

For claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, claims will
not be accepted from 29 July 2022.

Claims periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

All claims received for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring
that start from (on or after) 18 January 2022, for:

-   eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   phone claims, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Assisted
    Customer Claims
-   processing, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
    Process Direct

Claims for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start on
or before 17 January 2022, continue following this procedure.

Assessing and coding claims

To be eligible for the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, a
customer must reside in Victoria. Staff must select the correct
Victorian workflow.

Note: for a period between July and September 2020 only, customers who
lived in New South Wales or South Australia could claim the Victoria -
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment if they normally attended work in
Victoria.

See Some claims for New South Wales and South Australia residents will
be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

For all other eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

To code claims, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in
Customer First.

Payment period

The payment period for the Victorian Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment is
any date that occurs from:

-   5 July 2020 onwards for Victorian residents
-   5 July to 16 September 2020 for New South Wales residents who work
    in Victoria
-   5 July to 9 September 2020 for South Australian residents who work
    in Victoria

There are different payment rates and eligibility criteria, depending on
the period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring the customer is
claiming.

Some claims for New South Wales and South Australia residents will be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

From 5 July to 16 September 2020, the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment allowed New South Wales residents to claim a payment for a
period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring if they worked in
Victoria.

From 5 July to 9 September 2020, the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment allowed South Australian residents to claim a payment for a
period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring if they worked in
Victoria.

If a New South Wales resident lodges a claim for a period that:

ends before 17 September 2020 (and they were working in Victoria at the
time) - they must apply for the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts on or after 17 September 2020 (regardless of where they were
working) - they must apply for the New South Wales Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment

starts before 17 September 2020 and ends on or after 17 September 2020
(regardless of where they were working) - Services Australia will assess
the claim under the New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. If
the customer is:

-   eligible, their claim is processed as New South Wales Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment
-   not eligible, their claim is assessed to see if they are eligible
    under the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

If a South Australian resident lodges a claim for a period that:

ends before 10 September 2020 (and they were working in Victoria at the
time) - they must apply for the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts on or after 10 September 2020 (regardless of where they were
working) - they must apply for the South Australia Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment

starts before 10 September 2020 and ends on or after 10 September 2020
(regardless of where they were working) - Services Australia will assess
the claim under the South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. If
the customer is:

-   eligible, their claim is processed as South Australia Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment
-   not eligible, their claim is assessed to see if they are eligible
    under the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

See the:

-   scenarios about eligibility for either New South Wales or Victoria
    Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment on the Resources page of Pandemic
    Leave Disaster Payment - New South Wales
-   scenarios about eligibility for either South Australia or Victoria
    Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment on the Resources page of Pandemic
    Leave Disaster Payment – South Australia

For help, contact the Technical Peer Support.

Claiming period

A customer’s period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring must start
on or before 30 June 2022.

They have until 28 July 2022 to claim. No claims will be accepted from
29 July 2022.

Customers who receive a state related COVID-19 payment are not eligible

Customers are not eligible for a Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment if they have received or applied to receive the Victorian
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Worker Support Payment or the South Australia
Paid Pandemic Leave payment, for the same day period of self-isolation,
quarantine or caring.

Note: these payments are no longer available to claim. However, staff
must confirm a customer did not receive these payments for any past
periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring they are claiming.

Test Isolation Payment

If a customer is advised to self-isolate or quarantine while they await
COVID-19 test results, tell them to test their eligibility for the
Victorian Government’s $450 Coronavirus (COVID-19) Test Isolation
Payment.

Services Australia does not assess claims for this payment. Customers
should contact the Victorian Government.

Customers who get the Victorian Government’s $450 Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Test Isolation Payment may still claim the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment. See Scenarios.

Lodging claims

There are different claiming options depending on the period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring a customer is claiming. See Lodging
claims.

Required authority for 'informed to self-isolate or quarantine'

The required authority for customers who reside in Victoria is the
Victorian Department of Health (previously the Victorian Department of
Health and Human Services) or an agent of the Victorian Department of
Health.

Note: Victorian schools are not a required authority.

Victorian schools will inform parents of school children of the
requirement to self-isolate or quarantine.

A personal instruction to the customer:

will be provided by a required authority, and

may take several days

-   a timeframe cannot be provided by Services Australia

Customers advised by a Victorian school to self-isolate or quarantine
cannot be paid a Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment until they are informed
to do so by a required authority.

An 'agent' of the Victorian Department of Health is any of the
following:

-   Barwon Health
-   Ballarat Health
-   Bendigo Health
-   Goulburn Valley Health
-   Albury-Wodonga Health
-   Western Health
-   South Eastern Public Health Unit under Monash Health
-   North Eastern Public Health Unit under Austin Health
-   Barwon South West Public Health Unit under Barwon Health
-   Grampians Wimmera Southern Mallee Public Health Unit under Ballarat
    Health
-   Loddon-Mallee Public Health Unit under Bendigo Health
-   (Hume) Goulburn Valley Public Health Unit under Goulburn Valley
    Health
-   (Hume) Albury-Wodonga Public Health Unit under Albury-Wodonga Health
-   Gippsland Public Health Unit under La Trobe Regional Health

The required authority is a 'health official' for customers who reside
in:

South Australia, if:

-   the claim period is 5 July to 9 September 2020, and
-   they are unable to attend work in Victoria

New South Wales if:

-   the claim period is 5 July to 16 September 2020, and
-   they are unable to attend work in Victoria

A 'health official' is any of the following:

-   a person who is employed by a state or regional department of health
-   a registered General Practitioner
-   a nurse, doctor or registrar at a hospital

Workflow titles

On 9 December 2021, Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment policy changed.

Before assessing a claim and selecting a workflow, check the period the
customer is claiming.

If a customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring that starts between 9 December 2021 and 17 January 2022
(inclusive), select:

VIC Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - AU Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

VIC Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - Non-AU Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

If the customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine
or caring that starts before 9 December 2021, (that is, up to and
including 8 December 2021), select:

Victorian Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Australian Resident if the
customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

Victorian Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Non-Australian Resident if the
customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website, claim
forms, visa subclass numbers, event specific keywords and scenarios.

Related links

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
