-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to deliver an immediate payment to a
customer's bank account using the New Payments Platform (NPP).

About the NPP

The New Payments Platform (NPP) is a priority direct credit payment
infrastructure that can deliver payments in real time, 24 hours a day,
every day of the year including weekends and public holidays.

The NPP should be used to issue the following payments within the ISIS
system when the customer requires the payment immediately:

immediate payments

Crisis Payments

emergency payments:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP) - previously known as ex-gratia
    Disaster Recovery Payment (ex-gratia DRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA) - previously known as ex-gratia
    Disaster Recovery Allowance (ex-gratia DRA)
-   Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

one-off Income Management payments:

-   Restricted Direct Payments (RDP)
-   Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) are within the SAP system, and cannot be delivered via the NPP.
These should be issued via Real Time Gross Settlement.

Priority of payment methods

When issuing these immediate payments, consider the most appropriate
payment method for the customer.

The expectation is to pay the customer into their bank account by either
direct credit, or priority direct credit (NPP or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS)).

Issuing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) cards can only be
considered if these options are not suitable. EBT cards cannot be used
to deliver payments to customers who do not have a bank account.

Availability of NPP

A customer's account must be enabled for NPP by their bank or financial
institution ('NPP reachable'). The system will automatically check if
the customer's BSB is NPP reachable. If so, the option to pay via NPP
will be displayed for staff to select. If the request is via self
service channels, and the customer has selected the priority direct
credit option, it will pay via NPP where possible.

If an account is NPP reachable, but the payment fails to deliver, it
will automatically re-issue via RTGS if available, or via direct credit.

NPP and RTGS should only be used where the customer previously had a
regular payment issued to the payment destination (except for Crisis
Payment and AGDRP). Customers will not be able to use the self service
channels if they have changed their payment destination prior to
requesting the urgent payment and have not yet received a regular
payment into this account.

Customers receiving Farm Household Allowance or Status Resolution
Support Services can only be paid an urgent payment via Direct Credit or
RTGS.

Identifying NPP payments on the PS Screen

When a payment is granted, it will generally be delivered in 1 or 2
business days depending on the payment type.

For customers granted an immediate payment, staff can reissue some or
all of the payment via the New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS), depending on the customer's financial
institution's capabilities, or via an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
card.

Both the original and immediate payments will display on the Payment
Summary (PS) screen for staff and on the View Payments History for
customers via Centrelink Online Accounts. These payments will display by
most recent delivery date.

The original payment will show the full Gross amount, with the Net
amount reduced by the immediate payment amount delivered via NPP.

The immediate payment will display under the original payment, and can
be identified by 'NPP' under the 'Type' column.

Authentication

Ensure the customer record accessed is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
prior to assessing or issuing, an immediate payment. See Authenticating
a Centrelink customer for a detailed process.

Expanded payment description

Urgent Payments or Hardship Advances paid via the NPP will have an
expanded payment description delivered with the payment:

-   You have received an Immediate Payment from Centrelink. You can see
    how this will affect your future payment/s by signing in to myGov or
    the Express Plus Centrelink app to access your online account

This can be viewed on the customer's mobile banking app or online
banking, and is in addition to the standard remittance advice they see
on their bank statement. It is up to the customer's bank if and where
the description is viewable, and how it is displayed.

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) about the NPP, how NPP payments are
made, accessing NPP payments and troubleshooting.

Related links

Immediate methods of payment

Immediate payments

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Weekly payments

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Urgent payment requests for Income Management

Restricted Direct Payment (RDP)

Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's
request

About payment delivery

Current emergency management events

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
