
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) – November 2015 Paris attacks 003-14010300

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for the November 2015 Paris attacks has now closed,
unless special circumstances apply. For more details see Operational
Blueprint - Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)
claims lodged outside of the time limit.

This document contains event-specific information about the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) for the November 2015 Paris
attacks. AVTOP is a one off payment of up to $75,000. The purpose of
AVTOP is to provide financial assistance to Australians who have been
harmed as a direct result of the November 2015 Paris attacks, or who are
a close family member of a person who has died as a direct result of the
November 2015 Paris attacks.

On this Page:

Declared overseas terrorist act

The following acts which commenced in Paris, France:

The suicide bombings by 3 persons at the Stade de France, 93216,
Saint-Denis, Paris, on 13 November 2015 at the following locations:

-   outside Gate D on Rue Rimet
-   outside Gate H on Rue Rimet
-   on Rue de la Cokerie, in front of the McDonalds, approximately 450
    metres from the stadium

The shootings and suicide bombings occurring on 13 November 2015 at the
following locations:

-   le Carillon Restaurant and le Petit Cambodge restaurant, corner of
    Rue Alibert and Rue Bichat, 75010, Paris
-   la Casa Nostra restaurant, corner of Rue de la Fontaine au Roi and
    Rue de la Folie Mericourt, 75011, and Cafè la Bonne Bieère, corner
    of Rue de la Fontaine au Roi and Rue Faubourg du Temple, 75010,
    Paris
-   la Belle Equipe restaurant, 92 Rue de Charonne, 75011, Paris
-   le Comptoir Voltaire café, 253 Boulevard Voltaire, Paris

The shooting in Rue Oberkampf, Paris, on 13 November 2015 and the
shooting and hostage siege at the Bataclan Concert Hall, 50 Boulevard
Voltaire, 75011, Paris on 13 and 14 November 2015

While the suicide bombings occurred outside the Stade de France many
thousands of individuals inside the stadium were confined inside the
stadium for some time after the terrorist acts, and may have witnessed
the terrorist acts or their immediate aftermath.

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

The claiming period for Primary victims for the November 2015 Paris
attacks ended on 18 December 2017.

Secondary victim

Secondary victims have 12 months from the death of the close family
member to claim. The death of the close family member must be a direct
result of, and have occurred within 2 years of, the declared terrorist
act.

For the November 2015 Paris attacks the close family member must have
died on or before 12 November 2017.

The claiming period for secondary victims for the November 2015 Paris
attacks ended on 12 November 2018.

Eligibility for AVTOP

A person is eligible for AVTOP if:

-   the person was an Australian resident, or held a qualifying
    residence exemption, on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   the person must have been in the location of, and harmed as a direct
    result of, the terrorist act (primary victim), or be a close family
    member of a person who died as a direct result of a terrorist act
    (secondary victim), and
-   the person must not have been involved in the commission of the
    terrorist act, and must not have had family members involved in the
    commission of the terrorist act

There is no age limit.

Claim will be assessed on a case by case basis.

Maximum amount payable

Where a claimant is harmed (primary victim) and a close family member
dies as a direct result of the same terrorist act (secondary victim),
the maximum payment any 1 person can receive is $150,000. For example:

-   where a claimant is harmed and also loses a close family member,
    they may qualify for up to $75,000 for their injuries and up to
    $75,000 for the close family member lost
-   if the deceased has other close family members, then the $75,000
    that is payable in respect of the deceased may be shared among the
    eligible family members who submit a claim

Where a claim is lodged for 2 close family members who have died as a
direct result of the same declared terrorist act, the maximum payment
one person can receive is $75,000. A person cannot receive more than
$75,000 regardless of how many close family members have died as a
direct result of the event.

Proof of identity requirements

A claimant will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents from the approved list as shown on the Confirming your
identity (SS231) form.

For the purposes of claiming AVTOP a claimant over the age of 16 will
need to provide 1 document from each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of Identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

For the purpose of claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the claimant may
need to provide identity documents on behalf of the child. These
documents include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

The claimant have up to 28 days to provide proof of identity
documentation, with an extension granted in exceptional circumstances.

For more information see Confirming a customer’s identity.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment,
claimants may call the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Hotline.
The operating hours for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas
Hotline can vary, refer to the Services Australia Website for current
details. The Resources page contains a link.

Claimants may also download a claim form from the Services Australia
Website and post the completed claim form and supporting documentation.

Keywords

Once a claim has been uploaded into Customer First, the claim will need
to be indexed and have the keyword:

-   'V21NEW' for a primary victim claim
-   'V22NEW' for a secondary victim claim

For unsuccessful claim that are to be rejected, use one of the following
keywords:

-   'V21REJ' for a primary victim claim
-   'V22REJ' for a secondary victim claim

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel advice

Where possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable to November 2015
Paris for the period 6 months prior to the terrorist act. The Resources
page contains travel advices that have been received. For information on
how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see Reductions and
Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment
(AVTOP).

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

The Resources page contains links to claim forms, fax coversheet,
contact details for Emergency Management Teams and Emergency Management
Level 2 helpdesk, map of affected areas and the Payment Query Template.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim qualifications for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim qualifications for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
