
Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary circumstances 003-10010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for urgent payment requests from
customers experiencing severe financial hardship due to exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances.

Requesting an urgent payment

Customers can request the urgent payment:

-   [] using their Centrelink online account or Phone self service
-   by phone (Smart Centre telephony services)
-   at a service centre

When a customer requests an urgent payment

Contact with customers

Give extra care and consideration to customers presenting with financial
hardship and seeking support. They may be distressed and upset. See
Telephone standards - Service Officer’s manner with the customer for how
to support the customer. This also applies to face-to-face contacts

Offering other help

Service Officers must explore other forms of assistance.

If none is available or suitable:

-   check the customer is currently in receipt of an eligible Centrelink
    payment for an urgent payment
-   discuss with the customer the risks associated with urgent payments
-   consider the reason for the request - does it meet the criteria for
    urgent payment?
-   check for any previous urgent payments the customer has received in
    the previous 12 months
-   determine the amount to be paid and method of payment

The priority is to help remedy the customer's emergency circumstances.
If this can be done by giving them access to other assistance, rather
than reducing their future payments, this will place the customer in a
better financial position next fortnight.

Customers affected by family and domestic violence

A customer may contact for an urgent payment and disclose they have been
affected by family and domestic violence.

Before assessing a request for urgent payment, Service Officers must:

-   Check if the customer has been assessed for a Crisis Payment in the
    previous week. If not, offer a referral to a social worker to
    explore whether the customer may be eligible for a Crisis Payment
    due to family and domestic violence, and/or to discuss other support
-   If the customer does not wish to claim Crisis Payment or has
    recently been granted Crisis Payment, an urgent payment request can
    be assessed

For referral options, see Social work service referral.

Eligibility

Customers are eligible for an urgent payment if they:

-   are in severe financial hardship due to exceptional and unforeseen
    circumstances
-   will not be put in further financial hardship by receiving the
    urgent payment
-   receive an eligible Centrelink payment. An urgent payment cannot be
    granted for an ineligible payment type
-   are not receiving weekly payments
-   have not received an urgent payment on the same day
-   have not made an urgent payment request using self service or staff
    assisted, and had that decision reconsidered on the same day
-   have not received 2 urgent payments in the last 12 months (other
    than when extraordinary circumstances apply). Do not count urgent
    payments due to expenses related to the funeral of an immediate
    family member, Centrelink delay or holiday processing
-   do not have a record in Environment 'I' (overseas)

Severe financial hardship

A customer applying for an urgent payment is considered to be in severe
financial hardship when:

-   as a single person, their liquid assets are less than the maximum
    fortnightly payment rate (including add-ons) for the payment they
    are receiving
-   as a member of a couple, their liquid assets are less than twice the
    maximum fortnightly payment rate (including add-ons) for the payment
    they are receiving

Situations that are not exceptional or unforeseen

Situations not considered (or impacted by) exceptional and unforeseen
include, but are not limited to:

-   regular accommodation costs such as rent, mortgage payments or rent
    arrears. This includes when under threat of loan default or legal
    eviction due to non-payment
-   regular bills such as gas, electricity, telephone or water. This
    includes when services are under threat of disconnection due to
    non-payment, unless required for a life-threatening illness
-   credit account or loan repayments
-   car maintenance, registration or petrol costs
-   food and general living expenses
-   regular private and public transport costs
-   regular medical bills, where expenses are unchanged
-   costs associated with court appearances or fines

When considering the reason for the urgent payment, a separate
unforeseen event may have occurred which caused the customer to use
their regular funds to pay for one of the above expenses.

Limit of 2 urgent payments in 12 months

Customers can generally only receive 2 urgent payments in 12 months,
except for urgent payments due to a funeral, Centrelink delay or holiday
processing.

This is a rolling 12 months, not a calendar 12 months. It will change
depending on the date an urgent payment is granted.

Example

On 1 July 2020, a customer applied and was approved for an urgent
payment.

On 12 December 2020, they apply and are approved again for an urgent
payment.

They are now not eligible for another urgent payment until 2 July 2021.
They have received 2 urgent payments in the 12 months before this date.

If they apply on 30 July 2021 and an urgent payment is approved, they
must now wait until 12 December 2021 to apply again. The 12 months
started with the payment on 12 December 2020.

Extraordinary circumstances for more than 2 urgent payments in 12 months

To protect vulnerable customers, a decision can be made to approve more
than 2 urgent payments to a customer in 12 months if the customer is in
severe financial hardship and extraordinary circumstances are verified.

Service Officers must seek approval to grant from a Technical Peer
Support (TPS), Team Leader or a staff member above this level. If the
Service Officer is a TPS staff member, they must also refer to another
TPS or a Team Leader for secondary approval.

If the customer is on a Managed Service Plan, consult with their One
Main Contact (OMC) or refer to their Personalised Services Officer
(PSSO).

The Process page explains the full assessment, evidence and approval
processes.

When assessing the customer's request, consider:

-   Are they in severe financial hardship?
-   Their personal circumstances and history
-   Why they have not moved to weekly payments to manage their finances
-   All other immediate payment options such as Advances, Crisis
    Payments and Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. If an
    Advance Payment is granted as the customer is not eligible for an
    urgent payment, the Advance should be delivered as normal and not
    issued using urgent payment methods
-   Have they been offered financial management and Social Worker
    support (if suitable, see Social work service referral)
-   The need for extraordinary circumstances to be present that
    significantly exceed the threshold for the normal grant of an urgent
    payment (exceptional and unforeseen circumstances)
-   Any social worker, Indigenous Services Officer (ISO) or Farm
    Household Case Officer (FHCO) recommendations on the customer record
    or provided verbally. However, the Service Officer still makes the
    decision and approval is still needed to grant

TPS, Team Leaders and other staff asked to help with the decision should
take into account:

-   Access to more than 2 urgent payments in 12 months may indicate
    personal circumstances or ongoing hardships which can be worsened by
    further urgent payments
-   The general policy of 2 urgent payments in 12 months is to protect
    customers and reinforce the need for staff and customers to explore
    other ways to support customers. For example weekly payments,
    financial counselling or social work support where appropriate, in
    line with social work priority groups
-   Verify the customer's circumstances whenever possible. The way to do
    this should be responsive to the extraordinary nature of their
    circumstances. Make up to 2 calls to verify the circumstances. If
    the calls are unsuccessful but the customer can provide documentary
    evidence, the payment can be conditionally approved

Urgent payment amount

An urgent payment is the early payment of a customer's accrued
entitlement, less deductions.

It is limited to the number of days between:

-   the 'date paid to' for the last fortnightly payment, and
-   the date on which the urgent payment request is being actioned

The system will calculate the funds available.

Only pay the amount the customer needs to meet their immediate urgent
need. Paying more will place the customer in future financial hardship.

The customer should not be paid more than the maximum of $200. This
limit was introduced to stop payments over this amount and remove the
need for Team Leader approval for payments above $200.

The amount payable is the smallest of:

-   available funds calculated by the system
-   the amount requested by the customer
-   the minimum amount it will cost to meet the immediate hardship need,
    or
-   the maximum $200

Assessing urgent payment requests

See Urgent payment requests for:

-   delegation for decision making
-   payment methods
-   customers on weekly payments
-   customers with a history of requesting urgent payments
-   customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour

The Resources page contains links to forms, contact details, Office
Locator, the Services Australia and external websites. It includes FAQs,
examples and the role of social workers, TPS and Team Leaders.

Related links

Urgent payment requests

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Urgent payment requests using self service

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers

Processing urgent payment requests

Customer disagrees with an urgent payment decision

About payment delivery

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customer aggression - reporting and recording incidents

Immediate methods of payment

Making a decision about a hardship advance

Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Referral to external support services

Service Support Officer (SSO) role in Technical Peer Support (TPS) in
Smart Centres

Social work service referral

Technical Peer Support (TPS) role in Smart Centres

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
