
Assessing claims for emergency payments for Northern NSW Bushfires, February 2019 003-19022028

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details see Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time
limit.

This document outlines how to determine if Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or
their associated ex-gratia payments can be paid to customers affected by
activated emergency events.

On this Page:

Emergency payments

The following payments, administered by the Services Australia, have
been activated for Northern NSW Bushfires, February 2019 as the federal
Government has made a determination under the Social Security Act that a
major disaster has occurred.

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   NZ Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP) - for New Zealand non-protected
    Special Category visa (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent
    of AGDRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   NZ DRA - for New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa
    (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent of DRA

Affected Local Government Areas (LGAs)

The determination will specify which LGAs will be included for
eligibility for the relevant emergency payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Armidale
-   Inverell
-   Kyogle
-   Tamworth
-   Tenterfield

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Reasonably close (AGDRP/ex-gratia DRP only)

For the Northern NSW Bushfires, February 2019 the customer’s principal
place of residence must be:

-   within one of the designated LGAs and
-   ‘reasonably close’ to the bushfires.

Maps have been provided to assist in assessing reasonably close. Maps
detail the burn scar for each fire and also identify areas which are
approximately within a 5km or 10km radius. The maps have been provided
to assist in determining the likelihood that any major damage was a
direct result of the designated bushfire.

See the Resources page to access these maps.

Customers located outside the 10km radius may still be eligible to
receive a payment. Distances greater than the 10 km radius may require a
greater degree of examination and customer questioning to ensure the
damage claimed was a direct result of the declared major disaster.

For example, a customer’s principal place of residence may be 15km from
the burn scar however they are able to demonstrate they were downwind
from the fire, winds were excessive during the event and this was a
major factor in the interior of their house being breached by smoke
and/or ash.

Additional evidence, such as if a customer has claimed insurance for the
event and has been issued with a claim number may also support the
relationship between major damage and reasonably close.

The Process page contains further information including questions that
will assist with assessing ‘reasonably close’.

Where Service Officers have concerns about the validity of the damage
being claimed in relation to the location of the principal place of
residence and proximity to the bushfire they should escalate the claim
to the Emergency Management Level 1 Helpdesk/ TPS for further escalation
to the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk. See the Escalation of
claims from the Emergency Management Level 1 / TPS Helpdesk to the
Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk table on the Process page of
Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP for further information.

Eligibility for payments

To be eligible to receive a payment, a customer must have been impacted
on any day of the major disaster, which commenced on 1 February 2019.

For more information on assessing eligibility see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

The above links also provide information about reviews and appeals.

Lodgement of claims and claiming periods

Claims must be made within six months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply. See
Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

For information on how a customer can claim, steps relating to initial
contact and Callback DOCs and ACTDOCs, see Claiming emergency payments.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website for
customers, staff can also access the forms on the Services Australia
Forms page on the intranet. See the Resources page for links to the
forms.

Customers can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to:
    Emergency Processing Centre
    Reply Paid 7815
    Canberra BC, ACT 2610
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at their nearest service
    centre, agent, access point or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760

If a customer provides their claim form and supporting documents to a
service centre, scan this information onto the system, or fax them to
1300 727 760. See Scanning a document and Storing documents. For further
information on how to manage paper claims, see Claiming emergency
payments.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Rejection of Claims

From 21 March 2019, claims can be rejected.

-   See the Rejecting AGDRP/NZ DRP claims table in Processing AGDRP and
    NZ DRP claims in Customer First, or
-   See the Rejecting DRA/NZ DRA claims table in Processing DRA and NZ
    DRA claims in Customer First

Payment methods

There are a range of payment methods available for customers. These
include the New Payments Platform (NPP) and Real Time Gross Settlement
(RTGS) payments. If the customer advises they are in financial hardship,
NPP or RTGS may be available payment methods for them for the Northern
NSW Bushfires, February 2019. Discuss the preferred method of payment
for the customer. NPP and RTGS will ensure the speed of the delivery of
payments to customers adversely affected by the bushfires. Note: NPP is
not available for all banks including Bank of Queensland and Suncorp,
however RTGS is available for most banks. Check which payment methods
are available before discussing payment options with the customer.

The AGDRP claim must be finalised before using the NPP. For further
information see Immediate payment by payment method New Payments
Platform (NPP)

The References page contains a copy of the Operational Instructions,
that is the policy documents for each payment from the Department of
Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains tables with the relevant DRA and DRA
ex-gratia income cut-off points for Newstart Allowance (NSA) and Youth
Allowance (YA). There are also links to Operational Messaging, Payment
and Service Finder, forms, maps and the Emergency Management Teams'
contact details.

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning a document

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Grants and ex-gratia payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
