
Immediate payment by payment method direct credit 003-10030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how Centrelink staff deliver payments to
customers by direct credit when an immediate payment is approved.

Urgent payment requests

Customers can request an urgent payment using the following channels:

-   Smart Centre telephony services
-   At a Service Centre
-   Using their Centrelink online account; or
-   Using the Interactive Voice Response (IVR) service. The IVR and
    Centrelink online account can only be used to request payments due
    to exceptional and unforeseen circumstances

Priority of payment methods

When issuing an urgent payment to a customer, consider the hierarchy of
payment methods and the best way to issue the payment to the customer.

The preferred method is to pay the customer into their bank account by
either:

-   direct credit
-   the New Payments Platform (NPP), or
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).

Only consider an EBT card if these options are not available.

Delivery time

The payment will be delivered to the customer's bank account the next
working day for payments made in the Newstart system, or in 2 working
days for other payments.

If the customer needs the payment earlier than this and their
Bank/State/Branch (BSB) number and nominated bank account have been
enabled to use the New Payments Platform (NPP), NPP should be offered as
the first option. If NPP is not available, next offer Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS).

Most social security pensions and benefits can be paid early when the
customer is in severe financial hardship due to exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances. Service Officers are to offer other assistance
before offering an urgent payment or when the customer is not eligible
for an immediate payment.

For a list of eligible payments for:

-   an urgent payment, see Urgent payments due to exceptional and
    unforeseen or extraordinary circumstances
-   a hardship advance, see Making a decision about a hardship advance
    or anticipated payment

Authentication

Make sure the customer record accessed is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
before assessing or issuing an immediate payment. See Authenticating a
Centrelink customer.

If the customer contacts in person, it is preferable they provide at
least 1 photo identity document for a comparison. If this is not
available and the Service Officer doubts they are speaking with the
customer, they must ask more authentication questions. These must not be
limited to details the customer's friends and relatives know such as
their date of birth or how many children are in the family. The
questions must be searching, but must not be so personal as to be
intrusive. If appropriate, explain to the customer why they are being
asking these questions.

If the Service Officer doubts they are speaking to the customer, do not
release information. Verbally deny the urgent payment application.

The Resources page has links to the Confirming your identity (SS231)
form and the Confirm your identity page on the Services Australia
website.

Related links

Payment delivery

Immediate payment by payment method the New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Weekly payments

Return to Australia procedures for Service Centre and Smart Centre Call
staff

Urgent payment requests for Income Management

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
