
Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW 003-21073020

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has ended. Staff will only assess
online claims for this event that were lodged before the claiming period
ended or phone claims where special circumstances apply.

Due to changes in the relevant areas deemed a COVID-19 hotspot for
different parts of New South Wales since August 2021, staff must
carefully check the impact reason and relevant area a customer is
claiming under.

For staff not trained in processing claims, complete a cold
(unannounced) transfer to 'ISP200 COVID-19 Disaster Payment' in Services
Australia Workspace.

If a customer calls about the status of their claim or automatic
payment, see Status of claim - customer calls to enquire for what to
tell the customer.

The claiming period for some relevant periods has ended. Staff will only
assess online claims lodged before a claiming period ended.

This document outlines eligibility, payment rates and claiming options
for income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW.

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

The income support payment customers – COVID-19 Disaster Payment is
another payment under the COVID-19 Disaster Payments. See COVID19
Disaster Payment for:

-   Purpose of the payment
-   Identity requirements
-   Non-Australian residents and eligible visas
-   Claiming options
-   Payment methods
-   Taxable information
-   Exempt income for income tests
-   No Tax File Number (TFN) requirements

See Assessing income support payment customer COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims for how to assess:

-   Phone claims
-   Online claims

See Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment for how to record and code claims,
including:

-   Running the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow
-   Escalation of claims by Level 1 Helpdesk/Technical Peer Support
    (TPS)
-   Quality on Line (QOL)

To receive a payment

To receive a payment a customer must:

-   be unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual
    income because of a state public health order for restricted
    movement, and
-   meet the general eligibility criteria

General eligibility

For online claims for this payment, do not contact customers to confirm
online claim details unless advised to do so by the Level 2 Helpdesk.

Do not follow this procedure for any other event.

A customer qualifies if they meet all of the following for the same day
of at least 1 day in the relevant period:

if receiving an income support payment, that has a current (CUR) status
(including zero rate customers) in the income support payment relevant
periods. Note: customers with a pending, assessed (ASS) or suspended
(SUS) status are not considered to be receiving an income support
payment. See COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW

an Australian resident (through legal permanent residence and residing
in Australia) or a holder of a visa class permitted to work in
Australia, (to check these see Resources for visa subclasses), and in
Australia at the time of their claim

at least 17 years old

impacted as they either:

-   live or work in a relevant area subject to a state public health
    order for restricted movement that is a deemed a COVID-19 hotspot by
    the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer
-   were present in a COVID-19 hotspot at the time the restricted
    movement was declared and are now subject to a second public health
    order that restricts their movement in the state or territory they
    are currently in, or
-   live or work in a state or territory that has an area subject to a
    state public health order for restricted movement by the
    Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer

would have worked on or after the eighth day of a state public health
order for restricted movement in Sydney and Greater Sydney or would have
worked on or after the first day of a state public health order for
restricted movement in All Other Areas NSW

not received the COVID-19 Disaster Payment for the same relevant period,
or part thereof, and

has not received or will not receive any of the following payments, for
any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment relevant period they are
claiming for:

-   state pandemic payment
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   state small business payment
-   Dad and Partner Pay
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL),
    Note: staff must consider the period a payment was paid for not the
    date the customer received a payment.

have insufficient appropriate paid leave entitlements including any
special pandemic leave or not receiving pandemic-related paid leave
entitlements or will use them up during the same relevant period

for any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment relevant period they are
claiming for, their employer has not received or will not receive the
Retaining Domestic Airline Capability (RDAC) payment on their behalf.
Note: staff must consider the period the payment was paid for, not the
date the employer received the payment on the customer’s behalf

To receive a payment, customers must also be unable to attend work and
therefore unable to earn their usual income due to a state public health
order for restricted movement.

There is no liquid assets criteria for this event.

To be eligible for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment after New South Wales
reaches

80% full vaccination of its population who are aged 16 years and older,
a customer must:

-   have received a COVID-19 Disaster Payment in relevant period 12, and
-   continue to meet the eligibility criteria

A customer who is in gaol or imprisoned is not eligible for the COVID-19
Disaster Payment.

If a customer’s employer has not allowed them to attend work and earn
their usual income, as they are not vaccinated against COVID-19, the
customer may be eligible if they meet all eligibility criteria.

Self-employed customers can have the same work and home address.

Customers involved in a trust or company

Customers who only derive their income from a trust or company
(distributions/dividends) are not eligible:

-   a customer must be working and due to the restricted movement be
    unable to work and therefore unable to earn an income
-   distributions/dividends will not count as employment as the
    restricted movement is not affecting their income

Company directors

A customer who is a company director, even when they draw a wage from
the business, cannot receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment if the
business has received a state small business payment.

The customer may be eligible to receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment
if:

-   the business has not received a state small business payment,
-   the customer draws a wage from the business, and
-   all other eligibility criteria is met

For help assessing eligibility:

-   see the scenarios
-   contact the Level 1 Helpdesk/Technical Peer Support (TPS)

3 impact reasons

Due to changes in the relevant areas deemed a COVID-19 hotspot for
different parts of New South Wales since August 2021, staff must
carefully check which impact reason and relevant area a customer is
claiming under.

Note: although it has been reported that some parts of New South Wales
are no longer in ‘lockdown’ they are still:

-   subject to a restricted movement, and
-   deemed a COVID-19 hotspot

COVID-19 hotspot areas are:

-   decided by the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer, and
-   not the same as ‘stay at home orders’ which are decided by
    state/territory governments

Customers claiming the Income support payment customers - COVID-19
Disaster Payment can claim under 1 of 3 impact reasons.

Impact reason 1

Customers who live or work in a relevant area deemed a COVID-19 hotspot
can apply under the following reason if they are unable to work and earn
their usual income:

-   live or work in a relevant area subject to a state public health
    order for restricted movement that is a deemed a COVID-19 hotspot by
    the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer

Impact reason 2

Customers who were present in a relevant area deemed a COVID-19 hotspot
can apply under the following reason if they are unable to work and earn
their usual income:

-   were present in a COVID-19 hotspot at the time the restricted
    movement was declared and are now subject to a second public health
    order that restricts their movement in the state or territory they
    are currently in

Impact reason 3

In New South Wales, customers not living or working in a relevant area
deemed COVID-19 hotspot can apply under the following third reason if
they are unable to work and earn their usual income:

live or work in a state or territory that has an area subject to a state
public health order for restricted movement by the Commonwealth Chief
Medical Officer

-   Note: for online claims, this shows as ‘I am impacted by a COVID-19
    restricted movement, but do not live, work and was not present in a
    COVID-19 hotspot area’

See Relevant areas.

Unable to work and earn usual income

To receive a payment, customers must be ‘unable to attend work and
therefore unable to earn their usual income due to a state public health
order for restricted movement’.

This means the customer cannot earn their usual amount of income from
any employer (existing or new).

That is, if a customer has lost income from an employer, but is able to
regain the same lost income from a new employer, they:

-   can attend work and earn their usual income, and
-   are not eligible to receive a payment

Reasons a person may be unable to attend work and earn their usual
income

A person may be unable to attend work and earn their usual income for a
number of reasons related to the restricted movement conditions. This
includes where customers:

-   are not permitted or unable to work from home
-   cannot attend work due to caring responsibilities
-   are not vaccinated against COVID-19
-   have an exemption from wearing a mask, however, cannot work because
    of a state public health order mandating mask wearing (this must be
    because of a state public health order and not because of a
    condition an employer has placed on a person’s employment)

Unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual income
means the customer, in the relevant period, must have lost at least:

-   8 hours of work, or
-   1 full day of work

A full day of work does not need to be at least 8 hours.

For example: a customer normally works a 3 hour shift during the
relevant period and cannot attend that shift because of the restricted
movement. The customer meets the 'unable to attend work and therefore
unable to earn their usual income' criteria as they have lost 1 full day
of work in the relevant period.

If a customer does not lose 1 full day of work, they must lose at least
8 hours of work in the relevant period.

For example:

-   A customer normally works 1 x 10 hour shift during the relevant
    period. They work 5 hours of that shift. The customer does not meet
    the 'unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual
    income' criteria as they have not lost at least 8 hours of work or 1
    full day of work in the relevant period
-   A customer normally works 2 x 10 hours shifts during the relevant
    period. They work 5 hours each day of those 2 shifts. The customer
    does meet the 'unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn
    their usual income' criteria as they have lost 10 hours of work in
    the relevant period.

See payment amounts.

Relevant periods

-   Relevant period 1: 27 July to 2 August 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 2: 3-9 August 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 3: 10-16 August 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 4: 17-23 August 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 5: 24-30 August 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 6: 31 August to 6 September 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 7: 7-13 September 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 8: 14-20 September 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 9: 21-27 September 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 10: 28 September to 4 October 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 11: 5-11 October 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 12: 12-18 October 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 13: 19-25 October 2021 inclusive

If a customer:

claims for relevant period 1 or onwards, they will automatically receive
a payment for all future relevant periods (they do not need to lodge a
new claim), unless they advise of a change in circumstances that changes
the rate of payment or where the state reaches 70% full vaccination, see
Where automatic payments stop

does not claim for relevant period 1, claims cannot be lodged until the
claiming period for a relevant period starts:

-   workflows will only be available on the last day after the end of a
    relevant period

Note: the length of the relevant period does not impact the rate of the
automatic payment.

There are different claiming periods for each relevant period. See
Timeframes for claiming.

Where automatic payments stop

When New South Wales reaches 70% full vaccination of its population who
are aged 16 years and older:

-   automatic payments will stop
-   customers must reapply for each relevant period

Customers in New South Wales receiving automatic payments will receive
their final automatic payment for relevant period 11.

To continue receiving COVID-19 Disaster Payment from relevant period 12,
customers must reapply for each relevant period.

Note: automatic payments will continue to apply to all claims for
relevant periods up to and including relevant period 11.

Customers who previously claimed:

-   online, should continue to use their myGov account to apply
-   over the phone, can now claim online. See Claiming options

An abridged claim process will apply in certain circumstances.

COVID-19 Disaster Payment ending

When New South Wales reaches 80% full vaccination of its population who
are aged 16 years and older:

-   the payment will reduce over 2 weeks before ending. If this happens
    part way through the relevant period, the customer will get paid the
    full weekly payment for that period

New South Wales reached the 80% full vaccination mark of its population
who are aged 16 years and older on 17 October 2021. This means the
reduction in payment will apply from relevant period 13.

See Payment amount.

Customers requiring further financial assistance after the end of the
COVID-19 Disaster Payment should go to Payment and Service Finder to
find the most appropriate payment and/or service for them.

Relevant areas

There are 3 groups of 'relevant areas':

-   Sydney
-   Greater Sydney
-   All Other Areas in NSW

Due to changes in the relevant areas deemed a COVID-19 hotspot for
different parts of New South Wales since August 2021, staff must
carefully check which impact reason and relevant area a customer is
claiming under.

Note: although it has been reported that some parts of New South Wales
are no longer in restricted movement they are still:

-   subject to a restricted movement, and
-   deemed a COVID-19 hotspot up to an including 18 October 2021

Staff must use the Geospatial tool to determine if a customer lives,
works or was present in an area deemed a COVID-19 hotspot.

If a customer is claiming under the impact reason ‘live or work in a
state or territory that has an area subject to a state public health
order for restricted movement the customer’s residential and/or employer
address must be in New South Wales.

Present in

For income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment, the
eligibility criteria covers whether a customer lives, works or has been
present in (visited) a relevant area.

The area must be:

-   declared a COVID-19 hotspot, and
-   under period of restricted movement

A second public health order:

-   is a state or territory public health order that restricts a
    person's movement, due to them being in a COVID-19 hotspot that was
    also under a restricted movement order at the time they were there,
    even if they are now in another location
-   includes stay at home orders, self-quarantine or mandatory
    (supervised) quarantine
-   can differ depending on the home state or territory

The address the customer was present in within the COVID-19 hotspot area
will be checked using the Geospatial tool to make sure the relevant area
was 'declared a COVID-19 hotspot' and is under a period of restricted
movement.

Earnings reporting

Customers must have reported income to either Centrelink or the
Department of Veterans' Affairs:

At least once between 29 April 2021 and the start date of the relevant
period being claimed, or

Any time before the start date of the relevant period being claimed for,
where:

-   their income has not varied since 29 April 2021 and the customer is
    not required to report income, or
-   self-employed and the last report was before 29 April 2021 but the
    ongoing income was declared

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) are not subject to earnings reporting for the income support
payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment.

Insufficient appropriate leave or pandemic related paid leave entitlements

To get the COVID-19 Disaster Payment, a customer must have 'insufficient
appropriate paid leave entitlements (including any special pandemic
leave) or pandemic related paid leave entitlements, or will use them up
during the same relevant period'.

Appropriate leave includes paid special pandemic leave.

Insufficient appropriate leave means the customer:

-   has no appropriate leave entitlements under a relevant industrial
    instrument or by agreement with their employer including any special
    pandemic leave
-   does not have enough days of appropriate leave to cover the relevant
    period, or
-   the employer is unable to pay appropriate leave entitlements because
    of financial hardship

Appropriate leave does not include:

-   annual leave
-   long service leave
-   unpaid leave
-   another leave type they are not entitled to access, such as paid
    sick and carer's leave or compassionate leave when they have been
    stood down without pay by their employer under the Fair Work Act

Customers do not need to take:

accrued leave entitlements such as:

-   annual leave
-   long service leave
-   unpaid leave

leave they are not entitled to access if they have been stood down
without pay by their employer under the Fair Work Act, for example:

-   paid sick leave
-   carer’s leave
-   compassionate leave

However, if a customer is receiving any of the above leave types,
including pandemic related leave entitlements, during the entire
relevant period, they:

-   have not lost income, and
-   are not eligible to receive the income support payment customers -
    COVID-19 Disaster Payment

For unpaid leave, while the customer may have lost income, they would
not meet the ‘would have worked’ criteria. That is, if a person is on
unpaid leave, they would not have worked even if the restricted movement
did not occur.

If appropriate leave or pandemic related leave entitlements do not cover
the entire relevant period the customer meets this eligibility
requirement.

For example, if a customer has leave entitlements, including pandemic
related leave entitlements, that cover 3 days of the relevant period,
they meet this eligibility requirement. Note: the customer must meet all
eligibility requirements for at least 1 day in the remaining period.

A customer will not meet this eligibility requirement if appropriate
leave or pandemic related paid leave entitlements they have received or
will receive cover the full relevant period.

Payment amount

If the customer is eligible, the payment amount is $200.

The payment cannot be paid pro rata. The customer must be paid the full
amount of $200.

When New South Wales reaches 80% full vaccination of its population who
are aged 16 years and older, the rate of payment will reduce over 2
weeks before ending.

New South Wales reached the 80% full vaccination of its population who
are aged 16 years and older mark on 17 October 2021.

Customers will receive their last full payment of $200 in relevant
period 12. The next two payments for customers who claim the income
support payment rate will be:

Next payment (relevant period 13):

-   $100

Final payment:

-   no payment will be made

The COVID-19 Disaster Payment will stop after this final payment.

Maximum number of payments

Do not process more than 1 payment of COVID-19 Disaster Payment in 1
day, see Payment methods.

Customers cannot receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment for:

-   the same relevant period, or part thereof
-   relevant periods that overlap

Timeframes for claiming

The claiming period for this event has ended. Staff will only assess
online claims for this event that were lodged before the claiming period
ended or phone claims where special circumstances apply.

There are different claiming periods for each relevant period. Claims
cannot be lodged until the claiming period starts. Workflows are
available on the last day of a relevant period.

For the relevant period from:

27 July to 2 August 2021 inclusive (relevant period 1), the claiming
period

-   starts 3 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 30 August 2021

3-9 August 2021 inclusive (relevant period 2), the claiming period

-   starts 9 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 30 August 2021

10-16 August 2021 inclusive (relevant period 3), the claiming period

-   starts 16 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 6 September 2021

17-23 August 2021 inclusive (relevant period 4), the claiming period

-   starts 23 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 13 September 2021

24-30 August 2021 inclusive (relevant period 5), the claiming period

-   starts 30 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 20 September 2021

31 August to 6 September 2021 inclusive (relevant period 6) the claiming
period

-   starts 6 September 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 27 September 2021

7-13 September 2021 inclusive (relevant period 7) the claiming period

-   starts 13 September 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 4 October 2021

14-20 September 2021 inclusive (relevant period 8) the claiming period

-   starts 20 September 2021
-   end 11.59 pm 11 October 2021

21-27 September 2021 inclusive (relevant period 9) the claiming period

-   starts 27 September 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 18 October 2021

28 September to 4 October 2021 inclusive (relevant period 10) the
claiming period

-   starts 4 October 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 25 October 2021

5-11 October 2021 inclusive (Relevant period 11) the claiming period

-   starts 11 October 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 1 November 2021

Customers claiming from relevant period 12 onwards will need to lodge a
new claim for each new relevant period. Customers who have previously
lodged a full claim can use the abridged claim process.

12-18 October 2021 inclusive (Relevant period 12) the claiming period

-   starts 18 October 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 8 November 2021

New South Wales has reached 80% full vaccination of its population who
are aged 16 years and older. Payment amounts for the following relevant
period will reduce before stopping. See Payment amount.

19-25 October 2021 inclusive (Relevant period 13) the claiming period

-   starts 25 October 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 15 November 2021.

This will be final COVID-19 Disaster Payment for income support payment
customers in New South Wales.

The Resources page has links to the relevant areas and periods,
Geospatial tool, scenarios, visa subclass numbers, contact details, the
Services Australia website and Templates

Related links

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims

Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment and change of
circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
