
Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First 003-03050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

For the New South Wales Floods – July 2022, DRA and NZ DRA claims cannot
be rejected if a customer has claimed for a non-declared Local
Government Area (LGA) in New South Wales and meets all other eligibility
criteria. All other DRA and NZ DRA claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria can be rejected. See the Process page

This document explains how to record and code Disaster Recovery
Allowance (DRA) and DRA for New Zealand non-protected Special Category
(subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA) claims. NZ DRA was known as
ex-gratia DRA.

Staff not trained for DRA and NZ DRA

Before processing DRA or NZ DRA claims, staff must complete technical
training. Line managers will let Service Officers know about training
requirements.

If not trained in taking DRA or NZ DRA claims, see Claiming emergency
payments.

Processing claims

Fully assess the customer's eligibility before coding the claim.

It will depend on the claim type (DRA or NZ DRA) and if an event has the
online claim/Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) channel activated as to where
the payment will be processed.

For DRA events activated with:

-   an online claim/ACC, process using Process Direct
-   no online claim/ACC, process using the Disaster Recovery Payment
    Claims workflow in Customer First

For all NZ DRA events, the way claims are received (online/ACC or verbal
claim template) is outlined in the event specific file. All claims are
processed using the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow in
Customer First.

Only customers who hold a non-protected 444 Visa can be paid NZ DRA.
Residency screens must be checked, as customers may not always provide
accurate residency details in their claim responses. For more details
about the residence rules and check the status, see Table 1 in Australia
Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens.

For claims processed in Process Direct and Customer First, payments are
always made using the FSP (Flexible Support Payment) subsystem of ISS.

Documenting standards and Fast Notes

This information only applies if the online claim/ACC is not available
for the event.

Record all relevant information as per the Online Document Recording
(ODR) standards.

For verbal claims, staff must document the discussion with the customer
using the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim template.

The following Fast Notes are in Customer First:

DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim for copying the completed DRA/NZ DRA verbal
claim template. This becomes the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim DOC

DRA/NZ DRA Granted for successful claims

DRA/NZ DRA Rejected for unsuccessful claims

Fast Note to record a partner's claim for the event when the partner has
other workflows blocking the customer’s DRA or NZ DRA claim

-   EVENT NAME DRA CLM
-   EVENT NAME NZ DRA CLM

Rejecting claims

Only reject unsuccessful claims once there is formal approval to reject
claims for the event.

Approval is given by staff communication channels and is published in
Current emergency management events.

LGA not declared

Do not reject a claim if all of the following apply:

-   approval has not been given to reject claims
-   the customer is claiming for a Local Government Area (LGA) that has
    not been declared
-   the customer meets all other eligibility criteria and would receive
    a payment if their LGA was declared

Payment methods

Customers will receive payments in:

-   their nominated Australian bank account, or
-   their nominee's Australian bank account if they have a payment
    nominee

If updating a bank account for a current customer, make sure the
customer can provide their previous bank account details.

Payments for DRA and NZ DRA are by direct credit and will deliver
overnight into the customer's nominated bank account.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer may need a third party (a person or organisation) to act on
their behalf when claiming DRA or NZ DRA. See Appointing nominees and
Obligations of nominees.

A nominee’s identity must be established before an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form is
processed.

If there are concerns about a nominee’s identity or claim information
provided by a nominee, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

Claims

can be lodged by a correspondence nominee

cannot be lodged by a:

-   Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority or
-   payment nominee

Only a payment nominee can get a payment on a customer’s behalf.

Customers claiming DRA/NZ DRA who have a Payment Nominee arrangement, do
not need their claim to be processed in the !FFAP system. Process these
claims following standard procedure.

Quality On Line

QOL standards for all events where claims are processed in Customer
First is standard. Staff will be notified of any changes for specific
events.

Desktop messaging

The DEMC service is available for all emergency payments, including DRA
and NZ DRA. Use this service to send an SMS to customers to improve the
chances of contacting them.

After claims have been granted

See Managing DRA and NZ DRA after grant for:

-   Coding earnings
-   Actioning POI requirements once DRA or NZ DRA is granted with an
    exemption
-   Actioning TFN requirements once DRA is granted with an exemption
-   11 week transition review
-   Transferring to another payment
-   Cancellation of DRA or NZ DRA
-   Restoring DRA or NZ DRA
-   Voluntary surrender
-   If DRA or NZ DRA should not have been paid to a customer

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Help from Technical Peer Support

If staff need help to finalise a claim, they must not call Technical
Peer Support unless a customer is on the phone. See Resources for
details.

The Resources page has links and information to help staff process
claims and help customers.

Related links

Claiming emergency payments

Closed emergency management events

Current emergency management events

DRA and NZ DRA

Eligibility and new claim procedure for Special Benefit (SpB)

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

Emergency management events

Managing DRA and NZ DRA after grant

National Emergency Call Centre Surge Capability (NECCSC)

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Processing Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) claims in Process Direct

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Storing documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
