
Rates of payment for Special Benefit (SpB) 003-08040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the rate of Special Benefit (SpB) paid, as it is
not a set amount. It is at the discretion of the delegate, taking into
account the degree of support the customer needs. This makes SpB
different from other payments. Staff need to decide what the customer’s
maximum rate of SpB entitlement is. Only SpB processing teams can
process SpB claims and reviews.

On this Page:

Maximum rate for SpB

Regardless of circumstances, the rate of payment cannot exceed the rate
the customer would receive of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance
(YA) or Austudy, if the customer was qualified for one of those payments
and the payment was payable.

If the customer is single and has a dependent child, they may be
eligible for the higher 'single with child' rate of benefit. To be
eligible the child needs to meet the general definition of a dependent
child.

Customer’s complete reviews as a requirement to remain on payment and
the review process may change the rate. The Payment Summary (PS) may
show no future payment or reduced rate when the review is outstanding or
pending processing.

Note: Adult study rules for SpB mean that Austudy rates may be applied
in rare cases.

Exception: for Category ACC (Australian Citizen Child), the maximum
rates will vary based on the family unit’s situation.

Reduced rate for SpB

The rate of SpB may reduce because of:

-   Parental Means Test
-   personal income, or
-   in kind or financial support received by the customer

Other than Parental Means, free board and/or free lodgings, income is
deducted dollar for dollar from the SpB payment.

For free board and/or lodgings, an amount is deducted from the rate
calculated after the income test is applied, so that the customer is
left with:

-   one-third as the rate of SpB payable, if both board and lodging are
    provided, or
-   two-thirds as the rate of SpB payable if only lodging is provided

If the free board and lodging is provided on a temporary basis only,
there should be no deduction. Free board and lodging is regarded as
temporary if it is provided for no more than 6 weeks.

This is significant where board and lodging is provided pending the SpB
claim outcome. The delegate should make sure that the free board and
lodging is in fact only temporary. However, if the customer is receiving
the YA living at home rate, the rate of SpB would not be further
reduced.

Additional payments for SpB

In addition to SpB, customers may also receive some or all of the
following add-on payments:

-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA)
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL)
-   Energy Supplement
-   Education Entry Payment (EdEP)
-   Work for the Dole (WFD) Supplement
-   Pension Supplement for eligible customers of Age Pension age

The Resources page has examples of applying the Special Benefit income
test in various family situations.

Contents

Determining an exemption from income management for certain customers
receiving Special Benefit (SpB)

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Special Benefit (SpB) categories

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets test

Special Benefit (SpB) available funds test

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
