
Processing Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) claims in Process Direct 003-21122144

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

All DRA claims:
- must be processed in Process Direct
- must not be processed in Customer First

If there is a need to contact the customer or issue a Request for
Information letter, review the entire claim to check all information
needed. This will make sure all information to assess the claim can be
addressed in a single contact.

For the New South Wales Floods – July 2022, DRA and NZ DRA claims cannot
be rejected if a customer has claimed for a non-declared Local
Government Area (LGA) in New South Wales and meets all other eligibility
criteria. All other DRA and NZ DRA claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria can be rejected. See the Process page.

This document explains how to process DRA claims in Process Direct when
the online claiming channel has been activated for the disaster event.

NZ DRA claims

All NZ DRA claims are processed in Customer First.

See Processing DRA and all NZ DRA claims in Customer First.

Check which system to use

From 2022, most DRA claims will be processed in Process Direct. However,
Service Officers must always check the processing instructions in
Current emergency management events.

For DRA claims to be processed in Customer First, see Processing DRA and
all NZ DRA claims in Customer First.

Processing DRA claims in Process Direct

Only staff trained in processing DRA should process claims. Before
processing DRA claims, staff must complete technical training. Line
managers will let Service Officers know about training requirements.

Use Process Direct to review the DRA claim information and to process
the claim once all required information is available. Staff are not to
select or cancel any activities on the Activity List (AL) screen in
Customer First if the event procedure says claims are to be processed in
Process Direct.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the DRA claim is submitted
online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   has details provided by the customer or their correspondence nominee
    online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a DRA claim activity
-   lists evidence the customer has been asked to provide when
    submitting the claim
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information and
    make referrals

Records with a payment nominee arrangement

Claims with a payment nominee cannot be processed in Process Direct. The
Service Officer assessing the claim must:

-   check any nominee arrangements
-   if required confirm the nominee arrangements with the customer
-   assess the claim for eligibility
-   contact Technical Peer Support (eligible and ineligible claims), who
    will escalate the claim to the Level 2 Helpdesk for completion using
    the payment query template
-   not escalate these claims via Roxy

Documenting standards

The system will generate a Note detailing the outcome of the claim. It
will meet Online Document Recording (ODR) standards.

Staff can add any relevant information before finalising the claim, or
as an annotation.

Rejecting claims

Do not reject unsuccessful claims until there is formal approval to
reject claims for the event. If the customer does not meet the
eligibility criteria, however approval to reject has not been provided,
the claim should be put on hold.

Approval is given by staff communication channels and published in the
Operational Blueprint for the event. See Current emergency management
events for links to these Operational Blueprints.

LGA not declared

As declared areas are often expanded after the initial activation,
claims for customers in areas outside the declared LGAs are placed on
hold pending formal approval to reject.

Do not reject a claim if all of the following apply:

-   approval has not been given to reject claims
-   the customer is claiming for a Local Government Area (LGA) that has
    not been declared
-   the customer meets all other eligibility criteria and would receive
    a payment if their LGA was declared

Payment methods

Customers will receive DRA payments in their:

-   nominated Australian bank account, or
-   nominee's Australian bank account if they have a payment nominee

Note: the Nominee Link Summary (NOLS) screen will show nominee
information, however, it does not show if the customer is a nominee or
has a nominee.

This information can be viewed on the Customer Summary screen in
Customer First, under Relationships and next to the Nominee: field.

If updating a bank account for a current customer during an Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC), make sure the customer can provide their previous
bank account details.

Payments for DRA are by direct credit and will deliver overnight into
the customer’s nominated bank account.

Help from Technical Peer Support

If staff need help to finalise a claim, they must not call Technical
Peer Support unless a customer is on the phone. See Resources for
details.

Incorrect event or payment claimed

When staff assessing a claim (that has not been finalised) identify a
customer has claimed for the incorrect event or payment, staff will:

-   cancel the customer’s claim
-   run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) under the correct event and/or
    payment, and
-   clearly document the customer’s record with actions taken and why
    they were taken

Note: the cancelled claim will show on the customer’s Online Account. If
a customer calls to enquire, staff will explain why the event or payment
type was changed.

If a customer’s claim has already been finalised and a claim decision
made, do not change the decision.

Claimed the incorrect event

An example of claiming the incorrect event is where the:

-   employment address details provided by a customer may be in the
    local government area (LGA) of Ballina which is located in New South
    Wales, however, the event claimed is the South East Queensland
    Floods, February 2022
-   date of impact provided by a customer is 22 February 2022 (South
    East Queensland Floods, February 2022), however, the event claimed
    is the Queensland Floods, January 2022

Claimed the incorrect payment

Claimed the incorrect payment is where a customer has claimed:

-   DRA instead of NZ DRA, or
-   NZ DRA instead of DRA

Staff may not identify this until screens in the Residency Task Selector
are checked.

If a customer should have claimed NZ DRA but claimed DRA, customer
contact must be made to request evidence of the NZ DRA customer’s
participation in the Australian taxation system

See the Review claim details step in Table 1.

Customers claiming DRA or NZ DRA and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

A customer may be eligible for DRA or NZ DRA and Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment. However, staff need to carefully check the reason for the
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claim:

-   if the self-isolation, quarantine or caring period came first, then
    the customer would claim Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and could
    lodge a claim for DRA or NZ DRA after the self-isolation, quarantine
    or caring period ended
-   if the disaster affected the customer’s ability to earn or derive
    income first, then the customer’s eligibility for Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment would be dependent on if they were working any
    hours whilst receiving DRA or NZ DRA

See the DRA and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment scenarios.

Quality Management Application

Claims will be checked for accuracy through the Quality Management
Application (QMA).

QMA identifies which work items need checking based on the auto sampling
model.

Desktop messaging

The DEMC service is available for all emergency payments, including DRA.
Use this service to send an SMS to customers to improve the chances of
contacting them.

After claims have been granted

See Managing DRA and NZ DRA payments after grant for:

-   coding earnings
-   actioning POI requirements once DRA or NZ DRA is granted with an
    exemption
-   actioning TFN requirements once DRA or NZ DRA is granted with an
    exemption
-   11 week transition review
-   transferring to another payment
-   cancellation of DRA or NZ DRA
-   restoring DRA or NZ DRA
-   voluntary surrender
-   if DRA or NZ DRA should not have been paid to a customer

The Resources page has links and information to help staff process
claims and help customers.

Related links

Claiming emergency payments

Closed emergency management events

Current emergency management events

DRA and NZ DRA

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

Emergency management events

Managing DRA and NZ DRA payments after grant

National Emergency Call Centre Surge Capability (NECCSC)

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Storing documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
