
COVID-19 Disaster Payment claim or automatic payment - customer calls to enquire 003-21082456

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to help a customer who calls to ask about the
status of their COVID-19 Disaster Payment claim or automatic payment.

Do not process Abridged Customer Claims, as these are finalised
automatically. This can take up to 14 calendar days. Do not contact
Technical Peer Support about un-finalised abridged claims. Do not tell a
customer to withdraw an abridged claim and resubmit it, as this may
cause further delays.

Customer asks about their claim or payment including automatic payment

A customer may contact Services Australia to ask about:

-   the status of their claim
-   why they have not received an automatic payment or why their payment
    rates have reduced
-   returning a payment they have already received
-   the decision made on their claim
-   withdrawing their abridged claim
-   providing identity documents as they were told during their phone
    claim to attend in person to provide identity documents within 112
    days

Note: staff must not process (grant or reject) abridged claims.

Status of a claim

A customer's claim may have been:

granted but not paid, as more than 1 payment was finalised on the same
day
Note: 2 payments cannot be released on the same day for any customer
under the Flexible Support Payment (FSP) system (including COVID-19
Disaster Payment)

pending rejection

received by Services Australia but not yet assessed

assessed, but specialist staff have tried to make outbound contact to
clarify information before finalising the claim

-   for example, payment nominee bank details

granted but not successfully delivered to the customer's bank account
(also known as 'rejected')

Automatic payment

There are a few reasons why an automatic payment may be not
paid/delayed, including:

a change in circumstances

where the state or territory has not reached 70% full vaccination,
lodging a claim for a relevant period before the start of their
automatic payments

the customer opted out

it can take about 8 days from the start of the next relevant period

payment has not been successfully delivered to the customer's bank
account (also known as 'rejected')

where customers claimed for a relevant area no longer deemed a COVID-19
hotspot and they live in that relevant area

-   if this applies, the heading ‘Where automatic payments stop’ will
    show on the Background page of the Operational Blueprint for the
    event

where a state or territory reaches 70% full vaccination of its
population who are aged 16 years and older

There are no financial hardship escalation processes for automatic
payments. If the customer is claiming the Income support payment (ISP)
customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment, depending on the ISP they are
claiming, there may be financial hardship processes that relate to that
payment.

Returning a payment they have already received

A customer may contact Services Australia to ask if they can return a
payment, including an automatic payment, they have received. There are a
number of ways this can be done. See Processing a returned payment.

Note: do not follow this process if the customer was incorrectly paid or
if there is an error with an automatic payment.

If a claiming period has closed

Depending on the payment the customer is trying to claim, see ‘If a
claiming period has closed’ in:

-   Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims, or
-   Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
    claims

Claim decision

A customer may contact Services Australia to ask why their claim was
rejected or was granted at a different payment rate.

If a customer does not understand or does not agree with the reasons for
a Services Australia decision, they can ask for an explanation of the
decision from a Suitably Skilled Officer. See COVID-19 Disaster Payment
– review process.

If a customer wants to complain about a decision, see Level 1 - Manage
customer complaints and feedback. Customer's complaints should be
referred to the Level 2 Escalated Complaints team if they meet the
customer complaints escalation reasons.

Related links

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims

Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment and change of
circumstances

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - customer paid incorrectly

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - rejecting claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - review process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
