-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to deliver an immediate payment to a
customer's bank account using the RTGS facility.

About RTGS

RTGS is a priority direct credit payment method that can deliver
payments to a customer's bank account within a few hours. RTGS is only
used if the customer's bank account is not reachable by the New Payments
Platform.

The RTGS facility can only be used to issue:

-   urgent payment
-   hardship advance
-   Crisis Payment, or
-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)/Disaster
    Recovery Payment for New Zealand Special Category (subclass 444)
    visa holders (NZ DRP)

Note: NZ DRP was previously known as ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Payment
(ex-gratia DRP).

Priority of payment methods

When issuing these payments, consider the payment method appropriate for
the customer.

The preference is to pay the customer into their bank account by either
direct credit, or priority direct credit (NPP or RTGS). Only consider an
Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card if these options are not
suitable.

The Immediate Payment requests script will check if an account is NPP or
RTGS enabled before displaying it as method payment option.

Availability of RTGS

The hours of operation for the RTGS payment facility are weekdays
between 8:00 am - 3:30 pm (NSW and VIC time). The first payment run for
each day is 9 am.

RTGS can be selected as a payment method after 3:30 pm (NSW and VIC
time), but the payment will not be issued until the next business day.
If the payment is being made to the smaller banks and Credit Unions it
may take up to 2 working days to be received into the customer's
account.

An urgent payment by RTGS will not be available on national or
concurrent public holidays in Sydney and Melbourne or to bank accounts
that are not RTGS enabled. In these cases, if the customer needs the
payment immediately, it is to be issued using NPP. If the customer's
account is not NPP reachable, consideration can be given to issue the
payment by an EBT card so the customer can meet their immediate needs.

The financial institution decides the amount of the fees or charges and
processing timeframes. The customer will need to negotiate any fee
charged with their individual financial institution. Specific RTGS time
frames and fees information are not available to Services Australia.

If an account is NPP reachable, but the payment fails to deliver, it
will automatically re-issue using RTGS if available, or by direct
credit.

NPP and RTGS should only be used if the customer previously had a
regular payment issued to the payment destination (except Crisis Payment
and AGDRP). Customers will not be able to use the self service channels
if they have changed their payment destination before requesting the
urgent payment and have not yet received a regular payment into this
account.

Identifying RTGS payments on the PS Screen

When a payment is granted, it will generally be delivered in one or two
business days depending on the payment type.

For customers granted an immediate payment, staff can reissue some or
all of the payment via the New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS), depending on the customer's financial
institution's capabilities, or via an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
card.

Both the original and immediate payments will display on the Payment
Summary (PS) screen for staff and on the View Payments History for
customers via Centrelink Online Accounts. These payments will display by
most recent delivery date.

The original payment will show the full Gross amount, with the Net
amount reduced by the immediate payment amount delivered via RTGS.

The immediate payment will display under the original payment, and can
be identified by 'RealTime' under the 'Type' column.

Quality On Line (QOL)

If the activity has been selected by QOL, it must be checked
immediately. If QOL is not completed and the RTGS activity released and
received by the RBA before 3:30 pm (NSW and VIC time), the RTGS payment
will not be delivered until the next business day.

Authentication

Make sure the customer record accessed is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
before assessing or issuing, an immediate payment. See Authenticating a
Centrelink customer for a detailed process.

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customers

An urgent payment should only be issued to SRSS customers if the payment
has been delayed due to Centrelink error, and the customer is in severe
financial hardship, see Urgent payment due to Centrelink delay. The
payment can only be processed through the Issue RTGS. Payment guided
procedure in Customer First. The guided procedure is only
visible/available to staff with specialist access.

Issues with access to the guided procedure, or payment of the full
entitlement should be directed to the SRSS Level 1 Helpdesk.

The Resources page has FAQs and more details about payment by RTGS.

Related links

Immediate methods of payment

Immediate payments

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Weekly payments

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method the New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Urgent payment requests for Income Management

Holiday processing arrangements for delayed payments

Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's
request

Payment delivery

Current emergency management events

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
