
Immediate methods of payment 003-10030000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the different methods of an immediate payment to
a customer.

Preferred payment method

This depends on the customer's circumstances and access to banking. The
following immediate payment methods may be available to the customer:

-   Direct credit into their bank account (default option and can
    changed if needed)
-   New Payments Platform (NPP)
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
-   Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card

Note: Rural Agency/Remote Area Service Centres do not have access to EBT
cards.

Advance payments should only be issued by direct credit. This goes into
the customer’s bank account within 2 working days. However, if the
customer would be severely disadvantaged by any delay in accessing the
payment, NPP then RTGS may be used for the advance unless:

-   the customer's Bank/State/Branch (BSB) number is not participating
    in the NPP
-   the customer's individual account is not NPP-enabled
-   a fee is charged to receive an RTGS payment
-   RTGS is not available
-   the customer's bank account is overdrawn
-   the customer is advising a new account. At least 1 regular payment
    from Services Australia must have been paid into this account for it
    to be used for NPP and RTGS, except for emergency payments such as
    Crisis Payment and Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
    (AGDRP)
-   the customer has a passbook account, or
-   an urgent payment is being made due to agency error or delay, and
    payment to a bank account cannot be made by NPP or in real time,
    increasing the delay

Direct credit

In most circumstances, a direct credit payment is delivered to the
customer's bank account in 2 working days, other than for payments made
in the Newstart system that are available the next working day.

New Payments Platform (NPP)

If the customer needs the payment earlier than a direct credit, and
their BSB number has been enabled for the NPP:

-   RTGS will be disabled, and
-   staff should present the NPP as the preferred payment option to the
    customer

However, in order for the payment to be successful, the customer’s
nominated bank account must also be enabled to utilise the NPP.

Successful payments via the NPP will be delivered immediately to the
customer 24 hours a day every day of the year including public holidays.
This payment option will only be presented if the NPP is available.

Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

If the customer needs the payment earlier than a direct credit and
payment via the NPP is not available, RTGS should be offered as the next
available option.

The RTGS facility is operated by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) out
of New South Wales and Victoria.

The hours of operation for RTGS payment are weekdays 8:00 am - 3:30 pm
(NSW and VIC time). The first payment run for each day is 9 am.

An urgent payment by RTGS will not be available on national or
concurrent public holidays in Sydney and Melbourne or to bank accounts
that are not RTGS enabled. In these cases, if the customer needs the
payment immediately, issue it via an EBT card.

The Immediate Payment requests script will check if an account is RTGS
enabled before displaying it as a method of payment option.

RTGS can be selected as a payment method after 3:30 pm (NSW and VIC
time) but the payment will not issue until the next business day.
Payments to the smaller banks and credit unions may take up to 2 working
days to be go into the customer's account.

If the activity has been selected by Quality On Line (QOL), it must be
checked straight away. If QOL is not completed and the RTGS activity
released and received by the RBA before 3:30 pm (NSW and VIC time), the
RTGS payment will not be delivered until the next business day.

Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT) card

An EBT card allows an immediate payment to be paid to the customer
electronically via the use of an Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) card.
Payments via an EBT card are limited to:

-   a maximum of $200 for an urgent payment (early payment of
    fortnightly entitlement), or
-   a maximum of $1,000 if the delay is due to Centrelink error

An EBT card can be used at any ATM. EBT cards cannot be used at EFTPOS
facilities. Any ATM fee charged will be met by Services Australia.

Rural Agency/Remote Area Service Centres

Rural Agency/Remote Area Service Centres do not have access to EBT
cards. Customers must not be referred to these sites to collect a
payment. Due to the remote location of these sites, the method of
payment is restricted to either direct credit, NPP or RTGS.

Authentication

Make sure the customer record is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
prior to assessing or issuing, an immediate payment. See Authenticating
a Centrelink customer for a detailed process.

If the customer contacts in person, it is preferable they also provide
at least 1 photo identity document for a comparison. If this is not
available and the Service Officer doubts they are speaking with the
customer, they must ask further authentication questions. These must not
be limited to details the customer's friends and relatives know such as
their date of birth or how many children are in the family. The
questions must be searching, but must not be so personal as to be
intrusive. If appropriate, explain to the customer why they are being
asked these questions.

If the Service Officer doubts they are speaking to the customer, do not
release information. Verbally deny the urgent payment application.

Contents

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method the New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Related links

Immediate payments

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
