
Special Benefit (SpB) customers with Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) due to expire 003-08030060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to be used in relation to SpB
payments for holders of TPV subclass 447, 451, 695, 785.

TPV to Resolution of Status Visa

TPV subclasses 447, 451, 695 and 785 ceased to be issued after 9 August
2008. After this date, existing TPV holders became eligible to apply for
a new CD 851 Resolution of Status visa. This is a permanent visa and has
a qualifying residence exemption for all Services Australia payments.

Applying for payments

Once the refugee has been issued with a Resolution of Status visa, they
can apply for other Services Australia payments such as JobSeeker
Payment, Parenting Payment etc. Customers who hold TPV subclasses 447,
451, 695 and 785 after 9 August 2008 will continue to hold their TPVs
until they expire or they are granted a CD 851 visa. Note: TPV subclass
785 was reintroduced on 18 October 2013.

Residentially qualified

Holders of visa subclasses 447, 451, 695 and 785 where the end date of
their visa has been reached and they have not had their application for
a permanent Resolution of Status Visa (CD 851) finally determined, cease
to be residentially qualified for Services Australia payments.

These cases should be urgently referred to the National Special Benefit
(SpB) helpdesk for advice and action. Note: TPV subclass 785 was
reintroduced on 18 October 2013.

Red Cross Asylum Seeker Assistance payment

When holders of visa subclass 786 have held their visa for 36 months,
they cease to be eligible for Services Australia payments; they should
approach Department of Home Affairs to test their eligibility for the
Red Cross Asylum Seeker Assistance payment funded by the Department of
Home Affairs.

Expired TPV

Details of the TPV, including a visa end date, are recorded on the Legal
Residence Details (RSLEG) screen. When the visa end date is reached, the
person's SpB is automatically cancelled. In some cases where the end
date of the TPV has been reached, the Department of Home Affairs will
issue a bridging visa which may appear on the first page of the RSLEG
screen. The TPV (without an end date) should appear on another page of
the RSLEG screen. In these cases, the bridging visa and TPV co-exist so
that the person still holds the TPV and still has entitlement to SpB.

Application for permanent residence

The Department of Home Affairs will notify Services Australia National
SpB helpdesk when a final determination has been made about a TPV
holder's application for permanent residence.

There will be 2 possible outcomes:

-   The customer's application for permanent residence and/or further
    protection has been successful and the customer has been granted a
    CD 851 Resolution of Status visa or a Protection visa subclass 866.
    In these cases, the helpdesk will document the customer's record and
    send an ACTDOC with the keyword 'TPVISA' to the customer's home
    service centre, requesting them to invite a claim for a more
    appropriate payment
-   The application for further protection or permanent residence has
    been unsuccessful. In these cases, the customer's TPV will generally
    be cancelled and the Department of Home Affairs may arrange for the
    customer to be deported. The SpB helpdesk will document the
    customer's record, and ask the appropriate Area to cancel payments
    if entitlement to SpB has ceased

No documents

If there are no documents of the type listed in the two possible
outcomes above, the TPV is still valid and payment of SpB should
continue if the person is otherwise qualified. Smart Centre Call Service
Officers who come across these cases should refer them urgently to the
customer's local service centre, via ACTDOC or CALLBACK, for action.

Related links

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
