
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) Top-up 003-22033002

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the help available for Disaster Recovery
Allowance (DRA) Top-up.

This payment is only for customers who:
- receive/d DRA or NZ DRA for the New South Wales Floods – February
2022, and
- had a residential address or worked in the local government area of
Lismore at the time of being impacted by the New South Wales Floods –
February 2022.

Customers may contact because they have not received their final DRA
(Top-Up) payment. To help these customers, see Customer has not received
a payment of the DRA (Top-up) as expected.

Purpose of the DRA (Top-up)

The purpose of the DRA (Top-up) is to help customers significantly
affected by the flooding that occurred in New South Wales in February
2022.

What is the DRA (Top-up)?

If a customer meets the eligibility criteria, the DRA (Top-up) is a
payment of $350 per week, for each week (or part thereof) that they are
eligible for DRA or NZ DRA for the New South Wales Floods - February
2022.

The DRA (Top-up) is:

-   taxable
-   not subject to compulsory income management

Services Australia will pay eligible individuals directly to their
Australian bank account.

Eligibility for the DRA (Top-up)

A customer is eligible for the DRA (Top-up) if they:

-   are eligible to receive DRA or NZ DRA for the New South Wales Floods
    – February 2022, and
-   resided or worked in an eligible area at the time of the New South
    Wales Floods – February 2022

An eligible area is the local government area (LGA) of Lismore.

A customer’s eligibility for the DRA (Top-up) will stop when:

-   their eligibility for DRA or NZ DRA stops during the period of DRA
    or NZ DRA payments, or
-   they cancel their DRA or NZ DRA, or
-   they report their income as equal to or more than the average weekly
    ordinary time earnings (AWOTE) amount (that is, a nil rate of DRA or
    NZ DRA)

A customer’s eligibility for the DRA (Top-up) recommences when they

-   cancelled their DRA or NZ DRA and restore it within the 13 week DRA
    or NZ DRA payment period
-   reported their income as equal to more than the AWOTE and then
    report income less than the AWOTE again

See Managing DRA and NZ DRA payments after grant

Resided in an eligible area

This means a customer has a residential address in one of the eligible
LGAs at the time of the loss of income as a direct result of the
disaster.

Worked in an eligible area

This means a customer’s work activity at the time of the loss of income
as a direct result of the disaster occurred in one of the eligible LGAs.

A person can qualify for the DRA (Top-up) and the:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), or
-   New Zealand Disaster Recovery Payment (NZ DRP)

Eligible area

An eligible area is the local government area (LGA) of Lismore.

To receive the DRA (Top-up), customers must:

-   have received DRA or NZ DRA for the New South Wales Floods –
    February 2022 and
-   resided or worked in an eligible area at the time of being impacted
    by the New South Wales Floods – February 2022

See Eligibility for the DRA (Top-up).

Claiming the DRA (Top-up)

Customers do not need to claim for the DRA (Top-up).

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received a payment of the
DRA (Top-up) as expected, see If customer does not receive payment as
expected.

When a customer will be paid

If a customer is eligible for the DRA (Top-up), DRA or NZ DRA must have
been granted first. That is, the customer must have been eligible to
receive DRA or NZ DRA.

If staff identify a customer did not meet the eligibility criteria for
DRA or NZ DRA, see If staff identify a customer should not have been
paid DRA or NZ DRA.

Rules for payment

First payment of the DRA (Top-up)

-   Will always be an ‘arrears payment’
-   Customers will receive an arrears payment when
    - they have received at least one payment of DRA or NZ DRA (for one
    or more day’s entitlement), and
    - there have been at least 7 days pass since the customer’s income
    loss date
-   Note: where these rules for payment apply, payment can occur from 8
    April 2022 but may occur on any Friday thereafter. This depends on
    when the customer first meets the rules for payment.

Second and subsequent payments of the DRA (Top-up)

-   Will always be a ‘weekly payment’
-   Once an arrears payment is paid, the customer will receive weekly
    payments of the DRA (Top-up) from the following Friday, for any
    remaining weeks they are eligible for DRA or NZ DRA

If the rules for payment are met:

Customers who have already received at least one payment of DRA or NZ
DRA will receive their:

-   first payment (arrears payment) of the DRA (Top-up) on 8 April 2022
    - This will include an arrears payment for any weeks the customer
    has already received DRA or NZ DRA
-   second and subsequent DRA (Top-up) payments of $350 from 15 April
    2022 onwards
    - From 15 April 2022 and each Friday thereafter (22 April, 29 April
    etc.), the customer will receive weekly payments until their DRA or
    NZ DRA entitlement ends

Customers who have DRA or NZ DRA claims granted from 9 April 2022
onwards will receive their:

-   first payment (arrears payment) of the DRA (Top-up) on the next
    payment day for the DRA (Top-up). That is, Friday 15 April, 22 April
    or 29 April etc.
    - For customers who are granted DRA or NZ DRA after 8 April 2022 and
    before 15 April 2022, they will get their first payment (arrears
    payment) on 15th April 2022
-   second and subsequent DRA (Top-up) payments of $350 weekly on the
    same day (Friday) each week until their DRA or NZ DRA entitlement
    ends.

See Scenarios.

Final payment: Once the 13 week entitlement period ends, the Benefit
Status will show as DRA/CAN-EDR. The ‘cancelled’ status may stop the
final DRA (Top-up) from occurring.

Note: there are no part payments of the DRA (Top-up) payment. Customers
should receive the full $350 even if their DRA or NZ DRA entitlement
ends due to reaching full 13 weeks entitlement part way through a week.
If this has not occurred, run the

Non-receipt of DRA Top-up Fast Note.

For help, contact Technical Peer Support.

There are different event codes for the

-   DRA and NZ DRA arrears payment of the DRA (Top-up), and
-   DRA and NZ DRA weekly payment of the DRA (Top-up)

See Event Codes.

See If payments fall out of automation when a customer is eligible to
receive the DRA (Top-up) and they have not received payment as expected.

Automation of payments

DRA (Top-up) will be paid:

-   automatically to DRA customers who do not have a status of cancelled
    (CAN), suspended (SUS) or zero rate (CZR)
-   manually to all NZ DRA customers
-   manually to DRA and NZ DRA customer with a status of CAN, SUS or CZR

Specialist staff with access to the !FFAP screen manually pay DRA
(Top-up) where required.

When the following occurs, staff must contact Technical Peer Support,
who will escalate the query to the Level 2 Helpdesk using the payment
query template. The Level 2 Helpdesk will then forward the details to
Emergency Management Programme

-   If a customer’s DRA or NZ DRA has been cancelled and restored and
    there is a break in their DRA or NZ DRA entitlement. See Restoring
    DRA or NZ DRA
-   If a customer reported their income as equal to more than the
    Average Weekly Ordinary Time Earnings (AWOTE), resulting in a zero
    rate of DRA or NZ DRA for at least a fortnight then report income
    less than the AWOTE again. See Customer is earning, deriving or
    receiving an income
-   Where staff identify a customer did not receive a payment as
    expected. See When a customer will be paid

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received a payment as
expected, staff need to check the customer’s record to determine the
action to take.

See Table 1.

If staff identify a customer should not have been paid DRA or NZ DRA

If staff identify a customer was not eligible to receive the initial
payment of DRA or NZ DRA, these claims must be escalated.

See Table 1 and DRA or NZ DRA was incorrectly paid.

Review

If a customer does not understand or agree with the reason/s for a DRA
(Top-up) decision, they will need to request a review of the original
DRA or NZ DRA decision. See Review and appeal process.

Method of payment

Eligible customers will receive the payment into their nominated
Australian bank account.

The DRA (Top-up) will be paid via the New Payment Platform (NPP).

If an account is NPP reachable, but the payment fails to deliver, it
will automatically re-issue via Real Time Gross Settlement if available,
or via direct credit.

A recoverable payment

Services Australia undertakes checks to identify fraudulent claims.

If the agency does not have power under the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013 to pay an amount of the DRA
(Top-up) to a customer, then the relevant amount is a debt due to the
Commonwealth by the customer, and may be recovered.

See Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments.

The Resources page has:

-   task cards
-   event codes
-   external links
-   contact details

Related links

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

DRA and NZ DRA

Processing DRA claims in Process Direct

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

New South Wales Floods – February 2022

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Assessing Special Benefit (SpB) entitlements

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
