
Assessing and coding COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program December 2020 claims 003-20120240

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 1 November 2021, enquiries relating to the COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program are to be referred directly to Austrade. This includes
requests for late lodgement, updates on claims that are yet to be
finalised and complaints in relation to claim decisions and grant
outcomes. Applicants can contact Austrade via phone on 1300 729 401 or
email at consumertravelsupport@austrade.gov.au.

This document explains how to record and code COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program (TSP) December 2020 claims.

Eligibility and claiming

See COVID-19 Consumer TSP December 2020 for:

-   How to claim
-   Claiming period
-   Eligibility requirements
-   Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for applicants
-   Payment rates
-   Taxable payment details
-   Payment methods
-   Exceptional circumstances
-   Business Hub help
-   Frequently Asked Questions
-   PRODA Helpdesk details

Evidence

During the online claim process, applicants must:

upload the business’ COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program
certificate of tax details (ATO certificate)

upload evidence the business has an active incorporation or registration
with an applicable tourism peak industry body, (only if this was
selected in the online claim)

make a Declaration that they understand:

-   Services Australia may share details provided in their application
-   Giving false or misleading information is a serious criminal offence
-   They will need to repay some or all of the grant if later Services
    Australia decides the business was not entitled to the grant

The grant amount is calculated using a business’ 2019 calendar year GST
turnover amount.

For businesses:

-   not registered for GST and with a 2019 calendar year GST turnover
    amount of between $50,000 and $74,999 (inclusive) the amount is
    calculated using the applicant’s self-declaration of the turnover
    amount
-   registered for GST, the amount is always calculated by using the
    turnover amount in the business’ ATO certificate

Precedent

A precedent has been set by Austrade when an applicant:

-   states the G1 Business Activity Statement (BAS) figure on the
    business’ ATO certificate shows the business’ commission, gross
    profit or income, but
-   believes the ATO certificate should show the business’ total
    transaction value (TTV), gross sales or total ticket sales, and
    wants this figure used in the assessment

When this occurs, Austrade will not:

-   consider special circumstances
-   support the business using an alternative GST turnover amount
-   support the business providing another source for calculating the
    GST turnover amount

The GST turnover amount in the business’ ATO certificate must be used.

While an applicant can appeal a decision made on this basis, Services
Australia:

-   must apply the precedent set by Austrade
-   will not forward these appeals to Austrade to consider under the
    exceptional circumstances review process

The Process page has more details and what to tell applicants.

Access needed

-   Process claims in Process Direct
-   Access is requested using ESSentials

Only staff who have received COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program
training should request access.

Claim activity types

There are 2 types of claim activities, depending on the step the online
application is up to:

On Hold - up to the Review and Hold step and the applicant is waiting
for the business’ ATO certificate before submitting the claim. Do not
process these claims

Submitted - all steps are complete including uploading:

-   a copy of the business’ ATO certificate, and
-   if applicable, proof of active incorporation or registration with an
    applicable tourism peak industry body

Document standards

Staff must complete the Process Direct decision template COVID-19
Consumer Travel Support Program Claim Assessment Summary before
finalising a claim.

Rejecting claims

Claims that do not meet the eligibility requirements can be rejected.

Do not reject claims if:

-   an applicant has not uploaded an ATO certificate, or
-   an ATO certificate is uploaded however the certificate number or
    other information is not visible

Contact the applicant.

Quality Management Application (QMA) checking

QMA checking will be a manual process.

The sampling rate is:

-   a minimum of 10 claims checked through QMA
-   to achieve the minimum correctness rate as per the Proficiency
    requirements

Further claims may be quality checked if the Claim Assessment Summaries
show that application of policy and/or processes are not being followed.

See Updating proficiency for QOL.

Reviews

See COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program December 2020.

Support for staff

Contact the Technical Peer Support. See Service Officer role when
seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres.

If needed, the claim will be escalated by the Technical Peer Support.
They will contact the Level 2 Helpdesk using the Payment Query Template.

See the Escalation of claims by Technical Peer Support table.

Reassessment of claims

Specialist staff will be assigned to a claim when:

-   it has been finalised
-   it has been reviewed, and
-   more action must be taken on the record

These staff will follow a special process outside of Process Direct.

Contents

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program December 2020

Related links

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review (CLK)

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Social work service referral

Quality Management Application (QMA) in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
