
Contact requirements for Crisis Payment (CrP) 003-22061604

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Contact requirements for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Customers can claim a Crisis Payment (CrP) for:

-   Family and Domestic Violence (EXV)
-   Extreme Circumstances Other (EXO)
-   Prison Release (PRI)
-   Humanitarian (HUM) EXV, EXO, PRI or HUM

Customers must submit the claim within 7 days of the extreme
circumstance occurring. The 7 day claim period may be met by contacting
Services Australia about a claim and lodging a claim within 14 days
after the contact day.

This rule does not apply to CrP National Health Emergency.

Note: the occurrence of the extreme circumstance may not be the date the
event happened. See the Date of eligibility tables on the Resources
page.

Contact requirements for CrP National Health Emergency (NHE)

Claims for CrP National Health Emergency must be submitted within 14
days of:

-   entering quarantine or self-isolation, or
-   caring for someone who is in quarantine, or
-   self-isolation after having a COVID-19 test

The 14 day claim period may be met by contacting Services Australia
about a claim and lodging a claim within 14 days after the contact day.

For periods of quarantine/self-isolation starting on or between 1 July
2022 and 19 July 2022, customers must submit a claim for CrP-NHE or make
contact on or before 2 August 2022. Customers have a further 14 days
from the contact date to lodge the claim.

Special Circumstances - extension up to 13 weeks from the contact date

If a customer is considered vulnerable, special circumstances can be
considered. If the customer contacts Services Australia by the seventh
day (or fourteenth day for CrP NHE), but is unable to lodge the claim at
that time, the intent to claim provisions for vulnerable customers can
apply.

This means:

-   customers have an extra 14 days from the date of contact to lodge
    their claim
-   if special circumstances exist that stop the customer from lodging
    the claim within 14 days of their contact, this period can be
    extended up to 13 weeks in some circumstances

Special circumstances may include difficulties meeting the timeframe
because of:

-   living in a remote area, or
-   an emergency such as a natural disaster, or
-   impacted by family and domestic violence, or
-   a humanitarian entrant to Australia

Note: a medical condition of the customer, their partner or the person
they are caring for does not qualify as a special circumstance for a CrP
claim. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Contact

What is considered contact?

Contact for the purposes of claiming a CrP is considered to mean contact
via any available channel (for example, through online channels, at a
Service Centre or via the phone) by a person seeking help in the form of
a social security payment or concession card.

Note: the person does not need to mention a specific payment/concession
card or know what they are eligible for when they make contact, only
that they need help.

For example, a customer calls their regular payment line and explains
that their house burnt down in a fire and they cannot return. The person
asks if there is any extra help that they might be eligible for.

Note: it is not necessary for qualification to be ‘determined’ on the
contact day. It is necessary to be qualified on the contact day.

What is not considered as contact?

Contact by a person via any available channel that deals exclusively
with a payment/concession card the person already receives, is not
considered to be ‘contact’ for the purposes of claiming a CrP.

For example, a customer’s income reporting period happens to fall within
7 days of their house burning down. The customer reports their income
online. After 10 days, the customer calls their regular payment line to
advise that their house burnt down and asks whether there is any help
available to them. Reporting income is not considered ‘contact’ for the
purposes of claiming a CrP. The customer has missed the 7 day timeframe,
and is not eligible for a CrP for this circumstance.

Calculation of the 7 day contact period

If the event happened on a Friday, count 7 calendar days from Saturday.

The customer would need to make contact and seek help before the next
Friday.

If the seventh day falls on a weekend or public holiday, the next
working day would be taken to be the seventh day.

The claim must then be lodged within 14 days of the customer making
contact.

The Resources page has tables explaining the Crisis Payment event
notification date and when the claiming period begins for each category
of Crisis Payment.

Related links

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

New claim for Crisis Payment Other Extreme Circumstances

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment prior to the release of a customer in
prison or psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment for humanitarian entrants newly arrived in
Australia

New claim for Crisis Payment - National Health Emergency

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
