[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the National Redress Scheme for
people who have experienced institutional child sexual abuse.

About the National Redress Scheme

The National Redress Scheme (the Scheme) was established in response to
the recommendations from the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.

The Scheme is an Australian Government program that provides support to
people who were sexually abused as children while in the care of an
institution. The Scheme will run for 10 years until 30 June 2028.

The Department of Social Services (DSS) administers the National Redress
Scheme with support from Services Australia.

An institution is considered an entity that provides, or has at any time
provided, activities, facilities, programs or services of any kind that
provide the means through which adults have contact with children.

It is one way the government is working to acknowledge and help people
who experienced institutional child sexual abuse.

A dedicated phone information service exists. Applications can be lodged
[] online, via myGov by post or in person with Services Australia.

People who can apply to the scheme

A person can apply to the National Redress Scheme if:

they experienced sexual abuse when they were a child (under 18 years of
age), and

-   the abuse happened before 1 July 2018, and
-   an institution was responsible for bringing them into contact with
    the person who abused them, and

they were born before 30 June 2010, and

they are an Australian citizen or permanent resident at the time of
application

Overview of redress outcomes

The National Redress Scheme can help eligible people to access:

-   counselling and psychological services,
-   a redress payment, and
-   a direct personal response from an institution (for example, an
    apology)

If an offer of redress is made, a person can accept any or all of the 3
redress components listed above.

Redress is not compensation. It is about acknowledging the harm done and
supporting people to move forward positively in the way that is best for
them.

Redress payments are non-taxable and protected from Commonwealth debt
recovery processes:

-   payments are exempt from the Social Security income test, but
-   any ongoing income generated by the lump sum and any asset produced
    from the lump sum are assessable under the social security income
    and assets tests

States and territories that have joined the Scheme

All state and territory governments, as well as the Commonwealth have
joined the Scheme. Legislation is in place in all states and territories
to enable non-government institutions to join the Scheme.

Many non-government institutions have joined or have committed to
joining the Scheme. See the National Redress Scheme website for all
institutions that have joined the Scheme. The website also lists
institutions who have not yet joined the Scheme but are taking steps to
do so. Institutions that have refused to join the Scheme are also
identified.

For non-government institutions, the process of joining the Scheme
includes several steps. This means that there may be a delay between the
time that an institution announces it will join the Scheme, and the time
that applications relating to those institutions can be processed. The
Scheme is working very closely with institutions to help this process
happen as quickly as possible.

Roles in administering the Scheme

DSS is responsible for legislation and policy relating to the Scheme,
selection of the Independent Decision Makers (IDM) and all decisions
relating to applications to the Scheme.

Since February 2020, DSS holds responsibility for undertaking service
delivery for the Scheme with support from Services Australia.

The primary roles in the service delivery, administration and decision
making processes are:

Service Officers in Centrelink Service Centres:

-   provide general information on the Scheme, and
-   assistance with Identity Confirmation and document lodgement

DSS Redress Officers:

-   the telephony contact point for people making enquiries and
    applicants during the application process. This team supports
    applicants in the application process, by answering questions
    relating to applications and accessing further assistance from
    specialist areas of Redress to support applicants
-   validate applications and collate information, (including
    information from institutions) to forward to an Independent Decision
    Maker (IDM). DSS Redress Officers notify applicants of the final
    outcome when it is returned from the IDM

Independent Decision Maker (IDM) - appointed by DSS. IDMs:

-   consider all information and make a final decision about the
    application
-   refers the decision back to the DSS Redress Officer
-   Note: DSS Redress Officers notify the applicant, process the
    outcome, including letters and payments

How an applicant can apply for redress

A person can apply for Redress:

-   [] online, via myGov, or
-   using the Application for Redress form

See the Resources page for a link to the National Redress Scheme
website, where people can access the Application for Redress.

Assistance completing the form can be provided by the Scheme, Redress
Support Services and/or appointed nominees.

A DSS Redress Officer will:

-   acknowledge receipt of an Application for Redress, and
-   advise the applicant of the next steps in the process

The application is assessed and once a determination is reached the
applicant and responsible participating institutions are notified of the
outcome.

Six month acceptance period

Applicants have a 6 month period to accept the offer of Redress from the
date of the offer (an extension can be requested to the acceptance
period in exceptional circumstances).

If the applicant does not accept the offer within 6 months, the offer of
Redress is taken to be declined. The applicant cannot apply to the
Scheme again.

If an applicant received an advance payment of Redress from the Scheme,
and then declines their final offer, they must pay back the advanced
amount to the Commonwealth.

Review of decisions

Applicants can request in writing, an internal review of the original
decision within 6 months from the date of the letter of offer. A
different Independent Decision Maker (IDM) conducts the internal review
on the basis that:

-   an IDM cannot review their own decision
-   no additional information will be considered as part of the review,
    and
-   the review of the original decision can result in the outcome being
    affirmed or varied

After a review decision has been made, the applicant cannot request
another review. It is up to the applicant to accept or decline the
review decision, noting there are no further options for review.

Note: if a person's acceptance period is extended, the review period is
also extended.

Revocation of decisions

If the Scheme receives information about an application after it has
been determined but prior to acceptance occurring, a request for
revocation may be made. If a revocation is to occur it is a matter for
the IDM to make a finding on. Once a revocation occurs the original
decision is replaced.

Nominee arrangements for the National Redress Scheme

The Scheme has a different nominee process to other Services Australia
master programs as it is administered under separate legislation.

See Nominees for the National Redress Scheme.

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for applicants and nominees

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity processes for applicants
and their nominees are not the same as for customers of Services
Australia. See Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for the
National Redress Scheme.

The Resources page contains links to Scheme contact information and the
Scheme website (which includes links to the Application for Redress and
Redress Nominee form, information and support service websites).

Contents

National Redress Scheme enquiries and document lodgement in service
centres

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for the National Redress
Scheme

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Related links

Social Work role with individuals linked to the National Redress Scheme
and recording in SWIS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
