
Victorian Storms and Floods - June 2021 003-21061504

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the help available for the Victorian Storms and
Floods - June 2021.

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details, see Operational Blueprint - Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Emergency payments

On 17 June 2021, the Australian Government made a determination under
the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster occurred.

Additional Local Government Areas were declared on:

-   1 July 2021
-   1 October 2021

See LGAs for AGDRP and NZ DRP and LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA.

Payments activated for this event:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand non-protected Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For the Victorian Storms and Floods, June 2021, major disaster means the
severe storms and associated flooding that occurred between 9 June 2021
and 17 June 2021 in Victoria affecting the local government areas of:

-   Bass Coast
-   Baw Baw
-   Cardinia
-   Hepburn
-   Latrobe
-   Macedon Ranges
-   Moorabool
-   Mornington Peninsula
-   South Gippsland
-   Wellington, and
-   Yarra Ranges

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP claims. See the Resources page for
    questions to ask the customer to assess major damage
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

To record and code claims, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

Local Government Areas (LGA) for AGDRP and NZ DRP

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets the LGA criteria.

LGAs declared on 17 June 2021:

-   Hepburn
-   Latrobe
-   Moorabool
-   Yarra Ranges

LGAs declared on 1 July 2021:

-   Baw Baw
-   Cardinia
-   Mornington Peninsula
-   South Gippsland
-   Wellington

LGAs declared on 1 October 2021:

-   Bass Coast
-   Macedon Ranges

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas to confirm if an
address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA.

Do not use Office Locator.

LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets the LGA criteria.

LGAs declared on 17 June 2021:

-   Hepburn
-   Latrobe
-   Moorabool
-   Yarra Ranges

LGAs declared on 1 July 2021:

-   Baw Baw
-   Cardinia
-   Mornington Peninsula
-   South Gippsland
-   Wellington

LGAs declared on 1 October 2021:

-   Bass Coast
-   Macedon Ranges

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas. Use these to confirm
if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA.

Do not use Office Locator.

NZ DRP and NZ DRA tax participation

For NZ DRP and NZ DRA, a customer must have participated in the
Australian taxation system for at least 1 year in the past 3 financial
years:

-   2017-18
-   2018-19
-   2019-20

If they have not, they must do so before 1 October 2022.

Claiming period

Claims must be lodged by 31 May 2022.

Customers can only claim after this time if special circumstances apply.

How to claim

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia website and
intranet.

If a customer calls another agency phone number, complete a warm
(announced) transfer for:

AGDRP NZ DRP claims to:

-   internal transfer number for this event only is 176167
-   full number for this event only is 02 8440 2069 - do not give this
    number to customers

DRA or NZ DRA claims (as staff have been specifically trained for this
event and payment type) to:

-   internal transfer number 171534
-   full number 02 8440 2537- do not give this number to customers. Use
    only if unable to use the internal transfer number

Staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments, see
Claiming emergency payments. This has important steps to follow before
transferring the customer to the correct phone queue.

Rejecting claims

Formal approval has been given to reject claims that do not meet
eligibility criteria, this includes claims for:

-   declared localities, and
-   non-declared localities ( claims held with the keyword NOTLGA)

Before rejecting any claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim Fast
Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure the
customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected. See the Rejecting claims table in either:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

If the customer wants to apply for ACCS, complete an announced (warm)
transfer to the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue using Services
Australia Workspace.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are the
National Recovery and Resilience Agency policy documents for each
payment. Documents include details for this event and customer
scenarios.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to maximum payment rates
-   maps of affected areas
-   forms, scenarios and the Services Australia website

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Recording and coding a DRA and NZ DRA claims

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster
Recovery Allowance (DRA) and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Payment rates for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
