
Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line 003-11040010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Family Relationship Centres and
the Family Relationship Advice Line.

Assistance and services provided

Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line are
2 additional services available for customers with families who are
experiencing relationship difficulties and require assistance.

Assistance provided by the Centres and the Advice Line includes
information about family relationships, the family law system and
services that can assist families, as well as referrals to appropriate
services.

They will both provide advice about the impact of conflict on children,
appropriate arrangements for children after parental separation and the
development of parenting plans. The Centres will also provide group and
joint sessions in relation to arrangements for children.

The Advice Line will not initially provide any dispute resolution, but
will refer callers to local Family Relationship Centres and other
dispute resolution services for face to face dispute resolution, or will
help to arrange telephone dispute resolution for them.

Family Relationship Centres

The Centres are a community resource providing information and referrals
for families at all stages. They will also provide individual, group and
joint sessions for separating or separated parents (and other family
members, where applicable) to help them make parenting plans and resolve
disputes about their children without the need to go to court.

Centres may refer customers to Services Australia if they have queries
about payments (to an appropriate Service Centre depending on the
customer's location and circumstances, the families phone line 136150 or
the Services Australia Website), or to Child Support if they have
queries about child support payments.

There are 65 Centres around Australia. The first 15 opened on 3 July
2006 and are located at Hobart, Salisbury, Mildura, Sunshine, Joondalup,
Frankston, Ringwood, Strathpine, Darwin, Sutherland, Penrith,
Wollongong, Canberra, Townsville and Lismore.

Family Relationship Advice Line - 1800 050 321

The Advice Line replaces and considerably expands the existing Family
Law Hotline service by adding a new parenting advice and legal advice
component. The services provided will complement the services offered by
the Centres.

The Advice Line is a free national telephone service available to the
general public, especially for callers who do not have a Centre in their
local area or who prefer to use the telephone. It is available from
8am - 8pm Monday to Friday and 10am - 4pm on Saturday (local time),
except national public holidays.

Components of the Advice Line

The Advice Line has 3 components:

-   Information Officers, as the first point of contact, will assess a
    caller's needs, give information, and refer the caller to national
    and local services, for example Centrelink, Child Support or local
    family counselling and dispute resolution services that should be
    able to assist families experiencing relationship difficulties.
    Officers may provide contact information for the service or transfer
    the caller to the service.
-   Parenting Advisers will more thoroughly assess a caller's needs and
    give appropriate advice on parenting plans and the impact of
    conflict on children and/or refer the caller to Centres or other
    counselling/dispute resolution services. Parenting Advisers may
    provide contact information for the service, transfer the caller to
    the service, or actively refer the caller.
-   Legal Advisers will give simple legal advice to families about care
    arrangements for children after separation. This component of the
    service supports the other components listed above. The Advice Line
    is not promoted as a legal advice service. Callers requiring more
    complex legal advice will be referred to other legal services.

The Resources page contains links to the Family Relationships and
Services Australia Websites.

Related links

Identifying a package of services for customers recently separated or
divorced

Changes in relationship status - customer separates

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
separates

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Child enters customer's care/custody

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Shared care for Social Security payments

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Child out of care without consent

Social Work Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
