
Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct 003-21111107

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

For the New South Wales Floods – July 2022, AGDRP and NZ DRP claims
cannot be rejected if a customer has claimed for a non-declared Local
Government Area (LGA) in New South Wales and meets all other eligibility
criteria. All other AGDRP and NZ DRP claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria can be rejected. See the Process page.

For the New South Wales Floods - February 2022, 3 new Local Government
Areas (LGAs), Lake Macquarie, Strathfield and Waverley, were declared on
27 June 2022. Any claims previously rejected for these LGAs – customers
must lodge a new claim. Customers do not need to request an explanation
of the initial decision and these claims must not be re-indexed.

New impact reasons have been added to the online claim. Check the impact
reason selected by the customer. See Impact reasons to decide if the
customer meets the adversely affected criteria.

Reminder: more than one Flexible Support Payment (including AGDRP, NZ
DRP and the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment) cannot be paid on the same
day.

This document explains how to process AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process
Direct from 2022 when the online claiming channel has been activated for
an event. These are claims for Australian Government Disaster Recovery
Payment (AGDRP) or Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand
non-protected Special Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP).

Processing claims in Process Direct

Only staff trained in processing AGDRP and NZ DRP should process claims.
Before processing AGDRP/NZ DRP claims, staff must complete technical
training. Line managers will let Service Officers know about training
requirements.

Always check the processing instructions in the procedure for the
current emergency event to confirm where AGDRP/NZ DRP claims are to be
processed.

Use Process Direct to review the AGDRP or NZ DRP claim information and
to process the claim once all required information is available. Staff
are not to select or cancel any claim activities on the Activity List
(AL) screen in Customer First where the event advises claims are to be
processed in Process Direct.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the AGDRP or NZ DRP claim is
submitted online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   has information provided by the customer or their correspondence
    nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into an AGDRP/NZ DRP claim
    activity
-   lists any evidence the customer has been asked to provide when
    submitting the claim
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information and
    make referrals

Due to system limitations, after assessing eligibility the following
claims will need to have a keyword added. This is so they can be
assigned to appropriately trained staff with access to Flexible Support
Payment to finalise in the !FFAP screen in Customer First:

Claims where the payment is to be issued to a payment nominee and an
error stops the claim from finalising in Process Direct

-   this does not include where a customer has a correspondence nominee
    or where the customer is a nominee for another customer

NZ DRP claims where the customer is claiming for any of the following:

-   a child living with them who is not a dependent child
-   a spouse
-   a dependent adult

Staff without !FFAP access must not use the Handover to CF/CR option in
Process Direct.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim is assessed using criteria
to identify if it is suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process and grant AGDRP claims if all these criteria are
met:

-   identity requirements for emergency payments
-   citizenship, valid visa and residence requirements
-   children claimed are recorded as being in principal care
-   there is no change to child care arrangements
-   no imprisonment recorded (SUS-IMP or CAN-IMP)
-   the impact is not a family member deceased or missing (where the
    customer meets no other adversely affected criteria)
-   the customer’s home address is within the declared area for the
    event
-   there is no nominee arrangement
-   customer has indicated eligible reasons for being adversely affected
-   the customer’s impact was not due to a fire where their home is less
    than 5km from the fire
-   the customer claim is not flagged against the Fraud Management
    System’s fraud check

If a claim does not meet the straight through processing business rules,
it will be assigned to suitably skilled staff for processing.

Where this happens, the customer may still be eligible for payment.
There may be a few reasons why a claim has been assigned to staff. If a
claim has an exclusion keyword, staff must:

-   follow all process steps in Operational Blueprint, including any
    exclusion reason, to fully review the claim, and
-   determine if the customer is eligible or ineligible for the payment

If claims meet the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes relating to the claim will show that ROXY has created these.

Note: NZ DRP claims are not selected for straight through processing.
Evidence of tax participation must be lodged and assessed by a Service
Officer before a claim can be granted.

The system may automatically assess and finalise some AGDRP claims. See
Automation of ineligible claims – AGDRP only in the Background page of
the Operational Blueprint for the event.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation, the Service Officer must enter
their own logon as the Decision Maker when running the script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY

Documenting standards

The system will generate a Note detailing the outcome of claims
finalised in Process Direct, which meet Online Document Recording (ODR)
standards.

Staff can add any relevant information before finalising the claim or as
an annotation.

Dependent children - Families Shared Care trained staff

Handoff to Families Shared Care trained staff by adding the keyword
FAOCHI is needed if:

-   a principal carer assessment is needed
-   if a child is to be added to a customer’s record

See Table 1.

NZ DRP claims only

If a customer is eligible for NZ DRP and claiming for a child, the
child:

-   does not need to be the customer’s dependent child
-   must live with the customer

For more details, see NZ DRP claims only - ‘primary claimant’ claims for
a ‘secondary claimant.

Rejecting claims

Do not reject unsuccessful claims until there is formal approval to
reject claims for the event.

Approval is given by staff communication channels and published in the
Operational Blueprint for the event.

When customers initially claim, they meet all criteria except that of
living in a declared area. As declared areas are often expanded after
the initial activation, these claims are placed on hold pending formal
approval to reject.

Note: the system may automatically assess and finalise some AGDRP
claims. See Automation of ineligible claims – AGDRP only in the
Background page of the Operational Blueprint for the event.

Payment methods

Customers will receive payments in:

-   their nominated Australian bank account, or
-   their nominee's Australian bank account if they have a payment
    nominee

Note: the Nominee Link Summary (NOLS) screen will show nominee
information, however, it does not show if the customer is a nominee or
has a nominee.

This information can be viewed on the Customer Summary screen in
Customer First, under Relationships and next to the Nominee: field.

If updating a bank account when completing an ACC for a current
customer, make sure the customer can provide their previous bank account
details.

Immediate payment is the default method for AGDRP and NZ DRP. This
allows customers to receive the payment as soon as possible using:

-   priority direct credit via the New Payment Platform (NPP). This
    method is the default in Process Direct. It is not available for all
    banks. If an account is NPP reachable but the payment fails to
    deliver, it will automatically deliver via RTGS if available, or
    direct credit
-   Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card - issued by service centres
    only

If an account is NPP reachable but the payment fails to deliver, it will
automatically deliver via RTGS if available, or direct credit.

Claims processed in Process Direct will default to NPP.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer may need a third party (a person or organisation) to act on
their behalf when claiming AGDRP or NZ DRP. See Appointing nominees and
Obligations of nominees.

Establish a nominee’s identity before processing an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313).

Customers who have not engaged with the agency for some time may be
unaware they have a current correspondence or payment nominee
arrangement.

It is important to review these arrangements. Sending payments or
letters to a nominee who is no longer valid could result in hardship for
the customer and breach their privacy.

If there are concerns about a nominee’s identity or claim information
they provide, follow the process to report suspected fraud and
corruption.

Claims for customers with a payment nominee may need a keyword added.

If a customer:

-   has previously claimed a payment in the FSP system and an entry
    displays in that system on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS)
    screen, Process Direct should allow finalisation of the claim
-   has not previously claimed a payment in the FSP system an error may
    present. These claims are allocated to appropriately trained staff
    with access to Flexible Support Payment FFAP to finalise via the
    !FFAP screen in Customer First

Staff without !FFAP access must not use the Handover to CF/CR option in
Process Direct.

Claims:

can be lodged by a correspondence nominee

cannot be lodged by a:

-   Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority, or
-   payment nominee

Only a payment nominee can get a payment on a customer’s behalf.

Help from Technical Peer Support

If staff need help to finalise a claim, they must not call Technical
Peer Support unless a customer is on the phone. See Resources for
details.

Customer queries status of claim

Determine the status of the claim through Process Direct

-   view the status from the Transactions icon
-   view any supporting information obtained from the Notes icon
    (Progress of Claim and/or Finalisation of Claim Notes, or DOCs under
    ‘Display on access documents’ or ‘DL/Note

Do not select any activities displaying in Customer First when
determining the status.

Incorrect event or payment claimed

When staff assessing a claim (that has not been finalised) identify a
customer has claimed for the incorrect event or payment, staff will:

-   cancel the customer’s claim
-   process the claim under the correct event and/or payment, and
-   clearly document the customer’s record with actions taken and why
    they were taken

Note: the cancelled claim will show on the customer’s Online Account. If
a customer calls to enquire, staff will explain why the event or payment
type was changed.

If a customer’s claim has already been finalised and a claim decision
made, do not change the decision.

Claimed the incorrect event

An example of claiming the incorrect event is where the:

-   impacted address details provided by a customer may be in the local
    government area (LGA) of Ballina which is located in New South
    Wales, however the event claimed is the South East Queensland
    Floods, February 2022
-   date of impact provided by a customer is 22 February 2022 (South
    East Queensland Floods, February 2022) however the event claimed is
    the Queensland Floods, January 2022

Claimed the incorrect payment

Only customers who hold a non-protected 444 Visa can be paid NZ DRP.
Residency screens must be checked as customers may not always provide
accurate residency details in their claim responses.

Claimed the incorrect payment is where a customer has claimed:

-   AGDRP instead of NZ DRP, or
-   NZ DRP instead of AGDRP

Staff may not identify this until screens in the Residency Task Selector
are checked.

If a customer should have claimed:

NZ DRP but claimed AGDRP, customer contact must be made to request
evidence of the NZ DRP customer’s participation in the Australian
taxation system

AGDRP but claimed NZ DRP,

-   If the customer has claimed for a dependent adult, spouse or child
    who lives with them (who is not their dependent child), these must
    not to be included in the customer’s AGDRP claim
    - No customer contact is needed
    - The customer will receive a decision letter
    - If they disagree, they can request a review of the decision
-   If the customer claimed for a dependent child/ren include them in
    the customer’s AGDRP claim.

See the Review claim details step in Table 1.

Concurrent event

Claims must be checked where a customer is trying to claim for a
concurrent event. This is where a customer has been paid for the

-   New South Wales Floods – February 2022 and now claiming the South
    East Queensland Floods – February 2022, or
-   South East Queensland Floods – February 2022 and now claiming the
    New South Wales Floods – February 2022

These claims will not be eligible for automation.

Depending on a customer’s circumstances, they may be eligible to receive
a payment for both events.

Note: if a customer has been paid for the South East Queensland Floods –
February 2022 and they should have claimed the New South Wales Floods –
February 2022 instead, this may impact automation of the AGDRP (Special
Supplement).

See the Claiming for a concurrent event step in Table 1

Quality Management Application

Claims will be checked for accuracy through the Quality Management
Application (QMA).

QMA identifies which work items need checking based on the auto-sampling
model.

Incorrect payments

When AGDRP or NZ DRP should not have been paid to a customer:

-   If the payment was incorrectly granted through automatic claim
    processing, contact Technical Peer Support. Any errors will be
    validated before escalating to the Level 2 Helpdesk.
-   If AGDRP should have been paid instead of NZ DRP or NZ DRP, see
    Customer has been paid the incorrect payment
-   For other incorrect payments, including where payment was made to
    the incorrect carer, see AGDRP or NZ DRP was incorrectly paid

Preventing fraud

All staff play an important role in detecting customer and third party
fraud.

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has help with false images and using Process Direct -
claim hold reasons, common screens to check and keywords. It also has
links to the website, contact details and the payment query template.

Related links

Current emergency management events

Claiming emergency payments

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

AGDRP and NZ DRP claims for an immediate family member who has died or
is missing

Identity requirements for emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and DRP claims in Customer First

Additional Payment for Children (APC)

Evacuation and Recovery Centres during emergency events

Processing Special Benefit (SpB) claims

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Family and domestic violence

Immediate methods of payment

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
