
Abuse of older Australians 003-19121010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Customers in immediate danger or risk of harm must call 000.

This document outlines how to recognise, support and refer people
affected by elder abuse.

The Abuse of Older Australians National Plan

All Australian governments agree that action must be taken to reduce the
prevalence of abuse of older people, and plan the best way to respond to
an issue that will continue to grow with our ageing population.

To direct this work, all Australian governments agreed to the
recommendation made by the Australian Law Reform Commission in their
report Elder Abuse - A National Legal Response to create a National
Plan. See Resources for a link.

The resulting National Plan to Respond to the Abuse of Older Australians
(Elder Abuse) 2019 - 2023 will direct the establishment of a framework,
strategies and action by government and the community to address abuse
of older Australians. See Resources for a link.

Identifying abuse of an older Australian

Services Australia recognises that the physical, sexual, psychological,
financial, and social abuse or neglect of older Australians is a form of
family and domestic violence.

Abuse of an older Australian includes any form of violence or
mistreatment that causes harm or distress to an older person. It can be
unintentional or deliberate, and occurs within a relationship of trust.

This is also known as elder abuse.

The Family and Domestic Violence Strategy 2016-19 outlines Services
Australia's commitment to helping staff and customers affected by family
and domestic violence. This includes the abuse of older people.

Services officers and staff can help those affected by providing
information, referrals and support.

For more details, see Family and domestic violence.

Types of abuse

Financial

-   The misuse or theft of an older person's money or assets
-   Can include using or controlling someone's money, property or other
    assets improperly, coercively or illegally

Physical

An act that causes physical pain or injury to an older person

Can include:

-   hitting
-   pushing
-   kicking
-   inappropriate use of medication or restraints

Sexual

Any sexual behaviour without a person's consent

Can include any of the below:

-   intercourse
-   enforced nudity
-   cleaning a person's genital area inappropriately

Psychological and/or emotional

-   An act that causes emotional pain or injury to an older person
-   Can include acts that cause guilt, distress or feelings of shame

Social

Preventing or restricting a person's:

-   social contact with their friends and family
-   access to social activities and services

Neglect

-   This is the failure to meet a person's most basic needs. It can be
    the result of intentional and unintentional actions
-   It may include failure to provide housing, food and medical
    requirements

Family and domestic violence and COVID-19 Vaccination certificates

If a customer is affected by family and domestic violence, and having
proof of COVID-19 vaccination causes them safety concerns, there is
support available. Services Australia can help customers access safer
options for their circumstances, for example:

-   Add their digital COVID-19 certificate to a digital wallet. Their
    device may allow a customer to use a security pass code to use Apple
    Wallet or Google Pay. They can set up or change their security pass
    code through their Settings
-   A customer’s vaccination provider can print their immunisation
    history statement for them. Customers can also call the Australian
    Immunisation Register and ask for proof to be sent to them. It can
    take up to 14 days for a customer’s statement or certificate to
    arrive in the post
-   If a customer is concerned about unauthorised activity to their
    online accounts, or the security of their Centrelink, Child Support
    or Medicare records, they can let Services Australia know. If
    someone else has access to a customer’s online accounts, they can
    change their passwords at any time

Role of Service Officers and staff

The role of Service Officers is to:

-   be aware when abuse of an older Australian may be present, and
-   support the person by offering referrals to available resources,
    social workers or other service providers

The Resources page has links to contact details for external service
providers, as well as links to Intranet pages and the Services Australia
website.

Related links

Social work services

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Specialist officers and other internal supports for customers

Referral to external support services

Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff

Social worker and other service referrals for child support customers

Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

Customer password for Medicare enquiries

Sensitive Information Indicators in the CDMS

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer neglect tip-off
reviews

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
