
Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral 003-10010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to follow when customers request an
urgent payment because of expenses associated with a funeral.

Requesting an urgent payment to attend a funeral

Customers can request an urgent payment to attend the funeral of a
family member. For Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander peoples,
this includes extended family members and ceremonies of cultural
importance about the deceased.

The customer may be requesting funds to:

-   travel to the funeral (and return home) and/or
-   contribute to the cost of the funeral and other associated events,
    such as decorating the church or catering for the wake

The funeral does not need to be unforeseen for the customer to be
eligible for help. For example, the customer may have known the date of
the funeral a few days or weeks before requesting help.

Customers cannot use their Centrelink online account or Phone self
service to request payments associated with a funeral. Requests must be
assessed by a Service Officer. Customers will be advised to contact a
Service Officer to have their request assessed.

When a customer requests an urgent payment

Contact with customers

Customers requesting an urgent payment are presenting with financial
hardship and seeking support. Give extra care and consideration as they
are contacting at a difficult and upsetting time.

See Telephone standards - Service Officer’s manner with the customer for
how to support the customer. This also applies to face-to-face contacts.

Offering other help

Before assessing a request for an urgent payment, Service Officers must
explore other forms of assistance with the customer.

The priority is to help remedy the customer's emergency circumstances.
If this can be done by giving them access to other assistance, rather
than reducing their future payments, this will place the customer in a
better financial position next fortnight.

Eligibility

Customers are eligible for an urgent payment if they:

-   are in severe financial hardship and need assistance to attend the
    funeral of a family member
-   will not be placed in further financial hardship by the urgent
    payment
-   receive an eligible pension or allowance. If they are receiving an
    ineligible payment, they cannot be granted an urgent payment and the
    payment should be denied
-   are not receiving weekly payments
-   have not received an urgent payment on the same day
-   have not requested one urgent payment and one reconsideration on the
    same day
-   do not have a record in Environment 'I' (overseas)

Definition of family member

The term 'family member' is defined under social security law as being:

-   their partner or parent/guardian
-   their sister, brother or child
-   their grandparent
-   any other person who, in the opinion of the Secretary should be
    treated as one of the relevant person's relations described above,
    for example an aunt may have raised the person and should be treated
    as the mother

Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander customers may have extra expenses associated with a
funeral. For example, tombstone unveiling ceremonies may need similar
community commitment as attendance at funerals. These customers can have
diverse cultural, ceremonial, linguistic and religious norms. Service
Officers must respect these when helping customers during a time of
bereavement.

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander customers, see also Meaning of
extended family member.

Meaning of extended family member

When assessing urgent payment requests from Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander customers, 'family member' includes extended family. This
refers to the customer's kinship relationship with the deceased person
and is not defined by genealogy.

Service Officers should be aware of the cultural diversity among
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander families, through extended
family relationships. Indigenous kinship and extended family is
different to non-Indigenous versions of extended family where the family
members are directly related through grandparents, aunties, uncles, and
cousins. This is not necessarily the case for Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander kinship relationships.

Kinship

The kinship system defines people’s roles, responsibilities and
relationships with others within their culture and can be very complex.
It influences who a person marries, how people care for children and how
day-to-day life is structured and managed.

Kinship is more than just a social hierarchy. It goes back to belonging
and connection to country. Traditional kinship systems may vary across
communities but they serve similar functions. They play a significant
role in many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities today.

Cultural awareness for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander funerals

Service Officers must respect and consider cultural impacts for
Indigenous customers.

The Process page has information that Service Officers must consider.

Confirming funeral details

Other than the advice from the customer, Service Officers must confirm
the details of the funeral by checking:

Obits - the funeral director's website. Funeral notices only appear on
this site if organised by a family member or funeral director.

Ryerson Index - funeral notices only appear on this site if they have
been included in the daily newspaper

For Indigenous funerals, the Indigenous Funeral Notices intranet page.
The Indigenous and Remote Servicing Branch updates this page

-   Do not contact an Indigenous Services Officer (ISO) for more details
    about a funeral listed on the page. This page has the most
    up-to-date information
-   Do not contact the funeral director to confirm details for an
    Indigenous funeral

The Resources page links to the above sites.

Follow the relevant process to gather information to confirm funeral
details.

If a funeral cannot be confirmed, the request for an urgent payment must
be denied.

Cost of travel

One of the main reasons customers seek assistance is the costs
associated with travel to the funeral.

Staff should assess the appropriate cost of one way travel for customers
to go to the funeral. Assess the cheapest traveling option that allows
the customer to arrive in time. Consider cultural responsibilities for
Indigenous customers. For example, concession card travel expenses or
alternative travel by car or plane.

The customer must be advised to apply for another urgent payment to
return home if they need funds after the funeral. This gives more
assurance that the urgent payment will be used for travel, and avoids
customers being without funds to return home.

When deciding whether to pay for one way or return travel, consider the
location of the funeral and if the customer will be able to easily make
contact with Centrelink to make the second request. For example, the
funeral may be in a remote area with no mobile coverage. There may be a
landline at the local cooperative but this may be closed as a mark of
respect.

For a funeral in NSW, the customer can be directed to the NSW Government
Funeral Transport Program page. This helps the customer with transport,
fuel subsidies and bus hire and can remove the need for an urgent
payment.

Urgent payment amount

The amount of the payment should be limited to the amount the customer
requires to meet their immediate need. Paying more could place the
customer in future financial hardship.

The amount payable is the smallest of:

-   available funds calculated by the system
-   the amount requested by the customer
-   if the request is for travel costs, the estimated amount needed for
    one way travel, or
-   the minimum amount it will cost to meet the immediate hardship need

There is no maximum payment limit for customers granted a payment to
attend a funeral.

Assessing urgent payment requests

See Urgent payment requests for:

-   delegation for decision making
-   payment methods
-   customers on weekly payments
-   customers with a history of requesting urgent payments
-   customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour

The Resources page has links to confirm funerals, useful external
websites, contact details, EBT factsheet, and examples.

Related links

Urgent payment requests

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Customer disagrees with an urgent payment decision

Immediate methods of payment

Immediate payments

Personalised Services

Processing urgent payment requests

Specialist staff for Indigenous customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
