
Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay 003-17040700

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process when a customer requests an urgent
payment because of Centrelink delay.

Requests due to Centrelink delay

Customers can request an urgent payment if they are in hardship because
of action or lack of action by Centrelink that caused them financial
hardship by delaying receipt of income support payments. This is
referred to as Centrelink delay.

This may be because of:

-   system error
-   delayed processing of a new claim (when a hardship advance is not
    payable)
-   delayed restoration of a payment (when a hardship advance is not
    payable), or
-   any other Centrelink action or inaction that causes the customer's
    payment to be delayed due to no fault of their own

Customers cannot use self service channels to request urgent payments
due to Centrelink delay or holiday processing. A Service Officer must
assess these requests.

Customer contributed to delay of payment

Customers are not eligible to receive an urgent payment if they have
contributed to the delay in their regular payment by failing to:

-   attend an interview
-   lodge a form or medical certificate on the due date, unless
    prevented by the nature of their incapacity or a medical condition
-   lodge a form personally
-   lodge a completed or signed form
-   advise of a change of payment destination, or
-   advise Centrelink of any change in their circumstances required by
    the Social Security Act 1991

If the initial delay was the customer's, but Centrelink then made the
situation worse due to errors, delays or omissions, the customer may be
considered for an urgent payment.

Replacement payments

If requesting a replacement payment be issued as an urgent payment, the
customer:

-   is not eligible for an urgent payment due to Centrelink delay if
    they did not advise the change of payment destination
-   may be eligible for an urgent payment due to exceptional and
    unforeseen circumstance
-   may be eligible for an urgent payment if the delay in their regular
    payment is due to a national public holiday

Customer advises of hardship due to Centrelink delay

Service Officers must:

-   check if there was a delay in the customer's regular payment and if
    this was caused by Centrelink
-   check if the customer has solely contributed to the delay
-   discuss with the customer the risks related to urgent payments
-   decide the amount to be paid and method of payment

If the customer has given the reason for the delay as self service
issues or unavailability, it is expected that customers will use these
channels. It is their responsibility to contact if they have issues,
instead of not reporting.

If a person is in hardship and their new claim assessment (including
Family Tax Benefit new claim) is delayed for any reason including ICT
advice, the onus is on the Service Officer to seek to have the claim
processed. This might include:

-   contacting ICT to see what can be done to allow the outstanding
    claim to be finalised, or
-   contacting the relevant processing team if responsible for the
    apparent delay

Eligible payments

To be eligible for an urgent payment, the customer must be receiving an
eligible Centrelink payment.

If they are receiving an ineligible payment, they cannot get an urgent
payment and their request should be denied.

Customers on weekly payments are not eligible for an urgent payment.

Urgent payment amount

The amount of the payment should be limited to the amount the customer
requires to meet their immediate need. Paying more could place the
customer in future financial hardship.

The amount payable is the smallest of:

-   available funds calculated by the system
-   the amount requested by the customer
-   the minimum amount it will cost to meet the immediate hardship need
-   the maximum amount of $1,000. Note: this amount is not applicable
    for SRSS customers. See Immediate payment by payment method Real
    Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Assessing urgent payment requests

See Urgent payment requests for:

-   delegation for decision making
-   payment methods
-   customers on weekly payments
-   customers with a nominee or third party arrangement
-   customers with a history of requesting urgent payments
-   customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customers

SRSS customers are only eligible for an urgent payment if:

-   there is there was a Centrelink delay or error in their regular
    payment, and
-   they are in severe financial hardship

As the SRSS payment is not paid under social security law, SRSS
customers are not eligible for:

-   an urgent payment if they request part of their accrued entitlement
    be paid before the usual payday
-   advances or hardship payments

SRSS customers are not to be approved for an urgent payment when they
have contributed to the delay in their regular payment. If the initial
delay was the customer's, but Centrelink then made the situation worse
due to errors, delays or omissions, the customer may be considered for
an immediate payment.

If requesting a replacement payment as an immediate payment and the
customer did not advise the change of payment destination, they are not
eligible, unless they are in severe financial hardship due to
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances. If failing to advise the
change is the only reason for the delay in payment, this does not meet
the guidelines for an immediate payment.

This does not apply during periods of holiday processing. See Urgent
payments due to holiday processing.

Staff with specialist access will need to process the immediate payment
using the Issue Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) Payment guided
procedure in the Customer First native (SAP) system.

The Resources page has links to forms, contact details, Office Locator,
the Payment and Service Finder and useful websites.

Related links

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customer disagrees with an urgent payment decision

Immediate payments

Immediate methods of payment

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Processing urgent payment requests

Restricted Direct Payments (RDP)

Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

Urgent payment requests

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
