
Confirming prison admission and release dates 003-07030060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to confirm entry and release for
customers in custody including prisons, police cells/watch houses and
Juvenile Justice Centres. This information is needed when determining a
customer's entitlement to payment.

On this Page:

Prison discharge documents

In some cases, customers will have discharge documents.

A customer's discharge/release document or letter from the place of
detention can confirm their entry and release dates.

This can be used to confirm the period in custody unless the document is
illegible or if there is doubt about its validity.

Identity Confirmation

If an original prison discharge/release certificate has a photo or
signature of the customer, it can be used as an identity document.

Confirming details with prison/institution

If an adult customer has been released from prison but does not have
their prison discharge documents, their period in custody must be
confirmed by contacting the Prison Liaison Officer for that prison, or
the prison/institution directly.

Service Officers can confirm details with the responsible Prison Liaison
Officer or prison/institution over the phone.

The Resources page has a link to contact details.

If the customer is applying for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child who
has been released from an Approved Care Organisation see Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) child leave Juvenile Justice Centre.

Important payment consideration

Income support payments are not payable during periods in custody

-   Staff must make sure that payments are not restored/started from the
    original suspension or cancellation date
-   Payments that are incorrectly restored from the
    suspension/cancellation date will cause an overpayment and result in
    the customer incurring a debt

Customers admitted to custody should have their payments
suspended/cancelled from the first full day after entry into custody

-   See Admission process for incarcerated customers

Customers released from custody may have their payments restored or
started from the date of release

-   See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

If eligible for a Crisis Payment, this should be paid on the date of
claim

-   A claim for a crisis payment must be lodged within 7 calendar days
    of the date of release from prison
-   The customer may need to provide evidence of release from prison if
    in custody for 14 days or more
-   See New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison
    or psychiatric confinement

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child leaves Juvenile Justice Centre

When an FTB child leaves custody, evidence is needed to confirm the
child is no longer in the care of Juvenile Justice/Approved Care
Organisation (ACO).

In some cases, an FTB child released from custody will have discharge
documents. These will verify a child is no longer incarcerated and a
change in care has occurred.

See Evidence that can be used for change of care.

Confirming period in custody for overseas prisoners

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) is able to help with
confirming international prison admission and release dates through
completion of the Disclosure and Use of Personal Information form. The
Resources page has a link to this form.

Assistance to Australians arrested overseas and services available on return to Australia

Australians imprisoned overseas may still be eligible for Services
Australia's prison release services including Crisis Payment - Prison
Release if:

-   they return to Australia, and
-   claim within 7 days of their release from an international prison,
    and
-   meet all other payability criteria

The Resources page has links for confirming prison and juvenile justice
releases, Prison Liaison Officer and Medicare contact details and sample
discharge/release documents. It also has a link to the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Training (DFAT) disclosure and use of personal
information consent form.

Related links

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

Admission process for incarcerated customers or partners

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

Customers who were imprisoned with no incarceration details on their
Centrelink record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
