
Special Benefit (SpB) available funds test 003-08030040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to apply the available funds test when
assessing a customer's eligibility for SpB.

Purpose

SpB aims to provide income support for people who, due to reasons beyond
their control, are:

-   in financial hardship
-   unable to earn a sufficient livelihood for themselves and their
    dependants, and
-   unable to receive any other income support payment or benefit

The available funds test looks at the customer and partner’s available
funds. These are also called liquid funds. They are funds that can be
easily and ready utilised.

SpB is a discretionary payment for vulnerable customers. It is important
to consider the customer's circumstances and potential SpB category when
they claim and at review time. Consider the customer's risk by using the
low and high risk examples.

Some categories of SpB customers are not likely to exceed the available
funds test due to the nature of their finances. Other categories may be
at higher risk of exceeding the available funds test. Consider the
customer's circumstances and apply the available funds test correctly.
Avoid unnecessarily cancelling the customer’s payments, only to restore
payment.

Applying the available funds test

When assessing claims and at review, apply the test by considering:

-   funds the customer can access easily to fund their immediate needs
    (liquid funds)
-   funds the customer may have committed. These can be excluded from
    the long term available funds test

The customer can provide evidence of the immediate future costs. These
can be deemed as exceptional or unforeseen expenses. Any remaining funds
will be included in the available funds test.

There is no full list of ‘committed’ funds. Consider each case
separately. They include funds that would place the customer in further
hardship if not used to pay for an essential service.

Bank statements are usually for a past period, making it hard to
determine when the customer would have payments and expenses. This could
include electricity bills and rent payments.

Customers may have funds in their accounts ready to pay bills. When
providing bank statements they may have available funds of more than
$5,000. In these cases, check with the customer to gain a clearer
understanding of their situation. Customers will have times when their
budgets and timing of payments might result in going over the $5,000.
Make an effort to check with the customer and confirm any committed
funds before cancelling their payment.

Long term available funds test

Use this test when the customer is likely to need income support for
more than 13 weeks. The test may include the value of realisable assets
or avoidable expenses.

Short term available funds test

This is not often used. However, it would apply when the customer is
likely to need income support for less than 13 weeks. Consider the
customer's liquid assets when applying the test.

If their liquid assets exceed the $5,000 available funds test at claim,
SpB will be precluded for a period.

Example

A customer is waiting for their pension or allowance claim to be
finalised and they are in financial hardship. The test could be applied
for a period of less than 13 weeks. There are no reviews as the test
applies for the set period, and SpB will stop on a set date.

The References page contains more information and examples in the Guide
to Social Security Law.

The Resources page contains examples and links for seeking support.

Related links

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Processing Special Benefit (SpB) claims

Special Benefit (SpB) reviews

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
