
Assessing claims for emergency payments for Eastern Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019) 003-19111134

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a different payment to the Queensland Bushfires (Sep 2019).

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. See Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the
time limit.

There are different Local Government Areas (LGAs) for AGDRP/NZ DRP and
for DRA/NZ DRA for the Eastern Queensland Bushfires November 2019.

Formal approval has been given to commence rejection of claims for all
declared and non-declared Local Government Areas (LGA). This also
applies to DRA/NZ DRA Determination 2020 claims where a Request for
Information (RFI) letter was sent requesting documentary evidence of
income.

This document outlines how to determine if Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or
their associated ex-gratia payments can be paid to customers affected by
activated emergency events.

On this Page:

Emergency payments

The federal government has made a determination under the Social
Security Act that a major disaster has occurred. The following payments,
administered by Services Australia, have been activated for the Eastern
Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019):

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   NZ Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP) - for New Zealand non-protected
    Special Category visa (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent
    of AGDRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   NZ DRA - for New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa
    (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent of DRA

Affected Local Government Areas (LGA) for AGDRP and ex-gratia DRP

The determination specifies which LGAs are eligible for each emergency
payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Bundaberg
-   Gladstone
-   Livingstone
-   Noosa
-   Somerset
-   Toowoomba

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Affected LGAs for DRA and ex-gratia DRA

The determination specifies which LGAs are eligible for each emergency
payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Bundaberg
-   Gladstone
-   Gold Coast
-   Gympie
-   Ipswich
-   Livingstone
-   Lockyer Valley
-   Noosa
-   Scenic Rim
-   Somerset
-   Southern Downs
-   Toowoomba

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Reasonably close to the bushfire (AGDRP/ex-gratia DRP only)

Static maps are not available

For the Eastern Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019) the customer’s principal
place of residence must be:

-   within one of the designated LGAs and
-   ‘reasonably close’ to the bushfires

Live maps can be used to assist in assessing reasonably close. Live maps
detail the burn scar for each fire and can be used to assist in
determining the likelihood that any major damage was a direct result of
the designated bushfire.

See the Resources page to access the live map links.

Assessing claims where a customer's principal residence is outside 10km burn scar radius

Customers located outside of the 10km radius of a bushfire burn scar may
require a greater degree of examination and customer questioning to
ensure the damage claimed was a direct result of the declared major
disaster.

Where the customer's principal place of residence is outside the 10km
burn scar radius, Service Officers can escalate the claim to the
Emergency Management Technical Peer Support once the following have been
completed and the investigation is documented on the customer's record:

-   All other eligibility criteria has been assessed as met
-   Major damage criteria has been established, the customer has clearly
    demonstrated how they have met the criteria. For information see the
    Process page when assessing 'major damage' and 'reasonably close'
-   If the Service Officer doubts the validity of the customer’s claim,
    evidence should be requested before escalating to the Emergency
    Management Technical Peer Support

The Emergency Management Technical Peer Support reviews the customer's
record to ensure all information has been provided/documented. If more
information is required, they advise the Service Officer to:

-   ask the customer to provide the information required, and
-   place the claim on hold with the relevant keyword

If all information has been provided, the Emergency Management Technical
Peer Support escalates the claim to the Emergency Management Level 2
Helpdesk/TPS.

If the customer’s principal place of residence is more than 15km from
the closest burn scar, evidence to support the major damage assessment
should be requested. Once evidence has been provided a referral is made
to the Emergency Management Technical Peer Support for escalation to
Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Eligibility for payments

To be eligible to receive a payment, a customer must have been impacted
on any day of the major disaster, which commenced on 1 November 2019.

For more information on assessing eligibility, reviews and appeals see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Date of Income Loss for DRA and/ex-gratia DRA

When assessing income loss for this event, the customer’s income must
have been impacted on or after the start date of this event i.e. 1
November 2019.

Customers who reside and/or work in the LGAs of Noosa and Scenic Rim who
have claimed DRA or /ex-gratia DRA for the Queensland Bushfires (Sep
2019) event cannot claim for the Eastern Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019)
event unless they have suffered a second income loss on or after 1
November 2019.

Customers who reside and/or work in the LGAs of Noosa and Scenic Rim may
have had 2 instances of income loss as a direct result of the 2 separate
events.

When assessing income loss is it important to establish the date of
income loss and ensure the customer claims for the correct event.

Claiming periods

Claiming periods for LGAs may vary for AGDRP/DRA and their associated
ex-gratia payments.

Claims must be made within 6 months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply.

See Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Claim lodgement dates

AGDRP/ex-gratia DRP

The claiming period closed on 11 February 2021 for the LGA of Bundaberg,
unless special circumstances apply. See Emergency payment claims lodged
outside of the time limit.

The claiming period closed on 4 August 2020 for the following LGA’s,
unless special circumstances apply:

-   Gladstone
-   Livingstone
-   Noosa
-   Somerset
-   Toowoomba

DRA/ex-gratia DRA

Claims must be lodged by 4 August 2020.

The claiming period has now closed unless special circumstances apply.

DRA and ex-gratia DRA - tax free for bushfire event

DRA/ex-gratia DRA is tax free for all bushfire events commencing in the
2019-2020 financial year. For more information see:

-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims, and
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Rejection of claims

Formal approval has been given to commence rejection of claims for all
declared LGAs. This includes:

-   all claims previously held with the keyword NOTLGA, that is
    non-declared LGAs
-   DRA/ex-gratia DRA Determination 2020 claims where a Request for
    Information (RFI) letter was sent requesting documentary evidence of
    income

For more information about Determination 2020, see Assessing DRA and NZ
DRA claims.

Note: before rejecting claims for DRA/ex-gratia DRA consider if a
self-declaration is an option for the customer. See Table 3 of Assessing
eligibility DRA and NZ DRA claims.

When coding and rejecting claims, follow

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Lodgement of claims

For information on how a customer can claim, steps relating to initial
contact and Callback DOCs and ACTDOCs, see Claiming emergency payments.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia website and on the
intranet. See the Resources page for a link.

Customers can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to:
    Emergency Processing Centre
    Reply Paid 7815
    Canberra BC, ACT 2610
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at their nearest service
    centre, agent, access point or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760

Only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process these
claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be advised once they are able to reject payments.

Payment methods

There are a range of payment methods available for customers. These
include the New Payments Platform (NPP) and Real Time Gross Settlement
(RTGS) payments. If the customer advises they are in financial hardship,
NPP or RTGS may be available payment methods for them for the Eastern
Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019). Discuss the preferred method of payment
for the customer. Use of NPP and RTGS will help customers adversely
affected by the major disaster receive their payment/s faster.

Note: NPP is not available for all banks. However, RTGS is available for
most banks. Check which payment methods are available before discussing
payment options with the customer.

NPP is capped at $3,000. Any attempt to transfer more than that amount
will result in no funds being transferred in that attempt.

Claims must be finalised before using the NPP. For further information
see Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP).

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers may be able to get ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) if they
have been impacted by a declared disaster and claiming AGDRP.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) provides short-term support to
families experiencing significant financial stress due to circumstances
beyond their control. This additional financial assistance will help
ensure continuity of care for the child and support families when they
need it most.

To be eligible for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship), customers must:

-   be eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   be assessed as experiencing temporary financial hardship for an
    event that occurred no more than six months before the application
    is made
-   have had a substantial reduction in their ability to pay child care
    fees as a direct result of the temporary financial hardship

To support an application for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
customers must:

-   provide evidence that the event(s) occurred less than 6 months prior
    to the application
-   demonstrate a causal link between the event(s) and their financial
    hardship

Customers who are applying for ACCS Temporary Financial Hardship (as a
standalone application or a combined Child Care Subsidy claim) can
submit evidence that they or their partner have claimed for or received
AGDRP. No further evidence is required.

Customers still need to provide evidence the emergency event has caused
financial hardship and demonstrate the causal link between the event and
their reduced ability to pay child care fees.

If a customer wishes to apply for ACCS transfer the customer to 136 150.

The References page contains a copy of the Operational Instructions, the
policy documents for each payment from the Department of Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains average weekly income, income cut-off and
maximum rate details, links to Operational Messages, suburbs in declared
LGAs, maps and using the Google Maps measuring tool, forms, Minimum
Activity Management Standards, scenarios, and contact details for more
information.

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Additional Payment for Children (APC)

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
