-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Social worker templates and attachments

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Social
work template for CP/CA assessment for carers under 18 and over 80
years- use the following template to document all social work
assessments for carers aged under 18 years. The report template should
also be used for any assessment for carers aged over 80 years where the
social worker is recommending the payment be rejected or cancelled.

Use 'Save As' workaround to download/use attachment.

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Attaching
social work reports to customer records

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Care
Receiver at Risk template

More details for assessment of carer situations

Carer Payment

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

Constant Care

In order to qualify for Carer Payment, the carer must be providing
constant care which is defined as personally providing care on a daily
basis for a significant period’ during each day. See 1.1.C.310 Constant
care (CP) | Social Security Guide (dss.gov.au) for a full description of
constant care. There may be situations where it is indicated constant
care is not being provided. In assessing if constant care is being
provided, the social worker needs to consider the care receivers medical
condition(s), the responses provided by the THP on the medical report
and the carer and care receivers description of the care provided to
make sure consistency and that the care is provided due to the care
receivers medical condition or disability. Time spent undertaking
general household chores, shopping and transport would not normally be
considered personal care, as these tasks are not directly related to the
care receiver’s disability.

25 hour rule

Carers can participate in study or employment and still qualify for CP,
provide the total time they are away from their care receiver to
participate in these activities (including travel time) does not exceed
25 hours per week. See Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer
undertakes paid employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education
or training activities for full details.

Carer Allowance

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

In order to qualify for Carer Allowance, a carer must provide at least
some additional care and attention to a person because of a disability
or severe medical condition. See 1.1.C.10 Care & attention (CA) | Social
Security Guide.

If the carer does not reside with the care receiver, they may still be
eligible to receive carer allowance if they are providing care on a
Daily basis (1.1.D.10 Social Security Guide) and at least 20 hours per
week. Care and attention in these situations must address special care
needs as assessed under the ADAT. Special care needs help with bodily
functions and care to sustain life including help with:

-   mobility,
-   personal hygiene,
-   eating and drinking,
-   communication, and
-   treatment

Special care needs do not include other tasks such as shopping and
housework. See Social Security Guide 3.6.7.45 Qualification for CA -
carer & care receiver not co-resident for further explanation of the
care to be considered during the assessment.

Assessing level of care provided

A key purpose of the social work assessment is to assess if the carer
can and does provide care to the care receiver to meet the
qualifications for carer allowance or carer payment. The social worker
will need to gather detailed information about the care situation and
the carer and care receiver’s daily tasks and routines.

The care must be provided to the care receiver. In situations where the
care receiver has dependent children, child care provided to these
children cannot be considered when assessing eligibility for carer
payment/allowance. This includes where an older sibling helps with the
care of younger siblings due to a parents medical condition.

The following are some of the questions that social workers may ask to
ascertain the level of care that provided. The social worker should
tailor the interview to the specific care situation and the care
receivers’ medical diagnosis and care needs and explore the situation in
detail.

Physical care

-   Does the care receiver need help dressing?
-   Does the care receiver need help with personal hygiene tasks such as
    brushing hair, cleaning teeth?
-   Does the care receiver need help to use the toilet?
-   Does the care receiver need help to shower? If so, is this physical
    help or supervision? (in the case of young carers, the social worker
    may need to discuss the appropriateness of this level of care)
-   How does the care receiver move around? For example, do they need
    mobility aids? Help getting in and out of bed?
-   If the care receiver need helps to move around, does the carer use
    aids to do so or do they have the physical capacity to undertake
    this task without risk of injury to themselves?
-   Does the care receiver need attention during the night?
-   Does the care receiver need help to manage their finances?

Supervision

-   Is the care receiver able to be left alone for periods? If so how
    long, how often does this occur? How does the care receiver manage
    when the carer is not present?
-   Does the care receiver need help with memory tasks? For example,
    reminders to take medication and attend appointments
-   Does the care receiver need supervision due to wandering?
-   Does the care receiver need monitoring for medical episodes? For
    example, seizures, fainting. If so, what care does the care receiver
    need during these episodes?
-   Does the care receiver need prompting to undertake tasks such as
    bathing and brushing hair?

About the carer

-   Does the carer have any health conditions that may affect their
    ability to provide care?
-   Does anyone else help with providing care? This may be friends,
    family members or support services
-   What opportunities does the care receiver have to engage in social
    activities?
-   Does the care receiver participate in education or employment? If
    so, what is the nature of this and does it meet the 25 hour rule?

Third Party Verification

Given the complex nature of the care situations referred for social work
assessment, third party verification is often needed to help the social
worker in determining the level of actually being provided by each
person claiming carer payment/allowance.

Possible sources of verification can include:

-   Educational institutions - For young carers contact with the school
    should be made to verify study load and care provided
-   Paid in-home care providers such as those funded through the NDIS or
    MyAgedCare
-   Treating Health professionals
-   Other family or friends who are helping the carer in their caring
    role
-   Other support agencies that may be involved with the family

It is best practice to seek permission from the care receiver or carer
before contacting third parties to discuss their circumstances. If a
recent SA332a Medical Report has been provided, the social worker can
contact the Treating Health Professional who completed this form as
permission to contact is specifically addressed within the form.

Child safe framework

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Child safe
framework explanation

Community resources

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Over 80
Carer Assessments – Community Resources

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Young
Carer – Community Resources

Contact details

To contact the Carer Specialist Assessment Team use code CT1 in Office
Locator

Level 2 Policy Helpdesk

Family and domestic violence referral services

Family and domestic violence - External Support services

Payment and Service Finder

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
