
Customer disagrees with an urgent payment decision 003-10010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process when a customer disagrees with the
decision, the method of payment or the amount.

Urgent payments

An urgent payment is the payment before the usual payday of part of a
current customer's accrued entitlement. This payment is to help the
customer who is in severe financial hardship due to exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances as a result of Centrelink delay, holiday
processing or costs associated with a funeral.

As an urgent payment decision is a temporary change in delivery day (for
part or full entitlement), or method of payment, it is not a decision
about eligibility to a legislated entitlement. An urgent payment
decision is not subject to the same review and appeal processes as
decisions that are not made on an urgent basis or are about eligibility
to a legislated entitlement.

Urgent payment requests

Customers can request an urgent payment using the following channels:

-   [] using their Centrelink online account or Phone self service (only
    for urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen circumstances)
-   Smart Centre telephone services, or
-   at a Service Centre

Application for a formal review of decision

While the customer has the right to apply for a formal review of an
urgent payment decision, this would be impractical as it can take 35
days for a formal review to be completed. For this same reason, it is
unlikely that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) would review the
decision.

A rejected self service request for an urgent payment due to funeral
expenses or Centrelink delay should not be considered an urgent payment
decision. The self service channels cannot process urgent payments for
those reasons.

Any staff member at the APS4 or above level trained in urgent payments
can review a rejected self service request for an urgent payment due to
not meeting the exceptional and unforeseen circumstances criteria.

In a service centre, refer a reconsideration to the Local Leadership
Team if the original decision was made by a staff member in a service
centre. .

In Smart Centre Telephony channel, if a customer requests a
reconsideration:

-   when being advised the outcome of their initial request for an
    urgent payment, refer the reconsideration to a Technical Peer
    Support (TPS) officer trained in urgent payments
-   on the same day as a previous request for an urgent payment,
    transfer the call to any APS4 staff member who is skill tagged for
    urgent payments to do the reconsideration. This does not need to be
    a TPSO

The reconsideration is not to be undertaken by the staff member who
processed the original urgent payment request.

When reconsidering the original decision, follow the urgent payment
guidelines and show strong support for the decisions that are based on
them. An urgent payment decision must not be overridden or changed
unless there is new information or the original decision did not comply
with the guidelines.

To warrant a reconsideration of the decision, the request should be
about:

-   non-compliance with the guidelines
-   the decision to approve/ deny the payment was incorrect
-   method of payment, or
-   payment amount

If the original decision is changed, the urgent payment should be issued
by the staff member serving the customer.

When a staff member has a concern about the quality of urgent payment
decisions, feedback can be given via the Staff Feedback Tool using the
category 'Urgent Payment'.

If a request for an urgent payment is rejected by the self service
channel, any Service Officer trained in urgent payments can reconsider
the decision.

Limits to reconsideration requests

Customers can have one request and one reconsideration of the original
request per day. Each subsequent contact is an automatic rejection. If
the customer has already been granted an urgent payment, they cannot
request another urgent payment on the same day.

If the customer requests further reconsiderations, advise them this is
not possible, as they have had their one reconsideration for the day. No
further assessments of urgent payments should be undertaken that day.
The customer is not eligible to make a further request for any reason.

If the customer is not satisfied with the service they received and
wants to lodge a complaint, follow the complaints escalation process if
unable to resolve the complaint.

Customers are generally limited to 2 urgent payments due to exceptional
and unforeseen circumstances in 12 months. Only in extraordinary
circumstances can they receive an extra urgent payment. Extraordinary
circumstances must be verified and the Service Officer must seek
approval from Technical Peer Support (TPS) or a Team Leader or above to
confirm payment.

Customer unhappy with service received

If the customer is not satisfied with the level of service they received
during the urgent payment request process, they may be referred to a
Team Leader or Manager, or make a complaint.

Staff receiving the complaint should try to resolve the issue at first
point of contact.

Customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour

Services Australia staff must report and record all these incidents.
This is important as it informs the agency’s response, enabling
effective support for staff and customers. See Customer aggression -
Prevention and management for more information on how to deal with these
situations.

For how to report, record in CIMS and escalate incidents, see Customer
aggression – Reporting and recording incidents.

Inappropriate grant

Unlike most decisions that staff make, urgent payment decisions allow
the decision maker a level of discretion. For example, what one staff
member believes could be foreseen, another may not.

If the urgent payment was rejected incorrectly as per the guidelines,
consider changing the decision.

However, if the urgent payment was granted incorrectly, the customer
should not be disadvantaged by being refused the payment when they go to
the service centre to collect the payment.

In both these cases, if a staff member is not complying with the
guidelines or following Operational Blueprint, give them feedback. Do
this via the Staff Feedback tool using the category 'Urgent Payment'.

The Resources page contains a link to the Staff Feedback Tool.

Related links

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Immediate methods of payment

Processing urgent payment requests

Proposing and recording a Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Urgent payment requests

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
