
Assessing eligibility for ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand (NZ) citizens (AGDRP equivalent) - Tropical Cyclone Debbie - March 2017 003-17040103

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. See Operational Instructions for more details.

This document outlines how to determine if ex-gratia Disaster Recovery
Payment for New Zealand (NZ) non-protected Special Category visa (SCV)
(sub-class 444) holders can be paid to claimants. This payment provides
one-off financial assistance to eligible NZ citizens who have been
'adversely affected' by Tropical Cyclone Debbie which commenced on 28
March 2017 and continued in March and April 2017, where the Australian
Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) has been made available.

Affected Local Government Area (LGA)

The determination covered the affected LGAs of:

-   Byron
-   Gold Coast
-   Lismore
-   Logan
-   Mackay
-   Rockhampton
-   Scenic Rim
-   Tweed
-   Whitsunday

Claiming periods

Claiming periods for LGAs may vary.

Unless special circumstances apply (see the Operational Instructions for
further details), all claims for assistance must be lodged by:

-   30 September 2017 - Whitsunday
-   4 October 2017 - Gold Coast, Logan, Lismore, Mackay, Scenic Rim and
    Tweed
-   20 October 2017 - Rockhampton
-   19 January 2018 - Byron

The References page contains a link to the Operational Instructions.

Eligibility for ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Payment

A person will be eligible where they:

-   are at least 16 years old or is receiving a social security payment
    and
-   are a non-protected SCV (sub-class 444) holder and are a
    'non-resident' under the Social Security Act, and
-   have participated in the Australian tax system for at least one year
    in the past three financial years or is currently engaged in income
    generating activities with a likelihood of paying tax in Australia
    on or before 31 March 2018, and
-   are 'adversely affected' by a major disaster

A person cannot qualify for more than one ex-gratia payment in relation
to the same major disaster excluding Ex-gratia Disaster Recovery
Allowance.

A person can also claim as the 'Primary Claimant' on behalf of their
spouse, a dependent adult, or a child for which they are the principal
carer. The other persons:

-   must be 'adversely affected' by the disaster, and
-   must not qualify for, or have received, ex-gratia Disaster Recovery
    Payment for the same disaster

Adversely affected eligibility criteria

The circumstances in which a person is 'adversely affected' include:

a person was seriously injured as a direct result of the disaster, or

a person is an immediate family member of an Australian citizen who was
killed as a direct result of the disaster, or

a person's principal place of residence has been destroyed as a direct
result of the disaster, or

a person's principal place of residence has sustained major damage as a
direct result of the disaster, or

a person is a principal carer of a dependent child, and

-   the dependent child was seriously injured as a direct result of the
    disaster, or
-   the dependent child is the immediate family member of an Australian
    citizen who was killed as a direct result of the disaster, or
-   the dependent child's principal place of residence has been
    destroyed as a direct result of the disaster, or
-   the dependent child's principal place of residence has sustained
    major damage as a direct result of the disaster

Note: eligibility details and definitions can be found in the
Operational Instructions. The References page contains a link.

Proof of identity requirements

When a customer makes a claim for emergency payments Tier 1 Proof of
Identity (POI) is required.

Payment should not be refused when the customer cannot provide any or
all documentation required by POI Tier 1 guidelines unless there are
strong reasons for doubting the genuineness of the claim.

Lodgement of claim

Claims must be made within six months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGA, unless there are special circumstances
applying to the person's claim that justify a late lodgement.

The claim form is available on the Services Australia website, see the
Resources page for a link.

Staff can access the claim form from Services Australia Forms on the
intranet.

Claimants can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documentation to Services Australia,
    Reply Paid 7815, Canberra BC, ACT 2610, or
-   lodge a paper claim form and supporting documentation at the nearest
    service centre, agent or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax the completed form to and supporting documentation 1300 727 760

If the claimant provides their claim form and supporting documents to
the service centre, scan the form into the system, or fax them to 1300
727 760.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be notified in an Operational Message once they are able to reject
payments. The Resources page contains a link to Operational Messaging.

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Documentation standards

See the Resources page for documentation standards templates for
granted, pending and unsuccessful claims. For cancelled claims, use the
unsuccessful documentation standards template as a guide.

The Resources page contains links to Operational Messaging, Office
Locator, forms, documentation standards, Minimum Activity Management
Standards, scenarios, contact details for Emergency Management Teams,
maps of affected areas and a link to the Payment and Service Finder on
the Services Australia website.

Related links

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
