
Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit 003-17051801

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the guidelines for emergency payment claims
lodged outside of the time limit.

On this page:

Emergency payments

Emergency payments include:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP) - previously known as ex-gratia
    DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA) - previously known as ex-gratia
    DRA

Claiming emergency payments

Claims for emergency payments must be lodged within 6 months of the date
the disaster was declared. See Claiming emergency payments.

If a claim is lodged outside of the allowable claiming period, a
decision must be made that there are special circumstance that justify
the acceptance of the claim before starting assessment of the claim.

Special circumstances

Special circumstances are generally due to situations that are unusual,
uncommon or exceptional and each situation must be assessed on an
individual basis. As such, there is no precise, exhaustive or definitive
list of what constitutes a special circumstance.

In all situations, consideration must be given to why the customer was
unable to lodge their claim within the claiming period and each
application must be considered on its merits.

Factors to be considered when making a decision about special circumstances

A holistic view of the individual's circumstances should be applied when
making a decision about special circumstances. There may not be just one
factor, which makes a situation unusual or 'out of the ordinary' but a
combination of factors that apply to the individual. Service Officers
should consider:

-   The nature of the event or situation that prevented the customer
    from lodging their claim within the claiming period. (for example,
    natural disaster, bereavement, ill health, personal issues,
    accident)
-   Was the event or situation that delayed the lodgement of their claim
    outside the customer's control?
-   Was the customer prevented from taking action to lodge their claim
    before they were impacted by the event/situation? How were they
    prevented from taking action?
-   When did the event/situation that prevented them from lodging the
    claim occur?
-   How long was the delay between the event/situation that prevented
    them from lodging their claim and the actual lodgement of their
    claim?

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has contact details, a link to the disaster page on
the Services Australia website for updated claim forms and the Emergency
Management events page for disaster specific information. It also has
links to the Disaster Assist website and Disaster Health Care Assistance
Scheme.

Related links

Claiming emergency payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
