
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document contains details about Services Australia’s Social Work
Services.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

The role of social workers

The social work service is a network of social workers available in
face-to-face, telephony and national teams. The agencies social workers
help people who are going through a difficult time.

Social workers:

-   assess people’s needs
-   offer short term counselling
-   provide information and referrals to specialised services

Social workers give priority to:

-   people presenting at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   young people without adequate support
-   people experiencing family and domestic violence
-   people impacted by disasters and emergencies

Staff can refer a customer to a social worker if they think the customer
needs extra help. The Resources page has a link to the Social Work
Services Intranet page.

People presenting at risk of suicide, self-harm or harm to others

If a customer indicates they are at risk of suicide or harm to
themselves or others, staff should:

-   stay calm
-   listen to the customer and not dismiss any information they share
-   give the customer time to express themselves
-   say to the customer 'I will get someone who is trained to help you'

Stay with the customer until they are speaking to a social worker. A
social worker will respond straight away to customers who are at risk of
suicide.

In some circumstances, delegated staff members may release information
to the relevant authority without the customer’s permission if they
believe it is necessary to prevent or lessen risk of harm to the life,
health or welfare of a person. Wherever possible, seek the customer’s
permission to release information to the relevant authority.

For more details, see:

-   Customers talking about suicide or self-harm and
-   Disclosing information to third parties

Young people without adequate support

Social workers can help young people:

-   who do not have adequate support
-   if there are concerns for their safety or wellbeing

Social workers undertake:

-   Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) assessments for young people
    under 18 years
-   Youth Protective Assessments on behalf of the agency when referring
    young people to state or territory welfare authorities, and
-   Social Casework which helps young people under the age of 25 and
    other priority groups to achieve outcomes

People experiencing family and domestic violence

Staff may need to refer customers affected by Family and domestic
violence to a social worker if they are in an unsafe situation and/or
for professional intervention or assessment of specific entitlements.
This may include delegating claims for Crisis Payment or a child support
exemption due to family and domestic violence.

People impacted by disasters and emergencies

Social workers provide support to people affected by disasters and
emergencies, as part of a whole-of-government and community response.
Social workers can provide personal support and counselling and help
with referrals to material aid and community services.

People facing major disruption

Social workers assist customers who are facing a major disruption due to
traumatic life events or circumstances. This may include bereavement,
family breakdown or caring responsibilities.

Social workers and payments

Social workers complete professional assessments in relation to specific
income support entitlements. This can include:

-   Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) assessments for young people
    who have left home, under 18 years
-   customers who are claiming a Crisis Payment due to family and
    domestic violence
-   customers with concerns about child support matters seeking an
    exemption
-   an assessment of care situations for Carer Payment and Carer
    Allowance claims, when the claimant is under 18
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient Income Management assessments

Social workers also accept referrals from the National Redress Scheme,
Information and Integrity and Participation Solutions Team.

For more information about other tailored services offered by social
workers, refer to the Contents and Related Links section.

The Resources page has a links to the Intranet, including the Social
Work Services Branch home page and the Services Australia website.

Contents

Social work service referral

Social work assessments and assistance for at risk young people

Social work assessments for families

Social work assessments relating to customers experiencing family and
domestic violence

Social workers role in debt, payment assurance and compensation

Social worker role in the Participation Solution Teams (PST)

Requirements for recording of social work customer contact activities

Assessment and report writing

Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Social casework

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Related links

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Deferral of the prohibition of Family Tax Benefit instalment Payments
(PIP) in situations involving family and domestic violence

Social worker assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA) claims

Social worker involvement with Special Benefit

Determining if notification of a debt to an assurer can be delayed while
the assuree seeks refuge from family and domestic violence

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Social workers role in debt, payment assurance and compensation

Social work in the Participation Solutions Team (PST)

Referring individuals linked to the National Redress Scheme to a social
worker

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Customer aggression - Response

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Disclosing information to third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
