
Mutual Obligation Requirements for Special Benefit (SpB) 003-08050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Mutual Obligation Requirements (MOR) for
customers of working age who are claiming and/or in receipt of SpB.
These customers are also referred to as job seekers.

SpB MOR

SpB Mutual Obligation Requirements (MOR) apply to customers of working
age who are also capable of working. It makes sure that customers
receiving SpB in place of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA) are trying to find work that will earn them a sufficient
livelihood. Job seekers must meet their MOR unless they are exempt.

There are two types of MOR for SpB customers:

-   SpB Nominated Visa Holder (NVH) MOR based on legislation, and
-   SpB MOR based on policy. Only one MOR will apply at any time

SpB customers have the same MOR as JSP and YA. SpB customers are
required to be registered as a job seeker, connect with an Employment
Service Provider (ESP), enter into and satisfy the requirements in their
job plan. SpB NHV customers will be managed under the applicable job
seeker compliance systems Targeted Compliance Framework or the Job
Seeker Compliance Framework.

SpB Nominated Visa Holders (NVH) MOR (legislation)

The SpB Nominated Visa Holders Mutual Obligation Requirements (MOR)
apply to customers who are:

-   of workforce age 16 to age pension age, unless 15, independent and
    minimum school leaving age
-   capable of working (that is, if the person was residentially
    qualified, they would qualify for JSP or YA and they would be
    required to satisfy the MOR for the payment)
-   Nominated Visa Holders, and
-   not subject to an exemption from the SpB NVH MOR

The MO compliance arrangements for SpB NVH job seekers are the same as
those for JSP and YA job seekers. NVH customers will not be paid SpB if
they do not comply with their MOR without a reasonable exemption. NVH
customers will not be paid SpB if they do not enter into a Job Plan. See
Resources for a list of Visas and requirements. There are consequences
under the Targeted Compliance Framework or the Job Seeker Compliance
Framework if the job seeker fails to comply.

Special Benefit MOR (Policy)

The MOR for SpB customers who are:

-   not a NVH
-   of workforce age 16 to Age pension age, unless 15, Independent and
    minimum school leaving age
-   capable of working (that is, if the person was residentially
    qualified, they would qualify for JSP or YA and they would be
    required to satisfy the MOR for the payment), and
-   not subject to an exemption from the SpB MOR

Customers are required to be registered as a job seeker, linked with an
Employment Service Provider, enter into and satisfy the requirements
contained in their job plan. See Resources tab for a list of Visas and
requirements.

Note: SpB recipients with MOR which are based in policy are not subject
to compliance action.

When MOR do not apply

MOR do not apply to SpB customers who are:

-   permanently incapacitated (that is, would be granted Disability
    Support Pension (DSP) except they do not meet the residence
    requirements)
-   Criminal Justice stay Visa/Victim of Human Trafficking
-   unable to participate in the labour market (for example, due to
    permanent caring responsibilities, except they do not meet residence
    requirements)
-   principal carers with a child under 6

Applying MOR

Job seekers with MOR must show they are actively looking for work and
participating in a range of activities that will help them into
employment, unless Services Australia has granted the job seeker a
temporary exemption from these requirements.

A job seeker's MOR are generally determined by:

-   their age
-   their assessed work capacity, and
-   whether they have primary responsibility for the care of a child

Job seekers will have either full-time or part-time MOR.

Job seekers with full-time MOR should be looking for work on a full-time
basis and actively addressing individual circumstances that may affect
their capacity to undertake paid work.

The following job seekers have part-time MOR:

-   Principal Carer Parents (PCP) once the youngest child in their care
    turns 6 years of age
-   job seekers with a partial capacity to work (PCW) of 15 to 29 hours
    per week
-   mature age job seekers, 55 years and over
-   with the exception of SpB job seekers paid under the SpB Activity
    Test, Services Australia managed job seekers fully meet requirements
    by participating in approved activities and do not have job search
    requirements

For more information see Applying mutual obligation requirements.

Waiting periods that may apply for customers subject to the SpB NVH MOR

A waiting period of 4-6 weeks for Unemployment non-payment period
applies for customers who are subject to the SpB NVH MOR.

Study

SpB customers over 18 years of age should be actively looking for work,
however, studying full-time can only be approved in certain
circumstances for defined periods.

As part of meeting their MOR, full-time vocational study or short
vocational courses of less than 12 months duration can be approved by a
customer's ESP, but only if it is likely to improve the customer's
prospects for obtaining suitable paid work. This information should be
coded on the customer's record.

Part-time or full-time study of less than 12 months duration may be
approved by an ESP as an activity when the job seeker commences the Work
for the Dole Phase.

If the customer is subject to MO this should be monitored during the 13
week review processes as this will be contained in their job plan and
managed by their ESP.

Under no circumstances can full-time study of more than 12 months
duration be approved.

Guidelines for approving study is available in the Resources tab.

Job Plans

SpB job seekers with MO requirements are required to agree and enter to
a Job Plan. Job seekers are either Services Australia or ESP managed.
Generally, the organisation responsible for the ongoing management of
the job seeker negotiates their job plan.

To meet MOR, job seekers must participate in a range of approved
activities aimed at improving employment prospects and targeted towards
their individual circumstances. The number of hours a job seeker will
undertake will vary according to their age and work capacity.

Where the job seeker refuses to enter into, or renegotiate a Job Plan,
including unreasonably delaying entering into a Job Plan, they may have
their payments cancelled. See Refusing to enter into a Job Plan or
Participation Plan.

Exemption from MOR for SpB

SpB job seekers are required to demonstrate they are looking for work.
However, there are circumstances where exemptions apply if they:

-   are not of workforce age (that is, under minimum age for YA or of
    Age Pension age), or
-   are permanently incapacitated and not eligible for DSP (that is,
    would be granted DSP except for residence requirements as either
    manifest or has an assessed work capacity of 0 to 14 hours a week),
    or
-   are of workforce age, but have caring responsibilities and not
    eligible for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) (that
    is, would be granted CP and/or CA except for residence
    requirements), or
-   are a Criminal Justice Stay Visa (CJSV) Holder/Victim of
    Trafficking, or
-   are a principal carer of a dependent child aged under 6 years (only
    one parent can the principal carer if both parents are receiving SpB

SpB job seekers are subject to the same eligibility criteria as JSP and
YA other when assessing for a temporary exemption.

A person who is granted a 070, 449, 785, 786 or 790 visa will have an
automatic temporary exemption from MOR for 13 weeks from the visa grant
date.

Non-compliance with MOR

Where a SpB NVH job seeker does not comply with their MOR they may be
subject to compliance action. Compliance action is generated by ESP or
by Services Australia. When a MO failure is committed, NVH job seekers
may have their payment suspended or a financial penalty applied.

PST-skilled Service Officers undertake all compliance investigations and
determinations. Service Officers who have the Unemployment Non-Payment
Period security resource make decisions to apply or reject unemployment
failures.

Appeals

When a job seeker contacts Services Australia to request a review of a
MO failure, the call is to be transferred to the Participation Solutions
Team (PST) via Services Australia Workspace (option PST NATIONAL VIRTUAL
Q). If the job seeker is unable to be connected to PST provide them with
the PST phone number 1300 306 325.

See Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals.

The Resources page contains a link to the Special Benefit Level 2
Helpdesk contact details.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Negotiating Job Plans

Non-compliance events

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
