-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify if a customer's claim for Crisis
Payment (CrP), as a humanitarian entrant (HUM) who has newly arrived in
Australia, is payable and provides the action required to process the
CrP claim.

Eligibility for CrP-HUM

To be eligible for CrP-HUM a person must:

-   meet common criteria for CrP
-   make a claim within 7 days of arriving for the first time in
    Australia
-   be a holder of a qualifying humanitarian visa for Crisis Payment

Claiming options

CrP-HUM claims can be made via the following channels:

Online claim in Centrelink Online Services, by making the following
selections:

-   Make a Claim
-   Crisis Payments
-   Apply for Extreme Circumstances

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Note: from 1 August 2021, the paper claim (SU622) was decommissioned
from the Services Australia website and the Forms intranet page.

The Claim for persons granted a Refugee, Humanitarian or Protection Visa
(SS415) can be used as an intent to claim only. Specialist National
Refugee servicing team staff will make an outbound contact to complete
CrP-HUM claim as an ACC.

Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP) and Community Refugee Integration Support Pilot (CRISP)

A person arriving in Australia on one of the qualifying humanitarian
visa subclasses can be referred to a Humanitarian Settlement Program
(HSP) service provider, or Community Refugee Integration and Settlement
Pilot (CRISP) representative to access settlement support.

See Refugee entrant service offer for more details.

Hardship advance and possible recovery

Humanitarian entrants who qualify for CrP-HUM during the new claim
process, are also entitled to a hardship advance of the first instalment
of their social security pension or social security benefit payment.
This should be offered to all customers when their social security
payment is processed.

Customers must be informed of recovery arrangements, the impact on their
next payment and other service delivery options before making an
informed decision about whether to take the advance. This early payment
will be recovered from the first ordinary instalment of their social
security pension or social security benefit payment.

Alternative assistance

If a customer claiming CrP-HUM is found to be ineligible, the assessing
Service Officer (SO) should endeavour to offer alternative assistance or
refer the customer to specialist service, which may be available to
them.

The Resources page has a list of publications in other languages
available to customers and community organisations.

Related links

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Customer compensation and act of grace payments

Making a decision about a Hardship Advance

Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian Program

Refugee entrant service offer

Interpreters

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
