-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what staff need to do when a customer talks about
suicide or harm to themselves or others. Some people give warning signs
or some clue of their intent. Others may openly admit to their plan.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

Child Support customers

Service Officers must follow the correct procedures when responding to
Child Support customers who are talking about suicide or self-harm. See
Contact with Child Support customers and follow the Customer talking
about suicide or harm (self or others) table.

Service Officer role

When a customer talks about suicide or harming themselves:

-   remain calm
-   listen carefully and do not dismiss any information they share
-   allow the customer time to express themselves
-   say 'I will get someone who is trained to help you'
-   identify any child safety concerns and respond appropriately

Refer the customer to a social worker who is trained to help people in
these situations. All referrals to the Social Work Line must be warm
transfers.

Service Officers may need to document a security incident using:

-   the Customer Incident Management System (CIMS) on Customer First for
    Centrelink, or
-   the Customer Incident Reporting Tool (CIRT) for Medicare and Child
    Support

See the Resources page for:

-   recording incidents in CIMS and reporting security incidents to the
    Security Branch
-   how to identify potential suicide risk through verbal and non-verbal
    clues
-   releasing information for suicide or self-harm
-   Delegations Register
-   contact details for Language Services, Switchboard and national
    support services
-   Services Australia Workspace Quick Reference Guide
-   how to find a social worker
-   international customers

Team Leader and Manager roles

Centrelink

Some staff, including Service Managers, Team Leaders, Service Support
Managers, Assessors (APS6) and Social Workers (APS5 and above), have
delegation to release information to prevent or lessen a threat to life,
health and welfare of a person to a relevant authority.

Medicare

Some staff, including Service Managers and Team Leaders, have delegation
to release information to prevent or lessen a serious or imminent threat
to life or health of an individual to a relevant authority.

Team Leaders or Managers can request a welfare check from police
services by contacting triple zero (000). Record any release of
information in the public interest in the Release of Information form.

See the Resources page for links to release of information for suicide
or self-harm, and the Release of Information form.

Customers who are overseas

Staff are to follow the steps outlined on the Process page for the
relevant referral channel. This includes notifying a Team Leader and
referring to a social worker.

If a customer contacts from overseas, a Team Leader or Manager is to
refer them straight away to the Australian embassy in that country if:

-   the customer or others are in immediate danger or at risk of harm,
    and
-   a social worker is not available or the customer terminates the call

See the Resources page for a link to Our embassies and consulates
overseas.

The Resources page has links and information on:

-   how to identify potential suicide risk through verbal and nonverbal
    clues
-   a quick reference guide about supporting customers at risk of
    suicide
-   Customer Incident Management System (CIMS), releasing information
    for suicide or self-harm, Delegations Register, Security Incident
    Reporting
-   contact details for Language Services, Switchboard and national
    support services
-   Services Australia Workspace Quick Reference Guide
-   how to find a social worker
-   international Customers

Related links

Social work service referral

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Customer aggression - Response

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
