-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child's safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document explains how to help identify customers at risk of, or
experiencing, vulnerability.

Identifying vulnerability

Customers can experience vulnerability as a result of:

-   unexpected life events, and/or
-   long-term or short-term circumstances

Customers experiencing vulnerability may require additional support or
assistance to access payments and services.

Anyone can be at risk of vulnerability. It is not linked to a specific
customer group or characteristic. Everyone experiences vulnerability
differently.

Vulnerability can:

-   impact anyone at any time
-   be transient in nature
-   be complex
-   impact in different ways

Vulnerability can occur due to:

one or many risk factors

the combination and intensity of risk factors

limited supports or support networks which help reduce the risk of
experiencing vulnerability, such as:

-   family and social support
-   connection to country
-   religion, or
-   a caring doctor

Vulnerability may be identified in interactions with customers through:

Customer disclosure: A customer tells you that they are experiencing a
vulnerable circumstance

Customer cues: This may be in person, over the phone, in writing or as
part of an online claim. Observe:

-   what the person says
-   what the person doesn’t say
-   how the person says it
-   distress or anxious behaviour
-   body language

File review: A customer’s record can show signs they may be experiencing
vulnerability. This could be information about a range of circumstances
including accommodation, health and payment type

Identifying vulnerable circumstances

There are many circumstances which may place a customer at a higher risk
of experiencing vulnerability. Not everyone experiencing these
circumstances will identify as vulnerable. A person’s experience will
depend on the combination and intensity of their presenting
circumstances.

Presenting circumstances customers may have when they are at risk of, or
experiencing vulnerability, include:

-   Safety concerns
-   Health concerns (physical, mental, disability)
-   Financial hardship
-   Housing
-   Experiencing a crisis or trauma
-   Limited support or connection

There are many protective factors that may reduce a customer’s risk of
experiencing vulnerability, including:

-   family and social support
-   connection to country
-   religion, or
-   a caring health professional

Identifying these can help determine the most appropriate response and
referral options.

Role of Service Officers and staff

A Service Officer’s role is to:

-   identify vulnerability
-   respond appropriately by offering referrals to available resources,
    external service providers or agency specialist staff, if required
-   record details on the customer’s record where applicable
-   take responsibility for addressing the customer’s reason for contact

Note: it may not always be necessary to refer a customer to a specialist
or support service for further assistance.

Referral options

Internal supports

The agency has a range of specialist staff who can support customers
experiencing vulnerability, if required. These include:

-   Social Workers
-   Community Engagement Officers (CEOs)
-   Multicultural Service Officers (MSOs)
-   Financial Information Service Officers
-   Indigenous Service Officers
-   Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Advisers
-   Farm Household Case Officers
-   Aged Care Specialist Officers
-   Personalised Services
-   Assessment Services

For more information, see Specialist officers and other internal
supports for customers.

External referrals

External services available include:

-   Community or welfare agencies, for example Salvation Army
-   Local government or state government services

See the Resources page for more information on other external referral
programmes and services.

Our Vulnerability Strategy

The Vulnerability Strategy outlines the agency’s commitment to help us
deliver timely connection (referral) to services and support for
customers experiencing vulnerability. See the Resources page for a link
to the Vulnerability Strategy intranet page for more information.

Related links

Social work service referral

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Referral to external support services

Specialist officers and other internal supports for customers

Family and domestic violence

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

Personalised services

Social worker and other service referrals for child support customers

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Sensitive issue management Cuba Process Help

Additional support and services

Separating safely - protecting personal details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
