
Identity confirmation for the MH17 Family Support Package 003-19092603

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines identity requirements for the MH17 Family Support
Package.

Identity confirmation and different residency types

A customer, their nominee or a legal guardian of a child under 16 years
who does not have an Identity Status of confirmed must provide identity
documents to Services Australia. See Identity Confirmation. Note: if a
customer has previously confirmed their identity and has an Identity
Status of ‘Confirmed’, they only need to authenticate and establish
Proof of Record Ownership (PORO) to the record.
Follow Authenticating a Centrelink customer.
Do not prompt the customer, give hints, or provide answers to the
questions to determine PORO.

The identity documents a customer must provide depends on their
‘residency type’. A customer claiming the MH17 Family Support Package
may be classified under 1 of 3 different residency types as follows:

-   Australian resident - lives in Australia
-   Australian citizen - does not live in Australia
-   Foreign national - any person who does not live in Australia and who
    is not an Australian citizen

Identity documents required - Australian residents and Australian citizens

Australian residents and Australian citizens - over the age of 16,
including nominees and legal guardians

Customers over the age of 16, nominees and legal guardians of a child
under 16 years who do not have an Identity Status of confirmed must
provide 1 document from each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of Identity
-   Primary Use in Community
-   Secondary Use in Community

See Confirming a customer’s identity and Identity documents A to Z for
more information.

Australian residents and Australian citizens - child under 16 years

For claims for a child under 16 years, their legal guardian must provide
identity documents on behalf of the child. These identity documents
include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document or
-   sufficient identity documents to satisfy the Service Officer of the
    child's identity.

See Identity documents A to Z for more information.

Australian residents must provide an original copy of their identity
documents to support their MH17 Family Support Package claim.

Australian citizens must provide an Australian Consulate certified copy
of their identity documents to support their MH17 Family Support Package
claim. Australian Consulate details can be found in the Resources page.
Note: no fees apply for the purposes of family members applying for the
MH17 Family Support Package. See Providing identity documents (below)
for more information on how Australian residents and Australian citizens
provide their identity documents to Services Australia.

Note: linkage cannot be carried out for customers (Australian citizens)
who do not provide their 3 identity documents in person at a service
centre, agent or access point. In these instances the customer can be
given the status of ‘confirmed, no linkage’ provided that the documents
lodged by the customer can be verified using the Document Verification
Service. See Coding identity documents.

Identity documents required - foreign nationals

Foreign nationals living overseas must provide an Australian Consulate
certified copy of the following identity documents to the agency to
support their MH17 Family Support Package claim:

-   Valid passport, and
-   Foreign birth, marriage or education certificate, driver licence or
    national identity card

See Providing identity documents (below) for more information on how
foreign nationals must provide their identity documents.

Australian Consulate details can be found in the Resources page.
Note: no fees apply for the purposes of family members applying for the
MH17 Family Support Package.

Foreign nationals who have provided the required documents will be
granted using Alternative Identity provisions. Documents must be scanned
to the customer’s record and if the service officer is confident in the
customer’s identity, an alternative identity code of UD should be
applied.

Providing identity documents

Australian residents must provide their original identity documents by
visiting a service centre, agent or access point. The Resources page
provides a link to the ‘Find us’ page on the Services Australia website.

As per standard practice, if a customer attends a service centre with
identity documents, service centre Service Officers are to conduct
thorough checks to confirm if the customer has a record, and if not,
create a customer record.

Australian citizens and foreign nationals must provide the Australian
consulate certified copy of their identity documents. This can be done:

-   by post (costs apply)
    Services Australia
    Emergency Processing Centre
    PO Box 7815
    CANBERRA BC ACT 2610
    Australia
-   by fax - (+61) 1300 727 760

Australian Consulate details can be found in the Resources page.
Note: no fees apply for the purposes of family members applying for the
MH17 Family Support Package.

If required, ask customers to provide their identity documents within 28
days. Follow the Requesting evidence table in Eligibility and coding
MH17 Family Support Package claims.

Alternative identity

For customers or legal guardians unable to confirm their identity an
Alternative Identity assessment may be required. See Alternative
Identity. For further assistance, escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk. Follow the Escalating claims and special circumstances table
in Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims.

Customers who have one application approved for a specified travel
period and paid under an alternative identity assessment should have the
same alternative identity code applied to any subsequent claims for
subsequent travel periods. For example, if a customer is paid under an
alternative identity assessment in claim period 1 and reapplies for
claim period 2 and claim period 3 (if applicable), the same alternative
identity code should be applied.

Identity Review Period

If a customer is in hardship and is unable to provide sufficient
identity documents to confirm their identity, a Service Officer must
consider applying an Identity Review Period.

A period of up to 28 days can apply for the provision of identity
documentation, with an extension granted in exceptional circumstances.
See Identity Review Period (IRP). For further assistance, escalate the
claim to the Level 2 Helpdesk. Follow the Escalating claims and special
circumstances table in Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support
Package claims.

The Resources page contains links to the request for information letter
text for the manual letter, Australian Consulate details and the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Confirming a customer’s identity

Identity Confirmation

Identity documents A to Z

Alternative Identity

Identity Review Period

Coding identity documents

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Identity fraud

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims

Initial contact and claiming the MH17 Family Support Package

MH17 Family Support Package

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
