
Social work service referral 003-12010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

There is a direct number to social workers, for Service Officers working
from home, who are unable to use IWS.

This document explains how staff can refer a customer to a social
worker.

Child Safe Framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour that raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety.

Follow the agency’s Risk Identification and Reporting model when
identifying and responding to child safety concerns. See Risk
identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare of a
child.

Customer needs social worker assistance

Social workers:

-   assess customers' needs
-   offer short-term counselling and support, and
-   work with other staff and services to help vulnerable people

Priority is given to:

-   customers at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   young people without adequate support
-   customers who are experiencing family and domestic violence

The Process page has a full list of referral types.

The Resources page links to useful information.

Contents

Social work role in the National Redress Scheme

Social worker assessment for Crisis Payment (CrP) Extreme Circumstances
family and domestic violence

Social worker assessment of care situations for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA) claims

Social worker involvement with Special Benefit (SpB)

Social work role with Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clients and
recording in SWIS

Related links

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Assessment Services

Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line

Referral to external support services

Social casework

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Customer aggression – Response

Family and domestic violence

Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
