
Assessing eligibility for an Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) – Tropical Cyclone Debbie – March 2017 003-17040101

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. See Operational Instructions for more details.

This document outlines how to determine if an AGDRP can be paid to
claimants affected by Tropical Cyclone Debbie. AGDRP has been activated
to help people who have been 'adversely affected' by the severe weather
and rainfall and associated flooding that occurred. Tropical Cyclone
Debbie started on 28 March 2017 and continued in March and April. The
AGDRP provides one-off financial assistance to eligible Australians.

Affected Local Government Area (LGA)

The determination covers the affected LGA of:

-   Byron
-   Gold Coast
-   Lismore
-   Logan
-   Mackay
-   Rockhampton
-   Scenic Rim
-   Tweed
-   Whitsunday

Claiming periods

Claiming periods for LGAs may vary.

Unless special circumstances apply (see the Operational Instructions for
further details), all claims for assistance must be lodged by:

-   30 September 2017 - Whitsunday
-   4 October 2017 - Gold Coast, Logan, Lismore, Mackay, Scenic Rim and
    Tweed
-   20 October 2017 - Rockhampton
-   19 January 2018 - Byron

The References page contains a link to the Operational Instructions.

Eligibility for AGDRP

A person is qualified for AGDRP if:

the person is at least 16 years old, or is receiving a social security
payment, and

the person is:

-   an Australian resident, or
-   the holder of a specified visa for AGDRP/DRA, or
-   receiving a social security payment, or
-   is an Australian citizen who is not an Australian resident and who
    is covered by a determination under 1061K (2) of the Social Security
    Act, and

the person was 'adversely affected' by a major disaster

Note: a person cannot be qualified for more than one AGDRP in relation
to the same major disaster.

Adversely affected eligibility criteria

The circumstances in which a person is 'adversely affected' is where:

a person was seriously injured as a direct result of the disaster, or

a person is an immediate family member of an Australian who was killed
as a direct result of the disaster, or

a person's principal place of residence has been destroyed as a direct
result of the disaster, or

a person's principal place of residence has sustained major damage as a
direct result of the disaster, or

a person is a principal carer of a dependent child, and one of the
following occurs:

-   the dependent child was seriously injured as a direct result of the
    disaster, or
-   the dependent child is the immediate family member of an Australian
    who was killed as a direct result of the disaster, or
-   the dependent child's principal place of residence has been
    destroyed as a direct result of the disaster, or
-   the dependent child's principal place of residence has sustained
    major damage as a direct result of the disaster

Note: eligibility details and definitions can be found in the
Operational Instructions. The References page contains a link to the
Operational Instructions.

Proof of identity requirements

When a claimant makes a claim for emergency payments Tier 1 Proof of
Identity (POI) is required.

Payment should not be refused when the customer cannot provide any or
all documentation required by POI Tier 1 guidelines unless there are
strong reasons for doubting the genuineness of the claim.

Lodgement of claim

Claims must be made within six months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGA unless special circumstances apply.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website, see the
Resources page for a link.

Staff can access the claim form from Services Australia Forms on the
intranet.

Claimants can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documentation to Services Australia,
    Reply Paid 7815, Canberra BC, ACT 2610, or
-   lodge a claim form and supporting documentation at the nearest
    service centre, agent or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax the completed form and supporting documentation to 1300 727 760

If the claimant provides their claim form and supporting documents to
the service centre, scan the form into the system, or fax them to 1300
727 760.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be notified via an Operational Message once they are able to reject
payments. The Resources page contains a link to Operational Messaging.

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Documentation standards

See the Resources page for documentation standards templates for
granted, pending and unsuccessful claims. For cancelled claims, use the
unsuccessful documentation standards template as a guide.

The Resources page contains links to Operational Messaging, Disaster
Recovery Payment Helpdesk details, forms and factsheets, documentation
standards, scenarios, contact details for Emergency Management Teams,
links to maps of affected areas and a link to the Payment and Service
Finder on the Services Australia website.

Related links

AGDRP NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
