[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document outlines the different categories and fields used by
Services Australia social workers to record unreasonable to live at home
(UTLAH) assessments in the Social Work Recording Application (SWRA) in
Process Direct and the Social Work Information System (SWIS) in Customer
First.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour that raises
concerns about a child's safety, Services Australia sets out specific
steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk Identification and
Reporting model, when identifying and responding to child safety
concerns. See: Risk identification and management of threats to the
safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this model
and the agency's commitment to child safety.

Under 18 assessments

Under 18 years UTLAH assessments are often complex. The assessment
procedures include:

-   interviewing the customer
-   contact with one or both of the parents, except in limited
    circumstances. These include if contact with the parent would
    present a severe risk to the young person or others, such as
    siblings
-   contact with an independent third party, and
-   writing a professional report

The assessing social worker will also assess any risk of harm to the
young person, their support needs and make referrals to appropriate
internal and external support services.

Customer over 18

Service Officers in the Over 18 UTLAH Assessment Team do the UTLAH
assessment when the customer is 18 years or older. They do not use the
SWRA or SWIS. See Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for
customers claiming or receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support
Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP).

Social workers conduct UTLAH assessments for customer aged 18 years and
over by exception, see Conducting a social worker unreasonable to live
at home (UTLAH) assessment. If a social worker does conduct an
assessment for a customer 18 years or older they should record the
assessment in SWIS.

Related links

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Conducting a social worker unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
assessment

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
