[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the Social Work Recording Application (SWRA) in
Process Direct and its use as a report and case note recording system by
Services Australia's social work service.

About SWRA

SWRA is a Process Direct workflow used to write reports and case notes
for specific social work assessments. SWRA was developed to address some
of the limitations of the Social Work Information System (SWIS) through
rapid automation. SWRA does not replace SWIS. The two platforms are used
in conjunction with one another to record and store information about
the customer contact activities of Services Australia’s social workers.

Information that can be recorded using SWRA

SWRA can be used to record the referral, the file/paper assessment
contact and a range of reports and case notes. These are:

-   Crisis Payment (CrP) assessment reports for all types of family and
    domestic violence related CrP applications.
-   Child Support Scheme (CSS) assessment reports for full and partial
    exemptions relating to family and domestic violence.
-   Unreasonable To Live At Home (UTLAH) assessment reports for all
    Under 18 categories.
-   Income Management (IM) Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
    Youth exclusion (detrimental) assessment reports
-   IM VWPR notice assessment reports
-   Special circumstances debt waiver recommendation general reports
-   Social casework plan case notes
-   Other extreme circumstances CrP assessment case notes
-   CrP not pursued case notes
-   CSS exemption not pursued case notes
-   UTLAH not pursued case notes
-   Second reports for combined CrP and CSS exemption assessments
-   Second reports for combined CrP and UTLAH assessments

Instructions on how to use the SWRA to create specific reports and case
notes are found in the relevant SWIS recording Operational Blueprint
assessment procedures.

Information that cannot be recorded using the SWRA

Customer contact and third party contact cannot be recorded using the
SWRA. These contacts can be recorded through SWIS in Customer First
after recording the referral, file/paper assessment contact and the
report or case note in the SWRA.

Contents

Recording Child Support Scheme (CSS) exemption referrals – social work

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments - social work

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notice
assessments - social work

Recording unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments for customers
under 18 years of age - social work

Recording Crisis Payment (CrP) assessments - social work

Social casework

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
