
Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First 003-01040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document explains how to process AGDRP and NZ DRP claims for
disaster events activated before 2022. These are claims for Australian
Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery
Payment for New Zealand non-protected Special Category (subclass 444)
visa holders (NZ DRP).

Claims for activations from 2022

See Processing AGDRP and DRP claims in Process Direct.

If a customer is unable to access Online Claims, see Claiming Emergency
Payments for details on how to accept the customer’s claim using
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). Disaster Recovery Payment Workflow in
Customer First is not used to accept or process AGDRP or NZ DRP for
claims for activations from 2022.

Staff not trained for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Before processing AGDRP or NZ DRP claims, staff must complete technical
training. Line managers will let Service Officers know about training
requirements.

If not trained in taking AGDRP or NZ DRP claims, see Claiming emergency
payments.

Processing claims

Fully assess the customer's eligibility before coding the claim.

Emergency payments are processed in Customer First, in the FSP (Flexible
Support Payment) subsystem of ISS. See the Resources page for how to
access ISS subsystems.

Staff process claims for activations before 2022 using the Disaster
Recovery Payment Claims workflow on the customer's Centrelink record.
This includes unsuccessful claims.

Documenting standards and Fast Notes

Record all relevant details as per the DOC standards.

Staff must use these Fast Notes:

AGDRP/NZ DRP verbal claim when taking verbal claim details from a
customer, There is no need to use this for paper claims, as the claim
form has all the claim details

AGDRP/NZ DRP Granted for successful claims

AGDRP/NZ DRP Rejected for unsuccessful claims

DRA Blocking AGDRP claim when a customer has a Disaster Recovery
Allowance (DRA) or NZ DRA claim blocking their AGDRP/NZ DRP claim

Fast Note to record a partner's claim for the event when the partner has
other workflows blocking the customer’s AGDRP or NZ DRP claim

-   EVENT NAME AGDRP CLM
-   EVENT NAME NZ DRP CLM

Rejecting claims

Only reject unsuccessful claims once there is formal approval to reject
claims for the event.

Approval is given by staff communication channels and published in the
Operational Blueprint for the event.

LGA not declared

Do not reject a claim if all of the following apply:

-   approval has not been given to reject claims for the event
-   a customer is claiming for a Local Government Area (LGA) that has
    not been declared
-   the customer meets all other eligibility criteria and would receive
    a payment if their LGA was declared

Payment methods

Customers will receive payments in:

-   their nominated Australian bank account, or
-   their nominee's Australian bank account if they have a payment
    nominee

Staff must offer customers an immediate payment by NPP if available, or
RTGS.

If updating a bank account for a current customer, make sure the
customer can provide their previous bank account details.

Payment methods for AGDRP and NZ DRP:

direct credit into the customer's bank account the next business day

immediate payment

-   priority direct credit - limited to $3,000 per day
    - New Payment Platform (NPP). Not available for all banks
    - Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS). Available for most banks. A fee
    may be charged by the customer's financial institution
-   Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) cards

NPP and RTGS help customers receive payments faster. Offer these methods
to customers who need funds urgently.

Check payment methods available to the customer first.

Use one payment method unless the customer requests otherwise.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer may need a third party (a person or organisation) to act on
their behalf when claiming AGDRP or NZ DRP. See Appointing nominees and
Obligations of nominees.

Establish a nominee’s identity before processing an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313).

If there are concerns about a nominee’s identity or claim information
they provide, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

Claims

can be lodged by a correspondence nominee

cannot be lodged by a:

-   Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority, or
-   payment nominee

Only a payment nominee can get a payment on a customer’s behalf.

Quality On Line (QOL)

QOL standards for all pre-2022 disaster events:

-   Processed claims within the last 12 months - no QOL needed
-   Processed AGRDP within 12-18 months - 5 claims submitted for QOL
    checking
-   Not processed AGRDP before or longer than 18 months –10 claims
    submitted for QOL checking QOL standards for all other events is
    standard

Desktop messaging

The DEMC service is available for all emergency payments, including
AGDRP and NZ DRP. Use this service to send an SMS to customers to
improve the chances of contacting them.

Incorrect payments

If AGDRP or NZ DRP should not have been paid to a customer, complete a
referral to the Debt Management Branch. Document why payment was
incorrect.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Help from Technical Peer Support

If staff need help to finalise a claim, they must not call Technical
Peer Support unless a customer is on the phone. See Resources for
details.

The Resources page has links to Services Australia and external
websites, contact details, payment query template, keywords, how to get
help from Technical Peer Support and a task card for accessing ISS
subsystems.

Related links

Current emergency management events

Claiming emergency payments

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct

AGDRP and NZ DRP claims for an immediate family member who has died or
is missing

Additional Payment for Children (APC)

Evacuation and Recovery Centres during emergency events

Processing Special Benefit (SpB) claims

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Family and domestic violence

Immediate methods of payment

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for emergency payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
