-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the role of Services Australia in the early
release of superannuation on financial hardship grounds.

Overview

A person generally cannot access their superannuation before they reach
their preservation age and have retired. However, in some cases a person
can apply for an early release of their superannuation if they meet
certain eligibility requirements, including if they are in financial
hardship.

Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994

Rules about an early withdrawal of superannuation on financial hardship
grounds are not part of social security legislation or determined under
the Social Security Act (SSA). The superannuation industry has its own
legislation, which governs the release of superannuation.

The financial hardship requirements are outlined in Sub-regulation 6.01
(5) and (5A) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations
1994. These regulations determine if a customer is taken to be in
financial hardship for an early release of superannuation, not the SSA.

One requirement a person must meet is about getting a qualifying income
support payment for a specified period of time. Services Australia can
provide customers with an eligibility letter to confirm if they have met
the income support requirements.

Income support requirements for financial hardship

According to the Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994,
a person is considered to be in severe financial hardship if they have
had a:

continuous period of 26 weeks on a qualifying income support payment
immediately before the application. These customers:

-   cannot have gaps in payment
-   must be current on a qualifying payment at the time of their
    application

cumulative total of 39 weeks, at any time after reaching their
preservation age plus 39 weeks, and are not retired. These customers:

-   can have gaps in payment
-   do not need to be current on a qualifying payment at the time of
    their application

While in some circumstances, the SSA allows for periods of nil or zero
rate to be counted as continuous, these sections apply to decisions made
under the SSA. The Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulation do
not have the same provisions and a literal meaning of the word
‘continuous’ applies. Any break in the customer’s payment or periods of
nil or zero rate do not count towards the required continuous period.

Income support payment types

The Department of Treasury decides which income support payments allow a
customer to apply for an early release of superannuation on financial
hardship grounds.

Qualifying income support payments include payment types that are
generally designed to provide financial support to people who are unable
to support themselves financially due to unexpected life events, such as
disability or loss of employment.

Student payments, including ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (full
time student), are not qualifying payments for early release of
superannuation as they are designed to help in meeting some of the costs
of studying, which students have made a voluntary decision to engage in.
Additionally, those receiving student payments benefit from higher
minimum income thresholds than other payments, which means they can earn
more income from employment before their fortnightly payments start to
reduce. This provides them greater flexibility to work while studying
without affecting the level of Government support they receive.

Service Australia’s role

Services Australia’s only role in the early release of superannuation is
to respond to customer’s request for a letter confirming they have
received a qualifying income support payment for the required period.
The agency has no other involvement in determining if the customer is in
financial hardship, or in deciding if superannuation monies can be
released.

It is the customer's superannuation fund who is responsible for deciding
if the customer:

-   is in financial hardship, and
-   if they are eligible for an early release of their superannuation

Even if the customer meets the income support requirements and the
agency confirms this in a letter, a superannuation fund may decide not
to release the funds to the customer for other reasons. The agency
cannot review or override a decision.

Eligibility letters

Eligibility letters are issued by agency staff via the:

-   Issue Superannuation Advice workflow in Process Direct, or
-   Issue Super Advice guided procedure in Customer First

Manual letters should only be issued when Process Direct or the guided
procedure are unavailable, or other extenuating circumstances exist that
prevent system letters being issued. For example, multiple and
intertwined CRNs or system errors.

Alternatively, a customer may consent to their superannuation fund
checking their eligibility online using Centrelink Confirmation
eServices (CCeS). This means the customer does not need to obtain a
letter from the agency.

The eligibility letter:

-   confirms if the customer meets the income support requirements for
    the early release of superannuation on financial hardship grounds
-   is given to the superannuation fund by the customer to help the
    super fund make a decision about if they can release the customer’s
    superannuation early
-   is valid for 21 days only. A customer will need to request a new
    eligibility letter if they do not give it to their superannuation
    fund during this period
-   can only be issued on the date that the customer contacts the agency
    and makes a request for a letter. There are no provisions in the
    Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994 that allow
    for backdating of letters, or performing retrospective eligibility
    checks, for a date before the customer's contact date. This also
    applies to checks performed by a superannuation fund via CCeS.
-   is automatically issued to the customer’s myGov inbox if they
    receive their Centrelink letters online
-   should be issued even if there is a review of the customer’s
    eligibility for payment, for example, a debt is under investigation

Important: Service Officers should not manually issue an eligibility
letter (Q230 or Q251), unless manual checks have been performed on the
customer’s record to confirm that the customer meets the income support
requirements. Issuing a Q230 or Q251 letter incorrectly can cause
consequences for the customer when they lodge an application with their
super fund, including rejection of their application. This is common
when the super fund uses CCeS and the information through the service
does not match the information on the customer’s letter.

Customers with an involuntary nominee arrangement

An involuntary nominee arrangement is where a third party has been given
legal right to administer the customer's affairs as the result of a:

-   court
-   tribunal
-   guardianship, or
-   administration order

If the Reason for Arrangement on the NORS screen is CRT (Court appointed
involuntary nominee arrangement) or PAI (Power of Attorney involuntary
nominee arrangement):

-   under no circumstances is an eligibility letter to be issued at the
    request of this customer without their nominee's approval
-   contact must be made with the nominee and approval obtained before
    issuing the letter
-   the name of the nominee who gave the approval must be included in
    the DOC. A copy of the eligibility letter must then to be printed
    and posted to the nominee
-   if the nominee does not provide approval or cannot be contacted, the
    Service Officer must reject the request for the letter. The customer
    should be advised that the letter needs to be requested by their
    nominee

Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

Super funds are able to use the agency’s CCeS service to confirm if the
customer meets the income support requirement for early release of
superannuation electronically. This means that the customer does not
need to obtain an eligibility letter from the agency.

To use CCeS, the superannuation fund administrators or trustees must:

-   apply and be approved to use the service
-   have the customer's consent before checking their information with
    the agency

CCeS is fast and effective and can provide an immediate result to the
superannuation fund. It also helps to reduce the risk of fraud. If a
superannuation fund is interested in applying to use CCeS, they should
contact the National Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk.

Decisions cannot be reviewed or appealed

The information given by the agency is explained in the:

-   Superannuation Industry (Supervision) Regulations 1994, and
-   Retirement Savings Account Regulations 1997

There are no provisions for the agency to:

-   review, change or overturn a decision by a super fund to refuse to
    release a customer’s superannuation early if they do not meet the
    income support requirements or any other eligibility requirement
-   change a decision if the customer does not agree with superannuation
    legislation or policy
-   apply discretion in individual cases

This means customers cannot:

-   lodge an appeal to the agency about a decision. Staff must not
    record a request for an explanation or application for a formal
    review (appeal) on the customer’s record. If staff record one in
    error, it must be deleted from the customer's record
-   lodge a compensation claim to the agency as a result of an
    unfavourable early release of superannuation decision

If the customer disagrees with a decision they should be directed to
contact the appropriate authority or organisation depending on the
reason they disagree. Staff must not encourage customers to lodge a
complaint about a decision to the agency, or their local Member of
Parliament.

If a customer disagrees with a decision made by super fund to not
release their super early

Customers who disagree with decisions about early release of
superannuation should contact their super fund.

Even if the customer meets the income support requirements and the
agency has issued the customer an eligibility letter to confirm this,
the superannuation fund are responsible for the decision to release the
funds to the customer.

Note: for applications made under compassionate grounds that have been
rejected, customers need to contact the ATO to discuss the decision.

If a customer disagrees with the superannuation legislative or policy
requirements

Customers who disagree with legislative or policy requirements should
contact the Department of Treasury.

The Department of Treasury is responsible for administering the
legislation and policy that decisions are made under for the early
release of superannuation.

If a customer disagrees with the decision that they do not meet the
income support requirements

If a customer disagrees with an ineligible result as assessed by
Services Australia (for example, if the workflow in Process Direct or
guided procedure assessed that they have not met the income support
requirements), staff can undertake manual checks on the customer’s
record to check the result. See Table 2 Manually calculate continuous
period and cumulative period and issue eligibility letter.

Service Officers must not manually issue an eligibility letter (Q230 or
Q251) unless manual checks determine that the ineligible result,
auto-assessed by the system was incorrect.

Raise an incident for further investigation if a system issue is
identified that caused an incorrect result.

Compassionate grounds

Claims for release of superannuation on compassionate grounds are
assessed by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

Tell the customer to visit the ATO website for more details.

Customers with a New Zealand non-protected special category visa (SCV)

Section 7(7)(c) of the Social Security Act 1991 states customers with a
New Zealand non-protected special category visa (SCV) cannot receive a
payment for greater than 6 months (26 weeks).

Regulation 6.01 (5) of the Superannuation Industry (Supervision)
Regulations 1994, states a person needs to be receiving:

-   a qualifying income support payment for a continuous 26 weeks, and
-   payment on the day the eligibility letter is issued

In practice, this means a person would not be considered receiving a
payment for a continuous 26 weeks until the full period has passed (for
example, the day after their 26 weeks period ends).

Based on this New Zealand non-protected special category visa (SCV),
customers cannot meet the legislative requirements for an early release
of superannuation due to financial hardship and are unable to be issued
with an eligibility letter (Q230 or Q251).

The Resources page has additional information:

-   Examples of continuous period and cumulative totals scenarios
-   The preservation age for access to superannuation benefit table
-   Links to the Australian Taxation Office website, Services Australia
    Intranet and contact details for the Deduction and Confirmation
    Branch

Related links

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Application to be allowed to commute all or part of an asset-test exempt
income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Immediate payments

Social Work Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
