
COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment and change of circumstances 003-21072337

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the requirement for customers to advise changes
in circumstance when receiving a COVID-19 Disaster Payment. It explains
what to do when a customer wants to stop automatic payments or advises a
change in circumstances. It also explains the actions to take when staff
identify errors with an automatic payment.

Do not follow this document if a customer's payment rate needs to change
following an explanation of a decision (review) process. That is, there
are no errors with an automatic payment, but a customer does not agree
with a payment amount they have received.

Do not follow this document if the incorrect workflow has been run by
staff. That is, the issue does not relate to an automatic payment.

If a customer calls to ask why they have not received an automatic
payment, see Status of claim or automatic payment - customer calls to
enquire.

Automatic payments

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Customers who applied for an Income support payment customers - COVID-19
Disaster Payment for the periods below were progressively placed on
automatic payments

New South Wales

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 3 August 2021

Queensland

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 7 August 2021

Victoria (August 2021)

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 13 August 2021

Australian Capital Territory

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 20 August 2021

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Customers who applied for a COVID-19 Disaster Payment for the periods
below were progressively placed on automatic payments:

New South Wales

Sydney

-   relevant period 3
-   available from 15 July 2021

Greater Sydney

-   relevant period 3
-   available from 18 July 2021

All Other Areas in NSW

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 18 July 2021

Victoria

Victoria (July 2021)

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 23 July 2021

Victoria (August 2021)

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 13 August 2021

Note: Victoria (July 2021) and Victoria (August 2021) are different
events. To receive automatic payments for Victoria (August 2021)
customers need to claim for relevant period 1 or onwards Victoria
(August 2021) available from 13 August 2021.

Queensland

South East Queensland

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 7 August 2021

Australian Capital Territory

Australian Capital Territory

-   relevant period 1
-   available from 20 August 2021

For Victoria (July 2021) and Queensland

-   Customers do not need to lodge claims for future relevant periods
-   Customers automatically receive the same rate of payment for future
    periods, unless they advise of a change in circumstances that
    changes the rate of payment
-   The length of relevant periods does not change the rate of the
    automatic payment. For example, for Queensland, relevant period 2
    was 1 day

For New South Wales, Victoria (August 2021) and the Australian Capital
Territory

Customers will need to lodge claims for future periods when their state
or territory reaches 70% full vaccination of its population who are aged
16 years and older. See COVID-19 Disaster Payment.

The Operational Blueprint for the event includes the

-   date customers will need to apply for new relevant periods as they
    open
-   relevant period and date automatic payments will stop from

Note: customers claiming for relevant periods before these dates will
continue to receive automatic payments up to, and including, the
relevant period in which automatic payments stop.

For relevant periods where automatically payments apply, customers
automatically receive the same rate of payment for future relevant
periods, unless they advise of a change in circumstances that changes
the rate of payment.

Automatic payments are identified by a DOC titled CUS CLM EXG FSP, which
shows AUTO as the Source.

Staff must not reject claims if a customer is already set to receive
automatic payments, as this will stop the automatic payments.

Staff should not grant claims where a customer is set to receive
automatic payments for that relevant period (as part of assessing a
claim, staff are to check if a customer is set to receive automatic
payments). However, if they do, the system will:

-   automatically identify this
-   not issue another automatic payment for the relevant period the
    claim was granted for

If a customer has a claim granted for a relevant period before the start
of their automatic payments:

-   the customer will receive automatic payments up to an including the
    last relevant period they received an automatic payment for,
-   however, their automatic payments will then stop

For example: a customer is granted a payment in relevant period 3 and
then receives an automatic payment for relevant period 4. The customer
is then granted a payment in relevant period 1. The customer will
receive an automatic payment for relevant period 2. The system will then
stop automatic payments for the customer as it will detect payment has
already been made for relevant period 3 and 4. To receive payment in
relevant period 5, the customer must lodge a new claim.

For actions to take, depending on the payment the customer has claimed,
see the ‘Check if the customer is set to receive automatic payments’
step in

Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

-   Phone claims – pre-claim checks, see Table 1
-   Online claims - Assessing an online claim or ACC allocated for
    manual assessment, see Table 4

Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims

-   Phone claims – pre-claim checks, see Table 1
-   Online claims - Locating details in an online claim or ACC allocated
    for manual assessment, see Table 3

Customer obligations

Customers:

must advise any changes in circumstances while they are automatically
receiving the COVID-19 Disaster Payment

should advise any change in circumstances within 14 days of the change
occurring
If a change in circumstances means a customer should have received the
higher rate of payment (for example, they were paid $450 but should have
been paid $750):

-   If the customer has not advised the change in circumstances within
    14 days, a review by a Suitably Skilled Officer is needed
-   If the customer has advised the change in circumstances within 14
    days, a review by a Suitability Skilled Officer is not needed, see
    the Process page
-   For Abridged customer claims, customers must meet 2 further
    requirements if advising of a change of circumstances within 14
    days. They must
    -previously have received an automatic payment at the higher rate,
    and
    -make a declaration of actual hours lost making them eligible for
    the higher rate
    Note: If the abridged customer claim does not meet these 2
    requirements, a review is needed.

may also ask for automatic payment of the COVID-19 Disaster Payment to
be stopped at any time

can advise their change in circumstances through their Centrelink online
account via myGov

who are not registered for online services may contact by phone

who advise a change in circumstance or request their payment to be
stopped, will not receive any further payments. To get COVID-19 Disaster
Payment for any future periods, the customer will need to submit a new
claim

Change in circumstance for COVID-19 Disaster Payments

A change in circumstance includes:

change to employment

any increase or decrease in hours of work compared to the last relevant
period claimed

change in bank account details

any change in residency

changes in where the customer lives or works

no longer subject to a second public health order as a result of being
present in a COVID-19 hotspot

receiving any of the following:

-   Parental Leave Pay
-   Dad and Partner Pay
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   any state based pandemic payment
-   payments for pandemic related leave entitlements from their employer
-   an income support payment, for any days in the relevant period for
    the COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Any other change of circumstances does not need to be recorded for a
COVID-19 Disaster Payment. However, the updates may be needed if they
are getting another payment or service.

Errors with an automatic payment

Do not follow this process if a:

-   customer's payment rate needs to change following an explanation of
    a decision (review) process. That is, there are no errors with an
    automatic payment, but a customer does not agree with a payment
    amount they have received
-   staff member has run the incorrect workflow. That is, the issue does
    not relate to an automatic payment

Errors with an automatic payment occur:

when staff identify online claim details do not match a:

-   payment amount received, for example, a customer should have been
    paid $750 (20 hours or more) but was paid $450 (less than 20 hours),
    or
-   state or territory, for example, a claim should have been paid for
    Victoria (August 2021) but was paid for New South Wales, or
-   relevant area claimed, for example, a customer is paid for New South
    Wales Greater Sydney relevant period 3 but should have been paid for
    Sydney relevant period 3

after a customer has advised of a change in circumstances, and:

-   an automatic payment should not have been issued, or
-   the incorrect rate of automatic payment was issued

Note: staff must not run another workflow to correct any claim already
paid.

This process is separate to if a customer advises the agency of a change
in circumstances for future automatic payments. See Process.

Where automatic payments stop

Automatic payments are stopping where:

-   customers were granted a COVID-19 Disaster Payment as they live or
    work in a relevant area that is deemed a COVID-19 hotspot, and
-   that relevant area is no longer deemed a COVID-19 hotspot, and
-   the customer lives in that relevant area

Automatic payments are also stopping when a state or territory reaches
70% full vaccination of its population who are aged 16 years and older.
See COVID-19 Disaster Payment

If applicable, the heading Where automatic payments stop will show on
the Background page of the Operational Blueprint for the event.

The Operational Blueprint for the event will include the:

-   date customers will need to apply for new relevant periods as they
    open
-   relevant period and date automatic payments will stop from

Note: customers claiming for relevant periods before these dates will
continue to receive automatic payments up to, and including, the
relevant period in which automatic payments stop.

Customers will not need to lodge a change in circumstances where
automatic payments stop, as they will need to test their eligibility for
each new relevant period.

If a customer calls to query why automatic payments have stopped, see
Customer calls to enquire.

Related links

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - rejecting claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - customer paid incorrectly

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - review process

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Queensland

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - South Australia

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria (July 2021 onwards)

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria (4 - 10 June 2021)

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Queensland

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment -
Queensland

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria (August 2021)

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria
(August 2021)

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Australian Capital Territory

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment -
Australian Capital Territory

COVID-19 Disaster Payment – Tasmania

Income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment – Tasmania

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
