
Social Work Information System (SWIS) 003-12130000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the use of SWIS as a management information
system by Services Australia's social work service.

About SWIS

SWIS is a management information system designed to record and store
information about the customer contact activities and non-casework
activities of Services Australia's social workers. Social workers can
access SWIS via Customer First.

Information that SWIS gathers

SWIS gathers a wide range of information about the referrals and
contacts with customer groups seen by social workers. It provides
details on interventions undertaken and outcomes achieved by social
workers through their professional interactions with customers. It also
records details of non - casework activities undertaken by social
workers, such as policy feedback, community outreach and professional
development.

SWIS performs a significant function as a reporting tool for social
workers to demonstrate outcomes and community trends to internal
stakeholders such as the Minister, departmental executive and social
work managers.

SWIS is also used:

-   to analyse casework and non-casework trends and inform service
    planning for the social work service
-   to prepare indicative costing for new business or budget proposals,
    as SWIS data provides an indication of potential workloads and
    customer demand
-   with Commonwealth Public Sector Union (CPSU) endorsement, as one of
    the tools used to inform the social work component of Strategic Cost
    Management (SCM).

Referrals, contacts and outcomes

The part of SWIS that allows social workers to record detailed
information about their interventions with specific customers and third
parties is known as referrals and contacts.

The referral field

The referral contains demographic information about the customer and
details of how and why the customer was referred to a social worker.

The contact field

The contact details information about the type of contact the social
worker has had with the customer as well as what type of actions the
social worker has taken with, or on behalf of the customer. There is
also a field to record the outcome of each specific contact.

Third party contact

Contacts can also be added to a referral when the intervention has been
with a third party, either for verification, or where the third party is
a community or government agency contacted in relation to the customer's
circumstances.

Each referral can have many contacts attached depending on the
complexity of the issues being addressed.

The Resources page contains a link to the updated SWIS Help text.

Contents

Recording referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Subject Matter Expert (SME) referrals in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Recording contacts in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording non-casework activities in the Social Work Information System
(SWIS)

Recording Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) Carer Payment child
referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Child Support Scheme (CSS) exemption referrals - social work

Recording Child Support customers talking about suicide self-harm or
harm to others in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Crisis Payment (CrP) assessments - social work

Recording unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments for customers
under 18 years of age - social work

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
reviews/reconsiderations in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording referrals for customers on Income Management (non delegated)
in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notice
assessments - social work

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments - social work

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Exclusion (Not Practicable
due to Support and Demonstrated Capacity) Assessments in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Recording National Redress Scheme referrals in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Recording participation and compliance interventions in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Recording Carer referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Related links

Social Work Recording Application (SWRA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
