
Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP) 003-07010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when customers may be eligible for a CrP.

About CrP

CrP is a one-off, non-taxable payment that is designed to help new and
existing customers who have experienced an extreme circumstance and are
in severe financial hardship.

Note: if a person is not eligible for CrP, consider other forms of
assistance that may be appropriate such as urgent payment or advance
payment.

CrP is designed to help customers with the:

costs of establishing a new home when the customer has:

-   been forced to leave their previous home due to family and domestic
    violence
-   been forced to leave their previous home due to an event such as a
    fire, flood or community violence
-   to re-establish themselves in the community after having been in
    prison or psychiatric confinement
-   entered as a Humanitarian Entrant for the first time

cost of securing the person's home through changing locks or other
related expenses following an incident of family and domestic violence

It is also payable to customers who need to quarantine/self-isolate or
care for an immediate family/household member in
quarantine/self-isolation due to the COVID-19 National Health Emergency.

Types of CrP

Customers can apply for the following types of CrP:

-   CrP under extreme circumstances family and domestic violence (EXV)
-   CrP under other extreme circumstances (EXO)
-   CrP for customers released from prison or psychiatric confinement
    (PRI)
-   CrP for humanitarian entrants (HUM)
-   CrP for National Health Emergency (NHE)

Common criteria for customers claiming CrP

The customer:

-   is qualified (and payable) for a social security benefit, social
    security pension or ABSTUDY Living Allowance. Customers receiving
    Family Tax Benefit (FTB) only do not qualify for CrP
-   is in severe financial hardship
-   is not subject to an unemployment non-payment period, a serious
    failure period or serving a penalty applied for failing to meet a
    compulsory requirement
-   has experienced an extreme circumstance covered by one of the 5
    types of CrP

The claim for CrP is made within Australia

CrP is not generally payable to customers subject to an Assurance of
Support (AoS). However, CrP may be payable if it is unreasonable for the
assuree to accept the assurer's support. A CrP will only be payable if
the assuree has made a claim for a payment, and that claim has been
granted.

Severe financial hardship

The system calculates whether a customer meets the severe financial
hardship criteria based on information given in the claim for CrP and
coded on the record. A customer is considered to be in severe financial
hardship if, on the day they claim CrP, they are:

-   single and their liquid assets total less than 2 weeks of the
    maximum rate of their income support payment or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance
-   partnered and their combined liquid assets total less than 4 weeks
    of the maximum rate of the customer’s income support payment or
    ABSTUDY Living Allowance

The customer's maximum rate also includes one or more of the following
if they are eligible:

-   Energy Supplement
-   Pension Supplement
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Rent Assistance

Liquid assets for CrP include all of the following:

-   cash on hand
-   money in the bank
-   shares
-   bonds
-   other money available to the customer at short notice

This means the point at which someone is considered to be in severe
financial hardship may vary between customers.

Income Management funds:

If a customer can access available funds in their Income Management
account for the purpose for which the CrP is intended (such as to
establish a new home), these funds are considered liquid assets when
assessing severe financial hardship. A customer's regular expenses
should not be ceased to 'free up' income managed funds, as priority
needs must continue to be met.

Checking severe financial hardship

Once provisional savings data given in a CrP claim has been confirmed
and a grant or reject outcome is displaying on the ELD (entitlements)
screen, the CRISIS_PS screen will display:

-   the customer’s total liquid assets at the time the claim was lodged
-   the customer’s liquid asset threshold (the maximum amount of liquid
    assets a customer can have to be considered in severe financial
    hardship)

Crisis Payment Summary

The CRISIS_PS screen in Process Direct, or the Crisis Payment Summary in
Customer First, displays the following:

-   Crisis Payment claim ID
-   Date of receipt
-   Crisis type code (EXV, EXO, NHE, PRI or HUM)
-   Crisis type description (the full name of the CrP type)
-   Event date
-   Reason code (for EXV grants only, e.g. left home, stay home, alleged
    perpetrator)
-   Rejection reason code (for rejections only, e.g. LOD, NFH, NIA)
-   Rejection reason (for rejections only, e.g. Not in financial
    hardship)
-   Liquid asset amount (the customer’s total liquid assets at the time
    the CrP claim was lodged)
-   Liquid asset threshold (the maximum amount of liquid assets a
    customer can have to be considered in severe financial hardship for
    the purposes of CrP)
-   Amount paid (for grants only)
-   Activity number

Note: a new claim that has not been finalised yet will only appear on
the CRISIS_PS screen once a provisional grant or reject outcome is
displaying on the ELD (entitlements) screen.

Amount payable

The amount paid is equal to one week's payment at the basic rate of the
primary payment to which the customer is entitled.

The rate of CrP does not include add-on payments such as Rent Assistance
(RA), Pension Supplement, Telephone Allowance (TAL), Pharmaceutical
Allowance (PhA) or Remote Area Allowance (RAA). To get a CrP, the
customer must first claim and qualify for payment if they are not
already getting one.

One claim per circumstance

Only one CrP can be made for the same circumstances. For example:

-   paid CrP under the Social Security Act 1991
-   then becomes an ABSTUDY customer
-   they cannot claim another CrP under ABSTUDY policy for the same
    circumstances
-   someone who has left their home due to family and domestic violence
    should be paid under CrP-EXV and cannot be paid for the same
    circumstance under CrP-EXO

How CrP is paid

Crisis Payments are considered to be urgent. Because of this, they
should be paid via the New Payments Platform (NPP) where available. If
the customer’s bank account is not NPP enabled, then RTGS should be used
to pay the CrP. Direct credit should also be considered as an
alternative if NPP and RTGS are unavailable.

Only consider an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card if none of
these options are available and the customer has presented at a service
centre.

Evidence requirements

In most cases, evidence of the extreme circumstance is required to get a
CrP. In some cases a Service Officer or social worker may need to gather
evidence:

-   EXV: only a social worker can use their discretion to verbally
    confirm the extreme circumstance if a customer is unable to give
    evidence
-   EXO: a customer must give evidence of the extreme circumstance that
    led them to claim
-   PRI: a customer should give documentation that shows the date they
    were released. If they do not have this, a Service Officer or Prison
    Liaison Officer may contact the prison or psychiatric institution to
    seek verbal confirmation
-   HUM: the immigration datalink is used to confirm which visa subclass
    the customer arrived on and when. The customer does not need to give
    extra evidence, i.e. their passport or visa
-   NHE: a customer must give evidence of a COVID-19 test notification
    or result

Verification of severe financial hardship is required for all of the
above if the bank balances are updated within the claim. A customer must
give a bank statement or screenshot/screen capture of their bank
balance(s).

Review and appeals process

A customer's request for an explanation of a CrP decision should be
given by the same business area as the Decision Maker (DM). For example,
if the DM was:

-   a social worker, the explanation should be given by a SME within the
    social worker network
-   part of Smart Centre or Front of House, the explanation of the
    decision should be provided by a SME within their respective
    networks

If a SME is assigned a CrP request for explanation of a decision
activity with the DM identified as a social worker:

-   Out the activity to Region Code (ROC) SW2
-   Unassign the activity reason Recategorised, selecting
    ZIAM_ROD_EXP_SWO_SME

All other requests for an explanation of a CrP decision should be
actioned using existing business processes. See SME explanations, ARO
referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

All applications for a formal review of a CrP decision will be done by
an Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

CrP claims can be re-indexed if needed after an explanation or formal
request for review of the decision. This is only if the original
decision has been set aside. See Cancelling claim activities and
re-indexing claims.

Debt recovery principles

CrP can be recovered as a debt, if it is found that the recipient was
not qualified at the time payment was made, see:

Social Security Guide, 3.7.4.10, Qualification for CrP - general
provisions

Social Security Act 1991:

-   section 1223 Debts arising from lack of qualification, overpayment
    etc
-   section 1223 AA, Debts arising from prepayments and certain other
    payments

When a customer is incorrectly paid CrP, a debt should be raised on the
Debt Management Information System (DMIS) and normal debt recovery
action should follow.

See Debt recovery for Centrelink and Debt raising.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has examples, factsheets, forms, intranet links and
Services Australia website links.

Contents

Fixing an incorrect Crisis Payment (CrP)

Related links

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

New claim for Crisis Payment Other Extreme Circumstances

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment prior to the release of a customer in
prison or psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment for humanitarian entrants newly arrived in
Australia

New claim for Crisis Payment - National Health Emergency

Rates and thresholds

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Initial contact from customers in crisis or needing special help

Family and Domestic Violence

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Social work services

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian Program

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
