
Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB) 003-08030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains eligibility and new claim processes for SpB.

Qualification for SpB

SpB is paid to eligible people who are in financial hardship due to
circumstances beyond their control.

To be paid SpB, customers must meet the qualification and payability
requirements.

To qualify for SpB, a customer must meet all of the following criteria:

-   be in financial hardship
-   be unable to earn a sufficient livelihood for themselves or their
    dependants by reason of age, physical or mental disability or
    domestic circumstances or for any other reason over which they have
    no control
-   not be receiving or entitled to receive income support payment,
    pension or benefit from Services Australia or a Service Pension,
    Veteran Payment or Income Support Supplement (ISS) from the
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
-   not be able to receive sufficient ongoing support from any other
    source
-   be an Australian resident or the holder of an approved visa, and
-   be residing in Australia at the date of claim and during the period
    of payment except under certain exceptional circumstances

Although payments under the Paid Parental Leave scheme will not be
treated as income when working out the rate of SpB, it may be included
when assessing a customer's eligibility for SpB under the 'unable to
earn a sufficient livelihood' criteria.

SpB customers are subject to the available funds test and the asset test
is applied by considering whether the person's assets are accessible.

Newly arrived residents

Newly arrived residents are subject to a Newly Arrived Resident's
Waiting Period (NARWP) and/or a Qualifying Residence Period.

Unless the customer meets the NARWP exemption criteria, they must serve
the full NARWP.

If the customer holds a certain temporary protection visa (currently
subclasses 060, 070, 449, 785, 786, and 790) they are exempt from the
NARWP for SpB

See:

-   NARWP and Qualifying Residence Period
-   NARWP and Qualifying Residence Period Exemptions
-   Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit

Substantial change in circumstances

Some newly arrived persons may qualify for SpB during the NARWP if they
have experienced a substantial change in circumstances beyond their
control after arrival in Australia and they satisfy the available funds
test.

Newly arrived persons are required to have attempted to obtain support
from all possible alternative sources before being granted SpB. Before
SpB can be paid, the delegate must be satisfied that:

-   the change in circumstances is substantial and beyond the person's
    control and occurred after arrival in Australia, AND
-   they are in financial hardship and are able to satisfy the available
    funds test, AND
-   they have attempted to obtain a sufficient livelihood, AND
-   their available funds or support options were depleted because of
    the change in circumstances

All newly arrived persons claiming to be in hardship due to
substantially changed circumstances must substantiate their claim with
documents.

A customer whose Assurance of Support (AoS) has expired does not need to
satisfy the substantial change in circumstances rule as long as they
have served the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP). At the
end of the AoS period, the Assurer has no legal obligation to support
the assuree. As with all claims for SpB, all avenues of support should
be explored and exhausted after the AoS has ended before the claim is
granted.

The Resources page has examples of substantial changes for SpB.

SpB for other circumstances and customers under 16 years

In some circumstances, SpB may be payable to a disaster victim. In such
cases, payment is usually made for one fortnight only. SpB should only
be considered after a claim for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) has
been assessed and the claimant deemed not eligible.

SpB may be payable for people under 16 years of age whose parent,
guardian or someone else who has taken on the long term role of a parent
or guardian, can no longer provide support.

Customers aged under 16 years who do not meet the minimum school leaving
age in their state must be referred to a social worker for:

-   assessment of their entitlement, and
-   a thorough assessment of their support needs

See Assisting a customer aged under 16.

Australian Citizen Children (ACC) and Australian Permanent Resident Children

An Australian Citizen Child (ACC) or a child who is a permanent visa
holder whose parents/guardians are unable to receive any income support
payments (including FTB) maybe paid SpB in certain circumstances.

A parent/guardian of an ACC or child who is a permanent visa holder can
lodge a SpB claim on behalf of their child. See Special Benefit (SpB)
for Australian Citizen Child (ACC) and Australian permanent resident
children.

Victims of human trafficking

Victims of trafficking are supported by the Australian Red Cross in the
Support for Trafficked People Program. When the customer has been
granted a visa subclass 060, their Red Cross living allowance will stop
and the customer can apply for SpB. The customer can request to appoint
the Australian Red Cross as their correspondence nominee. This can be
done online or by completing the SS313 form.

Bridging visa F subclass 060 - The Bridging visa F sub class 060 (BVF)
is granted only to suspected victims of human trafficking. Holders of
this visa qualify for Special Benefit (SpB), family and ancillary
payments.

Referred Stay (Permanent) visa sub lass 852 - The Department of Home
Affairs may offer the Referred Stay (Permanent) visa subclass 852 to the
Bridging visa F holder if the victim meets the Department of Home
Affairs criteria.

Due to the sensitivities with this initiative, the customer must have a
password on their record. See Customer password on a Display on Access
DOC.

The customer and/or their nominee may request Restricted Access if they
are concerned with security of their personal information or safety.

Criminal Justice Stay Visa and Human Trafficking subclass 060 are not
subject to mutual obligation requirements.

Submitting claims

A customer and/or their nominee can make a claim for SpB by submitting:

-   an online claim
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   a completed Claim for Special Benefit (SU004) form

For claim progress, vulnerable customers and hardship claim escalation,
see Progress of claim or Request for urgent processing of a new claim
when experiencing financial hardship.

Note: when claiming SpB for an Australian Citizen Child, the
parent/guardian must submit a completed Claim for Special Benefit
(SU004) form. An online claim is currently not available for these
customers.

No early claims

SpB does not have any early claim provisions. If the customer is not
qualified for SpB on the date they claimed, the claim must be rejected,
outlining the reason(s). If the customer appears to qualify for SpB at a
later date, tell them they can test their eligibility for SpB by
submitting another claim on or after the potential eligibility date.

Identity Confirmation and supporting documentation

Customers are required to provide identity documents when making a new
claim. A Service Officer will confirm the customer's identity
documentation.

Service Officers must make sure that all supporting documents are
provided when the claim is lodged.

If the outstanding documents have not been provided, remind the customer
and/or correspondence nominee of what they need to provide and that any
delays in providing these documents will delay the processing of their
claim and may result in rejection of the claim. The paper claim must
still be accepted.

Mutual obligation requirements for SpB

SpB customers who are capable or working are subject to mutual
obligation requirements.

Exemptions can apply for some customers. To determine which requirements
apply, see Mutual obligation requirements for SpB.

If a claimant is a Nominated Visa Holder and has recently ceased
suitable employment voluntarily or is unemployed due to misconduct as a
worker generate compliance action using the Participation Compliance
Workflow before granting payment, except if they have self-served the
non-payment period. The new claim cannot be finalised until a Service
Officer with UNPP IT security resource makes a determination about the
compliance action. This may affect the date of eligibility for payment.

Income test for SpB

Customers receiving SpB are subject to the SpB direct deduction Income
Test and do not have access to Working Credit, Student Income Bank or
Work Bonus.

If the customer receives a disability payment from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA), do not reject their claim due to income before
checking if they may be entitled to Defence Force Income Support
Allowance (DFISA). Customers on a nil rate of payment may still be
entitled to the DFISA payment. The system will identify these customers
if the claim is correctly coded, including DVA Disability Payment
details. A zero rate reason of 'DFISA' will display. Payment of DFISA
does not on its own affect the payability of SpB.

Rates of SpB

The rate of SpB is not a set amount and is paid taking into account the
customers individual circumstances. The rate is also determined by the
customer’s age. This should not exceed the Youth Allowance (YA) or
Jobseeker Payment (JSP) rate that the person would otherwise receive
relevant to their age.

These include:

-   income received from all sources (Including partner income and any
    income earned or unearned)
-   in kind support
-   free Board and/or lodgings (1/3 or 2/3 rules)
-   Parental Income Test for under 22 dependant customers

Note: all personal income from any source for SpB is assessed on a
direct deduction basis. The direct deduction Income Test reduces the
rate of SpB on a dollar for dollar basis. There is no allowable income
free area and no taper. Differing rules apply for partner income,
parental income and free board and/or lodgings.

For more information, see Rates of payment for Special Benefit (SpB).

Financial hardship

Customers do not usually qualify for SpB if they have available funds of
more than $5000, including combined liquid funds (if partnered).
However, consider each customer's circumstances and use discretion
before rejecting or cancelling due to not exceeding the available funds
test.

Depending on the customer's circumstances, they may qualify for payment
under the short term or long term available funds test for SpB.

See Special Benefit (SpB) available funds test.

Circumstances leading to hardship

SpB is only payable where a person is unable to earn a sufficient
livelihood. The person's circumstances must be carefully considered to
determine whether their inability to earn a sufficient livelihood was
unavoidable or reasonable or whether they have placed themselves in
financial hardship by:

-   persevering with an unprofitable business venture
-   spending their money on unnecessary items, or
-   disposing of money, by gifting or other means without adequate
    return

SpB should not be paid if the delegate believes the person could have
avoided the situation of financial hardship.

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a customer
would also be assessed.

One-off Australian Red Cross and State Government financial assistance

Customers may receive various one-off support payments from the
Australian Red Cross or one-off immediate needs support packages funded
by the State Government. These one-off payments are not assessed as
income or in kind support for Special Benefit purposes, however may be
included in the available funds test.

Discretion should be used in these cases. Due to the nature of these
payments, it is likely that the customer will use these funds as soon as
practical to fund their immediate needs.

If the customer has over $5,000 in available funds at the date of claim,
any funds over $5,000 may be considered committed funds if the customer
can provide evidence of the intended immediate future costs and these
are deemed as exceptional or unforeseen expenses.

Any remaining funds that are not deemed as exceptional or unforeseen
will be included in the available funds test.

The Resources page has examples of SpB assessment for one-off Red Cross
and State Government financial assistance payments.

The Resources page has links to the claim form, interpreter and
translation services, and contact details.

Contents

Special Benefit (SpB) categories

Special Benefit (SpB) for Australian Citizen Child (ACC) and Australian
permanent resident children

Assisting a customer aged under 16

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

Special Benefit (SpB) available funds test

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets tests

Victims of trafficking

Social worker involvement with Special Benefit (SpB)

Related links

Rate of payment for Special Benefit (SpB)

Processing Special Benefit (SpB) claims

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
