
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child's safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

For PST-skilled Service Officers and PST-skilled social workers only.

This document explains when to access a Participation Solutions Team
(PST)-skilled social worker.

Overview

PST-skilled social workers support PST-skilled Service Officers through
case consultation to identify, understand and assess the customers’
circumstances, and how they affect their capacity to meet compulsory
requirements.

PST-skilled Service Officers must not consult PST-skilled social workers
solely for an exemption from compulsory requirements. An exemption may
be considered and assessed as part of a holistic case consult.

Consultation can occur during a:

-   Capability Assessment
-   Failure Investigation, or
-   Comprehensive Compliance Assessment

Three scenarios may occur during a case consultation, these are:

-   case discussion between the PST-skilled social worker and
    PST-skilled Service Officer
-   a three-way discussion with the PST-skilled social worker,
    PST-skilled Service Officer and the customer, or
-   the PST-skilled social worker may take over the call

The consultation method will depend on the complexity and sensitivity of
the customer’s circumstances. PST-skilled Service Officers and
PST-skilled social workers should work together to identify the most
suitable method.

Each consult is an opportunity to build staff capability and improve the
quality of decisions and outcome for customers.

PST-skilled Service Officers should investigate and use available
information when deciding how the customer's circumstance(s) are
impacting on their capacity to comply.

PST-skilled Service Officers and PST-skilled social workers will attempt
to finalise decisions at first contact.

See the Resources page for some case consultation scenarios.

Consultation with a PST-skilled social worker during a Capability Assessment or Failure Investigation

A PST-skilled Service Officer must consult if the customer:

-   presents with family and domestic violence, or
-   has an assessed Circumstances Impacting Compliance (CiC) of 'Family
    relationships/Domestic violence' recorded for family and domestic
    violence

Note: a consultation is not mandatory if the assessed CiC describes
issues other than family and domestic violence. For more details
explaining how Service Officers can recognise customers affected by
family and domestic violence, see Family and domestic violence.

A PST-skilled Service Officer can consult where the customer meets one
of the following:

-   presents with mental health issues
-   has an assessed CiC of 'Medical conditions - Mental health'
-   is in crisis and has complex personal circumstances
-   receives Youth Allowance, especially if in receipt of Unreasonable
    to Live at Home rate

Consultation with a PST-skilled social worker during a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

PST-skilled Service Officers (SO5s) conducting a CCA can consult with a
PST-skilled social worker during a CCA.

A consult can occur where a PST-skilled Service Officer (SO5) needs
support to assess:

-   the impact of circumstances on the participant’s capacity to meet
    their compulsory requirements, or
-   the participant is in crisis and has complex personal circumstances

Referral to a PST-skilled social worker to undertake a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

PST-skilled Service Officers decide which CCA specialist is the most
appropriate based on the Community Development Program (CDP)
participants individual circumstances. For more details, see Generating
and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA).

A PST-skilled social worker must assess CDP participants if it is not a
review CCA and they meet one of the following:

The CDP participant is in receipt of Youth Allowance

The CDP participant presents with, or the ‘Circumstances Impacting
Compliance’ screen identifies, either:

-   Medical conditions – mental health (MHI), or
-   Family relationship/Domestic violence (FMR)

The CDP participant is in crisis and there are exceptional circumstances
identified

Referral to a social worker once compliance action is complete

If a customer needs social work help after all compliance action is
completed, the PST-skilled Service Officer can make a general referral
to the Social Work Line. See Social work service referral.

The Resources page contains an overview of the 3 types of case consult
scenarios.

Related links

Social work role in the Participation Solutions Team (PST)

Recording participation and compliance interventions in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Generating and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Completing a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
