
Assessing eligibility for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) - Tropical Cyclone Debbie - March 2017 003-17040100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. See Operational Instructions for more details.

This document outlines how to determine if Disaster Recovery Allowance
(DRA) can be paid to claimant adversely affected by the Tropical Cyclone
Debbie - March 2017. This payment is to assist individuals who can
demonstrate they have experienced a loss of income as a direct result of
the severe weather, rainfall and associated flooding that occurred as a
result of Tropical Cyclone Debbie that commenced on 28 March 2017 and
continued in March and April 2017.

Affected Local Government Area (LGA)

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Byron
-   Gold Coast
-   Lismore
-   Logan
-   Mackay
-   Rockhampton
-   Scenic Rim
-   Tweed
-   Whitsunday

Claiming periods

Claiming periods for LGAs may vary.

Unless special circumstances apply (see the Operational Instructions for
further details), all claims for assistance must be lodged by:

-   30 September 2017 - Whitsunday
-   4 October 2017 - Gold Coast, Logan, Lismore, Mackay, Scenic Rim and
    Tweed
-   20 October 2017 - Rockhampton
-   19 January 2018 - Byron

The References page contains a link to the Operational Instructions.

Eligibility for DRA

A person is eligible for DRA if the person:

is at least 16 years of age (there are additional qualification
requirements if the person is under 22 years of age), and

is:

-   an Australian resident, or
-   the holder of a specified visa for AGDRP/DRA, and

earns, derives or receives income from one of the affected areas, and
does so by working in that area, or by residing in that affected area,
and

has suffered a loss of income as a direct result of the disaster, and

did not receive or will not receive a social security entitlement for
the period of time for which they are claiming DRA, and

did not receive or will not receive a prescribed payment for the period
which they are claiming DRA, and

will receive a payment greater than nil at the time the claim for
payment of DRA is determined

Additional qualification requirements for persons under 22 years of age

The person will not qualify for Disaster Recovery Allowance if on the 31
March 2017, the:

-   person is wholly or substantially dependent on another person
    (except for person's partner), and
-   person is not the parent of another person, and
-   person's income in the current financial year will not be more than
    $6,403

For further eligibility criteria, see Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims.

Note: eligibility details and definitions can be found in the
Operational Instructions. See References page for a link.

Proof of identity requirements

When a claimant makes a claim for emergency payments Tier 1 Proof of
Identity (POI) is required.

Payment should not be refused when the customer cannot provide any or
all documentation required by POI Tier 1 guidelines unless there are
strong reasons for doubting the genuineness of the claim.

Existing claimants receiving an income support payment

Claimants who formally cancel their current income support payment for
the purposes of claiming the Disaster Recovery Allowance are not
eligible.

A claimant will be eligible to receive an Disaster Recovery Allowance if
they have been administratively granted an income support payment or
pension but have not received monetary payments under the payment or
pension at any point during the eight consecutive weeks prior to the
Disaster Recovery Allowance claim lodgement, provided all other
eligibility criteria are met.

Lodgement of claim

Claims must be made within six months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply. See
the Operational Instructions for further details.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website, see the
Resources page for a link.

Staff can access the claim form from Services Australia Forms on the
intranet.

Claimants can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to Services Australia,
    Reply Paid 7815, Canberra BC, ACT 2610, or
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at the nearest service
    centre, agent or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760

If the claimants provides their claim form and supporting documents to
the service centre, scan the form into the system, or fax them to 1300
727 760.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Waiting periods and other income tests

DRA will not be subject to any of the following:

-   waiting periods
-   partner income test
-   parent income test
-   assets test

Reporting frequency

Claimants granted DRA must report their fortnightly income for 13 weeks
or until cessation of the payment to allow for the DRA to be calculated
in arrears.

Taxation treatment

The DRA is considered taxable income and is a 'rebatable benefit'
subject to the beneficiary tax offset scheme. Taxpayers who receive DRA
may be entitled to a beneficiary tax offset when they lodge their income
tax return. Claimants should visit the Australian Taxation Office
website for more information about the beneficiary tax offset, or to
discuss their individual circumstances.

Documentation standards

See the Resources page for documentation standards templates for
granted, pending and unsuccessful claims. For cancelled claims, use the
unsuccessful documentation standards template as a guide.

The Resources page contains tables with the relevant income cut-off
points for Newstart Allowance (NSA) and Youth Allowance (YA). There are
also links to Operational Messaging, claim forms, Payment and Service
Finder, factsheets, documentation standards and the Emergency Management
Teams' contact details.

Related links

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA or NZ DRA claims

Claiming emergency payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
