
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) – March 2017 London attack 003-17050800

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. For more details see Operational Blueprint -
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit.

This document contains event-specific information about the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) for March 2017 London
attack. AVTOP is a one off payment of up to $75,000. The purpose of
AVTOP is to provide financial assistance to Australians who have been
harmed as a direct result of the March 2017 London attack, or who are a
close family member of a person who has died as a direct result of the
March 2017 London attack.

On this Page:

Declared overseas terrorist act

The following acts which commenced in March 2017 London attack:

-   The terrorist act that occurred in London, England at approximately
    2.40pm (local time) on 22 March 2017 between the eastern end of
    Westminster Bridge and the Members’ entrance to the Palace of
    Westminster New Palace Yard

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

Primary victims for the March 2017 London attack have until 29 April
2019 to lodge a claim.

Secondary victim

Secondary victims have 12 months from the death of the close family
member to claim. The death of the close family member must be a direct
result of, and have occurred within 2 years of, the declared terrorist
act.

For the March 2017 London attack the close family member must have died
on or before 21 March 2019.

The claiming period for secondary victims for the March 2017 London
attack ended on 23 March 2020.

Eligibility for AVTOP

A person is eligible for AVTOP if:

-   the person was an Australian resident, or held a qualifying
    residence exemption, on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   the person must have been in the location of, and harmed as a direct
    result of, the terrorist act (primary victim), or be a close family
    member of a person who died as a direct result of a terrorist act
    (secondary victim), and
-   the person must not have been involved in the commission of the
    terrorist act, and must not have had family members involved in the
    commission of the terrorist act

There is no age limit.

Claims will be assessed on a case by case basis.

Maximum amount payable

Where a claimant is harmed (primary victim) and a close family member
dies as a direct result of the same terrorist act (secondary victim),
the maximum payment any 1 person can receive is $150,000. For example:

-   where a claimant is harmed and also loses a close family member,
    they may qualify for up to $75,000 for their injuries and up to
    $75,000 for the close family member lost
-   if the deceased has other close family members, then the $75,000
    that is payable in respect of the deceased may be shared among the
    eligible family members who submit a claim

Where a claim is lodged for 2 close family members who have died as a
direct result of the same declared terrorist act, the maximum payment
one person can receive is $75,000. A person cannot receive more than
$75,000 regardless of how many close family members have died as a
direct result of the event.

Proof of identity requirements

A claimant will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents from the approved list as shown on the Confirming your
identity (SS231) form.

For the purposes of claiming AVTOP a claimant over the age of 16 will
need to provide 1 document from each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of Identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

For the purpose of claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the claimant may
need to provide identity documents on behalf of the child. These
documents include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

The claimant should be provided with 28 days to supply their proof of
identity documentation, with an extension granted in exceptional
circumstances.

For more information see Confirming a customer’s identity.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment,
claimants may call the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Hotline
on 1800 040 226. Overseas callers can contact the Hotline on +61 3 9250
5159 - charges apply. The operating hours for the Australian Victim of
Terrorism Overseas Hotline can vary, refer to the Services Australia
Website for current details. The Resources page contains a link.

Claimants may also download a claim form from the Services Australia
Website and post the completed claim form and supporting documentation:

within Australia to:

-   Services Australia
    Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment
    Reply Paid 7830
    Canberra BC ACT 2610

internationally to - costs apply:

-   Services Australia
    Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment
    PO Box 7830
    Canberra BC ACT, Australia, 2610

Keywords

Once a claim has been uploaded into Customer First, the claim will need
to be indexed and have the keyword:

-   'V69NEW' for a primary victim claim
-   'V70NEW' for a secondary victim claim

For unsuccessful claims that are to be rejected, use one of the
following keywords:

-   ‘V69REJ’ for a primary victim claim
-   ‘V70REJ’ for a secondary victim claim

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel advice

Where possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable to March 2017
London attack for the period 6 months prior to the terrorist act. The
Resources page contains travel advices that have been received. For
information on how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see
Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP).

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

The Resources page contains links to Operational Messaging, claim forms,
contact details for Emergency Management Teams, travel advice and a map
of the affected areas.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim qualifications for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim qualifications for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Identity Confirmation

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
