
Assessing claims for emergency payments for Australian Capital Territory Bushfires, December 2019 003-20021237

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.

This document outlines how to determine if Disaster Recovery Allowance
(DRA) or their associated ex-gratia payments can be paid to customers
affected by activated emergency events.

On this Page:

Emergency payments

The federal government has made a determination under the Social
Security Act that a major disaster has occurred. The following payments,
administered by Services Australia, have been activated for the
Australian Capital Territory Bushfires, December 2019.

-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   NZ DRA - for New Zealand non-protected Special Category visa
    (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent of DRA

Affected Local Government Areas (LGAs) for DRA and ex-gratia DRA

The determination specifies which LGAs are eligible for each emergency
payment.

The determination covers the affected LGA of:

-   Australian Capital Territory

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Eligibility for payments

To be eligible to receive a payment, a customer must have been impacted
on any day of the major disaster, which commenced on 1 December 2019.

For more information on assessing eligibility, reviews and appeals see:

-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Claiming periods

Claims must be made within 6 months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply. See
Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Claim lodgement dates

Claims for:

-   DRA/ex-gratia DRA must be lodged by 12 August 2020

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.

DRA and ex-gratia DRA - tax free for bushfire event

DRA/ex-gratia DRA is tax free for all bushfire events commencing in the
2019-2020 financial year. For more information see:

-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims, and
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Rejection of claims

Formal approval has been given to commence rejection of claims for all
declared LGAs. This includes:

-   all claims previously held with the keyword NOTLGA, that is
    non-declared LGAs
-   DRA/ex-gratia DRA Determination 2020 claims where a Request for
    Information (RFI) letter was sent requesting documentary evidence of
    income

For more information about Determination 2020, see Assessing DRA and NZ
DRA claims.

Before rejecting claims for DRA/ex-gratia DRA consider if a
self-declaration is an option for the customer.

See Table 3 of Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims.

When coding and rejecting claims, follow:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Lodgement of claims for DRA and ex-gratia DRA

For information on how a customer can claim, steps relating to initial
contact and Callback DOCs and ACTDOCs, see Claiming emergency payments.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website and on the
intranet, see the Resources page for a link.

Customers can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to:
    Emergency Processing Centre
    Reply Paid 7815
    Canberra BC, ACT 2610
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at their nearest service
    centre, agent, access point or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be advised once they are able to reject payments.

Payment methods

There are a range of payment methods available for customers. These
include:

-   New Payments Platform (NPP)
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments

Discuss the preferred method of payment for the customer. Use of NPP and
RTGS will help customers adversely affected by the major disaster
receive their payment/s faster.

Note: NPP is not available for all banks, however RTGS is available for
most banks. Check which payment methods are available before discussing
payment options with the customer.

NPP is capped at $3,000. Any attempt to transfer more than that amount
will result in no funds being transferred in that attempt.

Claims must be finalised before using the NPP. For further information
see Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP).

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers may be able to get Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
(Temporary Financial Hardship) if they have been impacted by a declared
disaster and claiming AGDRP.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) provides short-term support to
families experiencing significant financial stress due to circumstances
beyond their control. This additional financial assistance will help
ensure continuity of care for the child and support families when they
need it most.

To be eligible for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship), customers must:

-   be eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   be assessed as experiencing temporary financial hardship for an
    event that occurred no more than six months before the application
    is made
-   have had a substantial reduction in their ability to pay child care
    fees as a direct result of the temporary financial hardship

To support an application for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
customers must:

-   provide evidence that the event(s) occurred less than 6 months prior
    to the application
-   demonstrate a causal link between the event(s) and their financial
    hardship

Customers who are applying for ACCS Temporary Financial Hardship (as a
standalone application or a combined Child Care Subsidy claim) can
submit evidence that they or their partner have claimed for or received
AGDRP. No further evidence is required.

Customers still need to provide evidence the emergency event has caused
financial hardship and demonstrate the causal link between the event and
their reduced ability to pay child care fees.

If a customer wishes to apply for ACCS transfer the customer to 136 150.

The References page contains a copy of the Operational Instructions,
that is the policy documents for each payment from the Department of
Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains the relevant DRA and DRA ex-gratia income
cut-off points. There are also links to Payment and Service Finder,
forms and the Emergency Management Teams' contact details.

Related links

Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
