
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

For Services Australia social workers only

This document outlines the different categories and fields used by
Services Australia social workers to record contacts in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS).

On this Page:

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour that raises
concerns about a child's safety, Services Australia sets out specific
steps that must be taken. Follow Services Australia’s Risk
Identification and Reporting model, when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the agency's commitment to child safety.

When to record a contact

A contact should be recorded when a social worker undertakes an activity
that includes:

-   an interview
-   a file/paper assessment
-   a letter
-   an online enquiry, or
-   a consultation with either a customer or another party (this
    includes another social worker, community organisation etc.) in
    relation to a particular customer

Customer interview contacts

An interview with a customer is regarded as one contact and encompasses
the activities that occur as part of the interview process. For example,
if a phone call or case consultation occurs during the interview, it
should be recorded as actions within the initial contact.

Where the contact relates to a group of customers, for example, at a
regular young parents meeting, this should be recorded as a non-casework
activity. For more information, see Recording non-casework activities in
the Social Work Information System (SWIS).

Sensitive information

Sensitive information should be recorded in the Casenotes section of
SWIS rather than be recorded on a DOC on a customer's record. However,
as this information is subject to Privacy and Freedom of Information
(FOI) legislation, a DOC should also be completed to advise that
sensitive information has been recorded on SWIS.

Related links

Recording referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording non-casework activities in the Social Work Information System
(SWIS)

Recording Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) Carer Payment child
referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Child Support Scheme (CSS) exemption referrals in the Social
Work Information System (SWIS)

Recording Crisis Payment (CrP) assessments - social work

Recording Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) assessments for
customerrs under 18 years of age - social work

The Resources page contains a link to the updated SWIS Help text.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
