
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and ABSTUDY Flood Education Supplement (FES) 003-19062133

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purpose of the Flood Education Supplement
(FES).

On this Page:

What is Flood Education Supplement (FES?)

The purpose of the Flood Education Supplement (FES) is to assist
families who are disadvantaged due to isolation and who were also
impacted by the North Queensland floods that occurred in early 2019.

FES is a one-off payment of $1,000 per eligible student. The supplement
targets families of students who, at the time of the floods qualified
for certain ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme
allowances. An eligible student’s family home must be located in a local
government area affected by the 'North and Far North Queensland Monsoon
Trough' that commenced on 25 January 2019.

If eligible, FES is payable in addition to any ABSTUDY or AIC the
customer may be receiving.

FES is exempt from tax and from all Australian Government means testing
arrangements and waiting periods.

Qualifying for Flood Education Supplement (FES)

To qualify for the Flood Education Supplement (FES), a student must meet
both of the following requirements between 25 January 2019 and 14
February 2019:

they have been attracting, or able to attract one of the following
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme allowances or ABSTUDY
payment:

-   Assistance for Isolated Children Basic Boarding Allowance (EBB/EBBO)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children Second Home Allowance (ESH)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children Distance Education Allowance (EDE)
-   ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (Group 2) (SFA2T/SFA2B) AND

they had a parental home in one of the 11 flood affected Local
Government Areas (LGAs) in North Queensland, or

for an independent ABSTUDY student, they had a home, in one of the 11
flood affected Local Government Areas (LGAs) in North Queensland

Qualifying Local Government Areas (LGAs)

The following areas qualify for Local Government Areas (LGA):

-   Burdekin
-   Burke
-   Carpentaria
-   Cloncurry
-   Douglas
-   Flinders
-   Hinchinbrook
-   McKinlay
-   Richmond
-   Townsville
-   Winton

Who is the payee for Flood Education Supplement (FES?)

The Flood Education Supplement (FES) is intended to be paid to the
families of eligible ABSTUDY and AIC students. It is not to be paid to
third parties (for example, schools or boarding providers).

For ABSTUDY Students:

-   For dependent ABSTUDY students the FES is to be paid to the parent /
    guardian or the student (if requested by the parent)
-   For independent ABSTUDY students, the FES is to be paid to the
    student

For AIC Students

-   The FES will be paid directly to the applicant (being the parent /
    foster parent or guardian / carer)

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator and task cards:

-   Requesting access to FSPFFAP
-   ISS subsystem

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second
Home Allowance (SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
