-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how staff can help customers claim Crisis Payment
for release from prison or psychiatric confinement (CrP-PRI) and how to
process the claim.

This payment is for customers who, after being charged with committing
an offence, have:

-   been released from prison or psychiatric confinement, and
-   served at least 14 days in custody

Eligibility for CrP-PRI

Customers can qualify for CrP-PRI if all of the following apply:

they meet the basic eligibility criteria for CrP

they claim, either:

-   within 7 days after being released from prison or psychiatric
    confinement
-   up to 21 days before the customer’s expected release date

be in Australia when claiming the payment

have been in prison or psychiatric confinement for 14 or more days

have been charged with committing an offence

Note: if the date of release was more than 7 days ago, the customer may
still qualify if they do either of the following within 7 days of
release from prison or psychiatric confinement:

-   make contact about a CrP-PRI, or
-   seek a payment or concession card

Claiming options

Customers can claim CrP-PRI using the following channels:

through myGov, by accessing Centrelink Services and selecting:

-   Make a claim
-   Crisis Payments
-   Apply for Crisis Payment for Release from Prison or Psychiatric
    Confinement

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

paper claim for Crisis Payment Release from Prison or Psychiatric
Confinement (SU508)

Request for restoration of Disability Support Pension or Age Pension
Claim for Crisis Payment and Anticipated Payment (SU695)

Payment of CrP-PRI

Because of the urgent nature of CrP-PRI claims, the preferred payment
methods are either:

-   New Payments Platform (NPP)
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Suspended payments

Customers released from prison who had payments suspended may be
eligible to have their payment restored.

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers may have their DSP suspended due to imprisonment (SUS-IMP) for
up to 2 years. There is no need for a new claim in these cases. DSP may
be restored from date of release.

Most other payments will have a suspension period of up to 13 weeks.
They may be restored from the date of release from custody.

For more details about restoring specific payments, see Restoration of
payments (CLK).

Parenting Payment

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) cannot be suspended for imprisonment.
The customer will have to make a new claim.

Customers may have their Parenting Payment Single (PPS) restored from
the date of release if they:

-   meet all other eligibility for PPS from the release date, and
-   contact within 13 weeks of the date of notice to suspend

See Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment
(PP).

PPS customers will generally not  have a dependent child in care while
in custody. PPS may be restored upon the customer's release from prison
if:

-   the customer has the child with them in custody, and
-   the child remains with them when released

In most cases, assess these customers for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
Youth Allowance (YA) before their release from prison.

ABSTUDY Living Allowance

Customers may have their ABSTUDY Living Allowance suspended for up to 15
weeks.

Evidence requirements

Customers can upload all available evidence through the Document
Lodgement Service.

The system may ask customers to supply evidence of bank balances in the
claim application process. This will depend on their answers in an
online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Evidence is not needed if the account balance is under the financial
hardship amount for the following circumstances:

-   before and after updates
-   for new accounts

If prison admission or release confirmation DOCs are not on the
customer’s record, get the following evidence:

-   a letter from the correctional centre or psychiatric institution to
    confirm customer and custody details
-   confirmation from the respective corrective services department

See Resources for examples.

14 days in custody

For CrP-PRI, the 14 day detention period starts the day after the
customer entered custody:

-   'Day 0' for the CrP-PRI count (the day they enter custody) is not
    included in the count of 14 days
-   ‘Day 1’ for the CrP-PRI count starts from the next calendar day
-   The day the customer is released from prison is not included in the
    count of 14 days

See Resources for examples.

Note: a person is in custody if they are in prison. ‘In custody’ means
customers are either confined, while under sentence because they have
been convicted of, or are pending trial for, an offence, in:

-   psychiatric institutions
-   remand centres
-   police cells/watch houses
-   youth training centres
-   community correctional centres

One CrP-PRI per circumstance

Only one CrP-PRI can be paid for the same circumstance. For example, if
a customer is paid CrP-PRI under the Social Security Act 1991, and then
becomes an ABSTUDY customer, they cannot claim CrP-PRI under ABSTUDY
policy for the same circumstance.

Customer not eligible for CrP-PRI

Offer support services to customers claiming CrP-PRI who are ineligible.

Customers with a Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Customers with a Managed Service Plan (MSP) are helped through One Main
Contact (OMC) or by Personalised Services Service Officers (PSSO).
Follow the servicing arrangements for MSPs when assessing CrP-PRI
claims. See Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer service delivered
through a One Main Contact (OMC).

Review and appeal process

If a customer asks for an explanation of a CrP-PRI decision, refer it to
the business area of the decision maker. For example, a subject matter
expert (SME) in Smart Centre Operations should explain a decision made
by a Smart Centre staff member.

An Authorised Review Officer (ARO) does all applications for a formal
review of a CrP-PRI decision.

CrP-PRI claims can be reassessed after an explanation or formal request
for review of the decision. See Initial contact about a decision and the
review of decision process.

Reassess when original release date is revised

CrP-PRI is not payable if the customer is released from prison later
than originally scheduled.

Reassess the original grant decision if both of the following apply:

-   the customer has been paid CrP-PRI before release from custody
-   the release date is revised to a date after the original scheduled
    release date

See Fixing an incorrect Crisis Payment (CrP).

The customer must make another claim for the revised date of release.

See Resources for an example.

Debt pause on repayments

CrP-PRI customers paid in the last 14 days can pause their debt
repayments for up to 3 months using either:

-   self-service, using Money you owe
-   the Express Plus app

To consider if a temporary exclusion from debt recovery is needed, see
Temporary write off Centrelink debt.

The Resources page has links to:

-   contact details
-   rejection codes and reasons
-   error and warning messages
-   forms
-   prison servicing information and contacts
-   referrals
-   peak post release NGO services, and
-   the intranet

Related links

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Income Management and enhanced Income Management customers entering or
leaving prison

Referral to external support services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
