
COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2 003-21042647

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the eligibility criteria and payment rates for
the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program, May 2021.

From 1 November 2021, enquiries relating to the COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program are to be referred directly to Austrade. This includes
requests for late lodgement, updates on claims that are yet to be
finalised and complaints in relation to claim decisions and grant
outcomes. Applicants can contact Austrade via phone on 1300 729 401 or
email at consumertravelsupport@austrade.gov.au.

Purpose

To provide a payment to help travel agents and tour arrangement service
providers impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The payment is to support travel agents and tour arrangement service
providers that received the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program,
December 2020 (Round 1):

by providing additional support, and

to make sure they can

-   continue to trade, and
-   meet their legal obligations to process refunds and credits to
    Australian consumers

How to claim

Applicants can claim online, on behalf of a business that is a travel
agent or tour arrangement service provider. Applicants cannot submit a
claim over the phone. There is no paper claim form.

Applicants can only claim if they are an ‘eligible associate’ of the
business on the Australian Business Register (ABR).

Applicants must read the grant guidelines before submitting a claim.

Applicants:

can access the grant guidelines from the GrantConnect website

can only view the full grant guidelines document by selecting Go
Documents from the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program page

-   the grant opportunity ID is GO 4801

who are not already registered users with GrantConnect will need to set
up a new registration to access the guidelines

-   the Services Australia website also has a link to the GrantConnect
    website

Applicants who lodged a Round 1 claim on behalf of the business

To claim, applicants must:

-   log into Business Hub using their Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
    user name and password
-   select the business they are claiming for (if they are registered
    for more than one business)

New applicants (not the applicant who lodged the Round 1 claim)

To claim, applicants must, in PRODA:

-   log onto their personal account or register a personal account in
    their name
-   register the business (if this has not been done before)
-   link the business to Business Hub as a Service Provider (if this has
    not been done before)
-   access the Business Hub

If the applicant has problems:

-   creating a PRODA account, they can call the PRODA helpdesk
-   with loading the business’ online claim in Business Hub, see the
    Business Hub help table

See the Resources page for links that applicants can access from the
Services Australia website for:

-   PRODA
-   user guides, including ‘How to register your Organisation for
    Business Hub

Applicants can also search for ‘PRODA’ and ‘Business Hub’ on the
Services Australia website.

All applicants

Once an applicant is in Business Hub, they will need to:

-   select Apply for Service from the landing page
-   start a claim for the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program -
    Round 2
-   answer all questions and complete all steps up to and including
    Review and Submit

During the online claim process, applicants will be asked to make a
self-declaration.

Claiming periods

-   Opens 2 May 2021
-   Closes midnight (AEST) 12 June 2021 or until allocated funding is
    exhausted

If allocated funding is exhausted:

-   staff will be advised, including what to tell applicants who call to
    enquire
-   Operational Blueprint will be updated

Contact the Technical Peer Support if the applicant contacts to lodge a
claim after midnight (AEST) 12 June 2021. The Technical Peer Support
must escalate the enquiry to the Level 2 Helpdesk using the Payment
query template.

Eligibility requirements

Applicant requirements

‘Eligible associate’ of the business on the Australian Business Register
(ABR). See the Resources page for a link to the ABR.

-   Only 1 applicant can claim per Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   Only 1 claim will be accepted and determined for each active ABN,
    and
-   Only the first eligible applicant will be considered

The Round 1 applicant does not need to be the same as the Round 2
applicant.

Business requirements

A business must meet all of the following:

qualified for the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program, December
2020 (Round 1)

received the Round 1 payment based on their turnover, not based on Total
Transaction Value (TTV)

be solvent

intend to operate for the April to June 2021 quarter

make best endeavours to:

-   retain its staff, and
-   meet the business’ obligations to process refunds and travel credits
    to Australian consumers

Businesses with pending appeals under Round 1:

-   should wait to apply for Round 2 of the program until their Round 1
    appeal has been finalised
-   as the outcome of the appeal may affect the amount the business is
    eligible for under Round 2

Note: a Round 2 application will not be assessed until the outcome of a
Round 1 appeal is finalised.

Proof of identity requirements – applicants

If an applicant has not set up a Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
account, they will need to provide 3 documents to verify their identity
online. The documents that can be provided are:

-   Medicare card
-   Drivers Licence
-   Immicard
-   Passport
-   Birth Certificate
-   Citizenship Certificate
-   Visa
-   Certificate of Registration by Descent

To allow information to be automatically checked online with the issuer
or official record holder, the applicant will need to enter the details
for each of the 3 documents such as the:

-   state the document was issued
-   number recorded on the document

If the applicant’s name differs from the documents they provide, they
will also need to provide a Change of Name document such as a:

-   Marriage Certificate
-   Change of Name Certificate

Payment rates

See the Resources page for payment rates.

Taxable payment

Do not ask the applicant for their or their business’ Tax File Number
(TFN).

As this grant payment is taxable, applicants are encouraged to seek
independent professional advice about their taxation obligations or seek
help from the Australian Taxation Office.

There will be no GST consequences from the payment. This means it will
not affect how much GST the business has to pay.

If this payment will be included in an applicant’s individual tax return
(for example, they may be a sole trader) and they or their partner:

-   receive Family Tax Benefit and/or Child Care Subsidy - they will
    need to include this payment in their family income estimate as
    taxable income
-   have a child support assessment - this payment will form part of
    their adjusted taxable income

[] The easiest way for customers to view and update a family income
estimate is online. They can use their Centrelink online account through
myGov or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Payment methods

Payments will be made as a lump sum only.

An applicant must

-   reconfirm the account information provided as part of their
    application for Round 1 or
-   supply a new Australian bank account number that is registered to
    the business to receive the payment

Payments will be made:

-   by direct credit only
-   into the business’ bank account as nominated by the applicant
-   into an Australian bank account

This payment must not be delivered by the New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).

Assessing claims

For businesses with an eligible assessed turnover under Round 1
totalling:

Less than $500,000 - Services Australia will assess the claim

From $500,000 and above - Austrade will assess the claim

-   Services Australia will email the claim to Austrade for their
    assessment and implement their decision

Exceptional circumstances

Austrade may waive one or more of the eligibility criteria in
exceptional circumstances.

Applicants who want to have their case considered under exceptional
circumstances should email Consumer Travel Support. An authorised
Austrade review officer will review exceptional circumstance requests.

Exceptional circumstances requests do not need a business to have lodged
a Round 2 claim. It includes:

-   businesses in Round 1 that did not receive a payment because they
    were assessed on a TTV of above $20 million but with a GST turnover
    of below $20 million
-   applicant’s with a combined Round 1 and Round 2 payment based on
    turnover that would be higher than only a Round 1 payment based in
    any part on TTV

Round 2 payments are based on the eligible assessed turnover amount
decided under Round 1 of the Program.

Requests for turnover to be assessed using TTV over another reporting
method to receive a higher grant payment:

-   will not be considered
-   will not be assessed under exceptional circumstances

Reviews

For businesses with an eligible assessed turnover under Round 1
totalling:

-   Less than $500,000 – a Services Australia Subject Matter Expert
    (SME) will review the claim decision
-   From $500,000 and above - an Austrade Subject Matter Expert (SME)
    will review the claim decision

Appeals cannot be referred to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Complaints

A complaint is made if:

-   a person expresses dissatisfaction about a product or service, and
-   a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected or
    legally needed

A customer can complain about a service, process or decision of the
agency over the phone, in writing, in person or by myGov.

If a complaint is being made, staff can transfer the call to Technical
Peer Support line.

The Technical Peer Support staff member will try to resolve the
complaint at this point of contact.

If the Technical Peer Support staff member cannot resolve the complaint,
then the complaint can be escalated to Level 1 Complaints and Feedback
using the Customer Feedback Tool. This will be made on the business' CRN
(the second CRN) that has the decision letter.

The Customer Feedback Tool is to be created as per the coding below.

-   Service Brand: Centrelink
-   Service Type: Business and Employers
-   Service Detail: Transport and Freight Services
-   Business Reference Section: Zone/Branch OU code of 61050779, then
    select the line presented that matches RSP NEW INIATIVES AND
    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Selecting the business reference field will make sure these complaints
can be easily identified and associated with this payment.

The complaint can be escalated to Level 2 Complaints, if it:

-   cannot be resolved by Level 1 Complaints and Feedback, or
-   meets 1 of the 8 escalation reasons

For more details, see:

Requesting access to the Customer Feedback tool

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)

See the Resources page for:

-   FAQs from applicants
-   Operational FAQs

Related links

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program December 2020 (Round 1)

Assessing and coding COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program May 2021
(Round 2) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
