
Conducting an assessment of care on an informal basis where a child may be at risk of harm 003-12040030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the process for when children sometimes live with
adults who provide care for them on an informal basis. It explains what
to do when these 'caring' arrangements may not be in the best interests
of the child, and when social worker involvement is needed.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Social worker involvement

Examples of when social worker involvement may be necessary include:

-   the child is exposed to or a victim of family and domestic violence
-   the child is exposed to alcohol, drugs or substance abuse
-   the child is being cared for by another child (a person aged under
    18, for example older sibling)
-   the child is involved in criminal, sexual or unhealthy activities
-   a lack of guidance or oversight from the carer in day to day care
    (for example education attendance)
-   alienation of the child from family and friends
-   a disregard by the carer for the child’s well-being and daily needs,
    for example food, health, hygiene and safety, etc.

When assessing levels of care, numerous considerations must be taken
into account regarding legal responsibility, care, welfare and
development of the child.

The case should be referred to a social worker if:

-   the child is not a family member of the person claiming Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) or a social security payment that is dependent on the
    provision of care for a child, and
-   the person has not supplied documentation to support that the child
    is legally in their care, or
-   the person has previously lost care of children

In addition, children who are being cared for by a family member who are
themselves under 18 should be referred to a social worker.

Children in this situation are considered to be at risk of harm and a
social worker assessment should be completed.

Cases may arise where the parties cannot agree on when/if a change in
care arrangements has occurred. A report from a social worker can be
included as evidence to assist the Service Officer to make a decision
about whether a claim should be granted.

If the case is being referred to a social worker, any payment the losing
carer is receiving for the child should not be cancelled before the
social worker has made a recommendation. Note: however, if the child has
been away from the previous carer for more than four weeks, payment
should be cancelled unless the disputed care provisions apply.

Role of the social worker

In cases when a child may be at risk, the social worker will:

-   attempt to contact the losing carer to advise that a claim has been
    lodged for the child, where this will not place the child at risk of
    harm. Consultation with a Social Work Manager is required if
    contacting the losing carer may pose a risk to the child
-   obtain information about the reason for the change and the likely
    duration
-   consider if disclosure of information in the public interest is
    required
-   make a recommendation to the Service Officer about payment of FTB
-   make a recommendation to the Service Officer about other affected
    payments

If a case involves a child of an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
group, then the social worker should consult with an Indigenous
Specialist Officer (ISO) about any relevant cultural issues.

If a case involves a refugee child or child from a culturally and
linguistically diverse (CALD) background, the social worker should
consult with a Multicultural Service Officer (MSO) about any relevant
cultural factors.

Disclosure of information in the public interest

A disclosure of information in the public interest in this case would be
a referral to the relevant State/Territory welfare agency. In these
cases, the Service Officer must decide whether to grant the claim, or
hold it pending any State/Territory action to remove the child from the
person’s care. In these cases, claims for payment related to the care of
the child, should be treated in the following way:

-   If the Service Officer is satisfied that the child is an FTB child
    of the applicant, the claim for FTB can be granted. If a claim has
    also been made for a social security payment, the Service Officer
    should ensure a consistent outcome and grant the claim if the
    customer is eligible
-   If the Service Officer is satisfied that the child is a dependent
    child of the customer, the income support claim can be granted. If a
    claim has also been made for FTB, the Service Officer should ensure
    a consistent outcome and grant the FTB if the customer is eligible
-   If a claim is held pending any State/Territory action, the claim
    should be reviewed after 28 days

Note: the social worker’s recommendation must be considered in each
case.

The Resources page contains examples of cases that should be referred to
a social worker.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Social Work Service referral

Social Work Services

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Conducting a Child Support non-parent carer assessment

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
