-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the use of Homelessness Indicators. The
Homelessness Indicator is one of the Services Australia measures,
developed as a response to the 2009 Homelessness White Paper. It
recognises that responding to a customer experiencing, or at risk of,
homelessness is the responsibility of all Services Australia staff.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour that raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Service Officer role

When a customer is experiencing, or is at risk of homelessness, Service
Officers must ensure they are provided with additional support and
information to:

-   lodge a claim for an income support payment, if they are not on
    payment
-   apply for a formal review a decision, if they disagree with it

Service officers should:

-   code a Homelessness Indicator on the customer's record, if the
    customer consents
-   consider whether an internal referral to an agency specialist is
    required
-   consider whether an external referral within the community is
    required, such as emergency accommodation or welfare agency
    assistance

Where the customer has compulsory participation requirements and a
Homelessness Indicator is recorded, information regarding the risk of,
or ongoing or temporary homelessness will automatically display under
the title of Accommodation Arrangements on the Circumstances Impacting
Compliance screen. The circumstance will display as 'Automatically
created - yet to assess impact' until a Service Officer is required to
assess the impact of this circumstance on compliance. This does not need
to be actioned at the time of recording the Homelessness Indicator.

This information is updated when further changes are made to the
Homelessness Indicator.

Homelessness Indicator Tool

A Homelessness Indicator identifies a customer who is homeless or at
risk of becoming homeless. It is a tool designed to improve staff
awareness of a customer's personal situation and alert attention to
changing the service offer to a vulnerable group. These customers
require additional support and understanding. The homelessness indicator
will display under the Complex Servicing section of the Snapshot page in
Process Direct.

When to code a Homelessness Indicator

For Services Australia purposes, homelessness and at risk of becoming
homeless are experienced when an individual or family has inadequate
access to safe and secure housing which meets community standards.

A Service Officer may become aware of a customer experiencing
homelessness or risk of homelessness when the customer:

-   claims a Crisis Payment
-   claims Unreasonable To Live At Home (UTLAH) rate of Youth Allowance
    (YA)
-   claims an Advance Payment
-   requests change in Paycode
-   lodges a new claim
-   advises a Change of Address
-   requests a weekly payment
-   advises any change in circumstances
-   requests an urgent payment
-   during a conversation where the customer self-identifies that they
    are about to become homeless or are homeless
-   requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of a decision

A customer advising any change in circumstances can prompt a Service
Officer to make further enquiries and discuss the customer's current
circumstances to identify whether they are homeless or at risk of
becoming homeless.

Use of the Homelessness Indicator is not restricted to only job seekers.
If appropriate, any customer can have a Homelessness Indicator on their
record.

Note: customers must provide consent for the Homeless Indicator to be
coded on their record, including when the customer has completed the
update online. See Frequently Asked Questions on the Resources page for
more information.

Mutual obligation requirements

The recording of a Homelessness Indicator does not, by itself, exempt a
job seeker from mutual obligation requirements. The impact on a
jobseeker's capacity to comply with compulsory requirements must be
considered when determining if the jobseeker has a reasonable excuse for
a non-compliance event. For example, before a decision is made to apply
a financial penalty regarding a mutual obligation or work refusal
failure.

The Resources page contains Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on the
Homelessness Indicator.

Related links

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Homelessness

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Review of Homeless Indicator and referral for a wellbeing assessment

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
