
Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA) 003-02000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements
(DRFA), formerly known as Natural Disaster Relief and Recovery
Arrangements (NDRRA), which is a jointly funded Commonwealth and
State/Territory disaster response and recovery assistance program
designed to provide assistance to the Australian States and Territories.

Government intent - DRFA assistance program

Under the jointly-funded Commonwealth and State/Territory Disaster
Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA), assistance is provided to
alleviate the financial burden on states and territories. It also
supports the provisions of urgent financial assistance to disaster
affected communities.

Under these arrangements, the relevant state and territory government
determines which areas receive DRFA assistance and what is available to
individuals and communities. This assistance is offered as a partial
reimbursement of costs to cover relief and recovery payments and
infrastructure arrangements.

-   Personal hardship and distress (PHD) assistance funding is generally
    for emergency aid such as clothing, food, accommodation, repairs to
    housing, replacement of essential household items and personal
    effects
-   Restore essential public assets funding is generally to assist local
    governments to restore essential public assets to their pre-disaster
    standard to meet current engineering standards and building codes
    while maintaining the same asset class and immunity level
-   Natural disaster declarations for AGDRP and DRFA are not the same.
    The declaration for DRFA in a local government area (LGA) is
    different to the declarations for AGDRP in the same area. For more
    details on LGA's and funding covered by DRFA, refer to the Resources
    page for the Disaster Assist website

Commonwealth Disaster Recovery Payments

In some circumstances, Services Australia may be required to deliver
recovery payments to affected residents through the Australian
Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), Disaster Recovery
Allowance (DRA) and/or other ex-gratia payments. This additional
assistance is separate to DRFA.

The Resources page contains a link to the Disaster Assist website.

Related links

Identifying and offering a package of services for customers in crisis
or needing special help

Claiming emergency payments

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Emergency Management events

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
