
Additional Payment for Children (APC) 003-20011632

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for all eligible events for APC have now closed
unless special circumstances apply. See Closed emergency management
events.

This document outlines the purpose and eligibility criteria of the
Additional Payment for Children (APC).

On this Page:

Purpose of APC

The purpose of APC is to provide one-off financial assistance to
eligible Australian and New Zealand principal carers with children under
the age of 16, who have been directly affected by a major disaster.

The intention is for the APC to assist families with costs associated
with returning to school, however it will be available to all children
regardless of whether they are engaged in school or early childhood
education settings.

What is APC?

The APC is a one off ex-gratia payment to help eligible Australians with
children under the age of 16 in their care who have been adversely
affected by the 2019-20 bushfires.

See Grants and ex-gratia payments.

Customers are only eligible to receive one APC payment per child in
their principal care.

An eligible child’s family principal place of residence must be located
in a local government area affected by the 2019-2020 New South Wales,
Victorian, South Australian, Queensland and Tasmanian bushfires.

If eligible, APC is payable in addition to any pension or benefit the
customer may be receiving.

APC is exempt from tax and from all Australian Government means testing
arrangements and waiting periods. Additional Payment for Children is
exempt from tax and from all Australian Government means testing
arrangements and waiting periods.

Qualifying for APC

A person qualifies for APC if they have already received, or are
eligible to receive, Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
(AGDRP) or ex-gratia DRP for the bushfires in 2019-20 as the principal
carer of a child under the age of 16.

Customer Contact - Non receipt of APC

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received the APC for the
relevant events:

-   Non-allocated processing staff - send an ACTDOC using the Fast note
    available in Customer First. Select Auto text. Use Emergency > Claim
-   Processing staff - see the task card on the resources page - How to
    manually code APC

APC is also available to New Zealand SCV holders (subclass 444) who have
received the ex-gratia DRP.

Note: this payment has only been activated specifically for the
bushfires that commenced in August 2019 and occurred throughout 2019-20.
These are:

Eastern Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019)

NSW Bushfires (Sep 2019)

South Australian Bushfires, November 2019

Queensland Bushfires (Sep 2019)

Victorian Bushfires, December 2019

Tasmanian Bushfires, December 2019

Qualifying Local Government Areas (LGAs)

For a list of current Local Government Areas see the Resources page of
the relevant specific event file: Assessing claims for Emergency
payments for Eastern Queensland Bushfires (Nov 2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for NSW Bushfires (Sep 2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for South Australian Bushfires,
November 2019

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Queensland Bushfires (Sep
2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Victorian Bushfires,
December 2019

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Tasmanian Bushfires,
December 2019

Claiming APC

Customers do not need to complete a separate claim form for APC.

Payment will be made automatically to any eligible principal carers for
each child who has already received or is eligible for the AGDRP or
ex-gratia DRP.

Payment rates

The rate of Additional Payment for Children (APC) is $400 per eligible
child.

The rate of payment is determined by the relevant Minister.

APC must be paid in one lump sum. It cannot be paid in instalments.

Method of payment

Eligible APC customers will receive the payment into their nominated
Australian bank account.

APC cannot be paid via:

-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
-   Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) cards
-   Immediate payment maybe available to customers via the New Payment
    Platform (NPP)

APC is not subject to compulsory income management.

A recoverable payment

Services Australia undertakes checks to identify fraudulent claims.

If the agency does not have power under the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013 to pay an amount of APC to a
customer, then the relevant amount is a debt due to the Commonwealth by
the customer, and may be recovered.

See Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments.

Authority to pay Additional Payment for Children

APC can only be paid when the relevant Minister has made a determination
by gazetted notice that:

-   a major disaster, whether naturally occurring or otherwise, has
    occurred, and
-   AGDRP and ex-gratia DRP applies to that major disaster.

Under no circumstances can APC be paid without this authority.

Where there is no ministerial declaration to pay APC, another social
security payment may be payable to meet the needs of people affected by
a disaster. For example JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Crisis Payment (CrP) or
Special Benefit (SpB).

When a disaster is declared, a new active event procedure will be
created containing relevant information. See Current emergency
management events.

The Resources page contains a link to information on the Services
Australia website about assistance available for declared disasters and
how to claim disaster payments. It also contains a link to the Disaster
Assist website and the Australian Government’s Emergency Management
page.

The Resources page contains task cards for accessing ISS and requesting
access to Flexible Support Payment FFAP. It also contains a link the
Services Australia Website.

Related links

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Assessing claims for Emergency payments for Eastern Queensland Bushfires
(Nov 2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for NSW Bushfires (Sep 2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for South Australian Bushfires,
November 2019

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Queensland Bushfires (Sep
2019)

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Victorian Bushfires,
December 2019

Assessing claims for emergency payments for Tasmanian Bushfires,
December 2019

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Assessing Special Benefit (SpB) entitlements

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
