
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment 003-20080418

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Customers can claim online again from 8am Wednesday 20 July 2022. If a
customer calls, tell them to visit
https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/pandemic-leave-disaster-payment for
how to claim online. If a customer does not have access to online
services, they can claim over the phone using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) from 9am on the same date.

There are different claiming periods depending on the self-isolation,
quarantine or caring period claimed. See the Resources page.

If a customer has lodged a claim online or using ACC that has not yet
been finalised, they cannot lodge another one. If a customer calls to
ask why they cannot lodge more than 1 claim, tell them:
‘You can lodge your next claim once you have received confirmation from
Services Australia on the claim outcome of your previous claim.’

Reminder: more than one Flexible Support Payment (including Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment) cannot be paid on the same day. See Processing
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Process Direct.

Different eligibility criteria apply depending on a customer’s period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring. Confirm the period the customer is
claiming before assessing their claim.

This document explains the eligibility criteria and payment rates for
the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

Purpose of the payment

This lump sum payment helps to limit financial hardship for customers who cannot earn an income as:

-   they or a child 16 years or under in their care are required to
    self-isolate or quarantine
-   they are caring for a person who has tested positive with
    coronavirus (COVID-19), or
-   they are caring for a person who has to self-isolate or quarantine,
    and the person has a disability or severe medical condition that
    means they cannot look after themselves

Check the period the customer is claiming

Staff must check the period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring a
customer is claiming.

Different criteria apply depending on the period the customer is
claiming.

If the customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine
or caring that starts:

-   on or after 18 January 2022, customers can claim a 7 day payment
    period. See eligibility criteria
-   on or after 10 January 2022 and up to and including 17 January 2022,
    customers can claim a 7 day payment period. See eligibility criteria
-   on or after 9 December 2021 and up to and including 9 January 2022,
    customers can claim a 7 day payment period. See eligibility criteria
-   before 9 December 2021 (up to and including 8 December 2021),
    customers can claim a 14 day payment period. See eligibility
    criteria

Awaiting COVID-19 test results

See the Resources page for Test Isolation Payments (payments available
while awaiting COVID-19 test results).

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start:

on or after 18 January 2022

-   see eligibility criteria to check if these can be received on any
    day of the same Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claim period

on or before 17 January 2022

-   see the state or territory details to check if these can received on
    any day of the same Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claim period

Payment rates

Payment rates depend on the period of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring a customer is claiming.

See Payment rates.

Taxable payment

As this payment is taxable it must be included in the customer's:

Income Tax Return for the relevant financial year the payment was made
in

family income estimate (if relevant) for:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB), and
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

The easiest way for customers to view and update an estimate is [A self
service option is available for customers] online using:

-   a Centrelink online account through myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If a customer has a child support assessment, the payment:

-   will form part of their adjusted taxable income for child support
    purposes
-   must be included in any income estimate they lodge in the current
    financial year

The easiest way for customers to view and update an estimate is [A self
service option is available for customers] online using:

-   a Child Support online account though myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Child Support mobile app

No Tax File Number (TFN) requirements

Customers do not need to give their TFN to claim this payment.

Services Australia:

-   has no authority to collect this information for this payment
-   must not ask for the customer's TFN to be given either verbally or
    in writing

Customers will be advised in their grant letter that it is their
responsibility to declare this payment when lodging their tax return for
the relevant financial year the payment was made in.

Lodging claims

If the claim is for a self-isolation, quarantine or caring period that
starts:

on or after 18 January 2022

-   Customers can claim online
-   Details on how to claim are available for customers on the
    Centrelink online account website
-   If the customer needs help or cannot use online services they can
    call Services Australia on 180 22 66 to lodge a verbal claim using
    Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   If a customer has lodged a claim online or using ACC that has not
    yet been finalised, they cannot lodge another one. If a customer
    calls, tell them:
    ‘You can lodge your next claim once you have received confirmation
    from Services Australia on the claim outcome of your previous
    claim.’
-   Due to the re-instatement of the Pandemic Leave Disaster payment
    from 1 July 2022, there are different claiming periods, depending on
    the 7 day self-isolation, quarantine or caring period claimed
-   See Resources

on or after 9 December 2021 and up to and including 17 January 2022, the
claiming period has now closed and late claims will not be accepted.
Customers could call the agency on 180 22 66 to lodge a verbal claim up
to and including 28 July 2022

-   Customers were previously able to use the EM252 Claim for Pandemic
    Leave Disaster Payment form. This claim form is no longer available
-   Claims received on the EM252 Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster
    Payment form will still be allocated to staff to assess and finalise

on or before 8 December 2021, the claiming period has now closed and
late claims will not be accepted. Customers could call the agency on 180
22 66 to lodge a verbal claim up to and including 28 July 2022

-   See the state or territory details

When the EM252 Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form was
available:

If customers had a computer that had ‘Adobe Acrobat Reader’, the claim
form:

-   was fillable, and
-   could be completed and digitally signed using their computer.
    Digitally signed means typing their name or inserting their
    e-signature under the Consent question of the form

If they did not have a computer that had ‘Adobe Acrobat Reader’, the
claim form:

-   was not fillable
-   may have had errors, including a request to enter a password to open
    the form, or dates recording incorrectly in the question ‘What 7 day
    period are you claiming’
-   could be printed off, completed and signed by hand

Customers were able to return the form online, via the Upload documents
service using their Centrelink online account or via fax on 1300 727 760
if they had printed and signed a copy of the form.

Report suspected fraud

See Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption.

The Resources page has links to Visa subclass numbers, forms, contact
details and the Services Australia website.

Contents

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Process Direct

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process from 18
January 2022

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - New South Wales

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Queensland

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - South Australia

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Tasmania

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Victoria

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Western Australia

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Australian Capital Territory

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Northern Territory

New claim for Crisis Payment – National Health Emergency

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
