
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) – August 2016 Kabul kidnapping 003-21090237

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains event-specific information about the AVTOP for
the August 2016 Kabul kidnapping. This is a one off payment of up to
$75,000. It provides financial assistance to Australians who have been
harmed, or are a close family member of a person who has died, as a
direct result of the August 2016 Kabul kidnapping.

Declared overseas terrorist act

The terrorist act that occurred in Kabul, Afghanistan 7 August 2016 at
approximately 8.35pm Kabul time.

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

Primary victims of the August 2016 Kabul kidnapping have until 14 August
2023 to lodge a claim.

Note: declaration for this event was signed on 14 August 2021.

Eligibility for AVTOP

A person is eligible for AVTOP if:

-   the person was an Australian resident, or held a qualifying
    residence exemption, on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   the person was in the location of, and harmed as a direct result of,
    the terrorist act (primary victim), and
-   the person was not involved in the commission of the terrorist act,
    and did not have family members involved in the commission of the
    terrorist act

There is no age limit.

Claims will be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

Maximum amount payable

If a customer is harmed (primary victim), the maximum payment any 1
person can receive is $75,000.

Proof of identity requirements

A customer will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents. See Confirming a customer’s identity and Identity
Confirmation.

A claimant over the age of 16 will need to provide 1 document from each
of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

When claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the customer may need to
provide identity documents on behalf of the child. These documents
include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

Customers can be given up to 28 days provide proof of identity
documentation, longer in exceptional circumstances.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the AVTOP, customers may call the Australian Victim of
Terrorism Overseas Hotline. The operating hours for the hotline can
vary. Refer to the Services Australia website for current details.

Customers may also download a claim form from the website and post the
completed claim form and supporting documentation.

Keywords

Claims uploaded into Customer First need to be indexed and have keywords
added.

Claims to be rejected will also need to be indexed with the relevant
keywords. The Resources page contains keywords for indexing a claim and
rejecting an unsuccessful claim.

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel advice

Where possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable for the August
2016 Kabul kidnapping for the 6 months before the terrorist act.

The Resources page contains travel advices received. For information on
how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see Reductions and
Deductions for the AVTOP.

Withdrawal of claim

Customers can choose to withdraw a claim before the claim has been
determined.

Social worker referrals

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

For information on the role of social workers for AVTOP and how to refer
AVTOP customers to a social worker, see Primary victim eligibility and
rate calculation for the AVTOP.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details, claim forms, keywords, map of the affected areas,
travel advice and the Smartraveller website.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
