
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document outlines the:

-   the social work role with individuals linked to the National Redress
    Scheme (the Scheme) administered by the Department of Social
    Services (DSS)
-   how referrals are recorded in the Social Work Information System
    (SWIS)
-   the process for Subject Matter Experts (SME) who create
    non-Centrelink customer records

Note: no information about the individual is to be recorded on the
individual’s record in Customer First or Process Direct, this includes
the Document List (DL) screen. Information must only be recorded within
SWIS (case notes).

Social Work role in the National Redress Scheme

A referral to a social worker can be initiated by:

-   a DSS Redress Officer,
-   staff member, or
-   by the individual presenting in an acute crisis

When referred by DSS, the individuals will be told that they are being
transferred to a Services Australia social worker who may ask personal
information about their circumstances. This is to enable the social
worker to appropriately record interactions and provide the most
suitable support. If the individual declines to provide information, a
referral can still be made. The social worker will obtain the referring
Redress Officer's logon and contact details to notify them of the risk
assessment outcome within one business day of the referral.

Social workers will provide support and help to individuals contacting
about the Scheme where they are experiencing an acute crisis.
Individuals referred to the Social Work Service include:

-   applicants
-   nominees
-   carers
-   family members
-   institutional representatives
-   staff of Redress Support Services
-   survivors

A referral for an acute crisis occurs when the individual presents:

-   at imminent risk of suicide, self-harm or risk to others, or
-   at immediate and significant risk to the health and wellbeing of
    themselves or another person

Social workers will:

-   provide immediate support and crisis intervention
-   liaise with and provide referrals to appropriate support services
    including Redress Support Services

The Resources page has a link to the National Redress Scheme website,
which lists these services.

Documenting referrals from the National Redress Scheme in Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Social workers must only record Redress referrals in SWIS Case Notes. Do
not record on any other system, for example Process Direct or Customer
First.

Social workers record Redress referrals in SWIS, even if the individual
identifies as a non-Centrelink customer.

Note: social workers must check the Zone Survey box in SWIS for
non-identified data collection.

Social Workers record this referral:

as a customer referral if the individual:

-   has a Customer Reference Number (CRN) and provides consent for the
    referral to be recorded
-   has a CRN, does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded,
    but the social worker deems the customer to be at imminent risk of
    harm
-   gives consent to use their personal information to search for their
    record or provides permission to create a customer record for
    purposes of documenting the interaction

as an anonymous customer, if the individual:

-   does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded and is not
    at imminent risk of harm
-   does not have a CRN and does not want a record created

The Resources page has links the Release of Information for
non-Centrelink customers form, contact details Intranet links and links
to external websites.

Related links

National Redress Scheme

Referring individuals linked to the National Redress Scheme to a social
worker

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
