-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the interpreter services available for customers
who are deaf or hard of hearing.

Communication with deaf or hard of hearing customers

Deaf or hard of hearing customers use many forms of communication to
conduct their business with Services Australia.

To make sure they access the services and support they need, it is
important to determine their communication preference. These include:

Sign language interpreters:

The agency provides free Auslan interpreters for customers who are deaf
or hard of hearing

Customers can access an agency supplied interpreter, or use their own
interpreter or nominee

If using their own, the interpreter can be in:

-   person
-   via video chat (on the customer’s own device)
-   over the phone, who must be accredited

The National Relay Service (NRS):

-   A telephone service for people who are deaf or hard of hearing
-   For information on how to help customers via the NRS, see Using the
    National Relay Service (NRS)

Other forms of communication:

-   Lip reading (also referred to as speech reading)
-   Visual cues
-   Speech
-   Written text, for example writing on paper or digital device

Interpreter preference

Staff must make sure to use the customer's interpreting preference where
possible.

Services Australia prefers the use of qualified interpreters.

Offer the use of agency provided interpreters to the customer. If the
customer declines the use of an agency provided interpreter and prefers
to use their own interpreter, the customer must:

use an accredited interpreter when contacting by phone

not use a friend, relative or children as the interpreter:

-   Unless recorded as a nominee
-   Avoids problems with language competency, impartiality, content
    integrity and confidentiality

Take reasonable steps to provide a service to customers who are deaf or
hard of hearing. If a service cannot be provided at point of contact,
offer an alternative arrangement as soon as possible.

Staff must make sure the customer is not exposed to risks, such as
identity crime or who cannot be authenticated. See:

-   Identity fraud
-   Authenticating a Centrelink customer
-   Authenticating a Medicare customer
-   Authenticating a Child Support customer

Auslan interpreters for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Auslan is the official and most commonly used sign language of the
Australian deaf or hard of hearing community. It is also known as
Australian sign language.

Interpreters use gestures instead of sounds to facilitate comfortable
and smooth communication for the deaf or hard of hearing customer. They
convert spoken language into sign language and vice versa.

Auslan interpreters:

-   are certified and registered with the National Accreditation
    Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI) after having
    their skills and competencies assessed
-   certification includes knowledge, understanding and demonstration of
    the Australian Sign Language Interpreters Association (ASLIA) Code
    of Ethics
-   code of ethics provides direction on principles, values and
    standards of conduct in their professional capacity

When using an Auslan interpreter to communicate with a deaf or hard of
hearing customer:

-   Be prepared. Brief the interpreter of the appointment’s purpose or
    any special terminology that will be used. Provide material (if in
    person) that will be discussed or signed
-   Service centre staff - consider printing the customer's name in
    large font on A4 paper instead of calling their name in the waiting
    room
-   Make sure the customer and interpreter can see each other’s hands
    and facial expressions clearly
-   Allow for regular breaks. Sign interpreting for long periods can be
    physically and mentally exhausting for both the interpreter and the
    customer
-   Consider the same principles and techniques as using interpreters
    who interpret for different languages. See Guidelines for using
    interpreters

The agency offers other forms of sign languages for customers who are
deaf or hard of hearing. For more information, contact Language
Services.

The Resources page contains links to notices, contact details and
external websites.

Related links

Interpreter Services

Language Services

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Guidelines for using interpreters

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Identity fraud

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Authenticating a Child Support customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
