
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the services available for customers who have
limited English proficiency or who are deaf or hard of hearing.

Overview

Interpreters help customers who speak a language other than English
conduct their business.

The benefits of using an interpreter include:

-   improved customer and staff experience
-   greater accuracy in the information recorded
-   fewer customer debts or compliance issues
-   less re-work or time resolving issues

If the customer needs an:

-   immediate telephone interpreter
-   Indigenous language interpreter

If the customer is deaf or hard of hearing and needs an:

-   immediate interpreter, explore their nominee arrangement, or see
    Using the National Relay Service (NRS)
-   interpreter for booked appointment

For an overview or help on how to offer and work with interpreters, see
Language Services and Guidelines for using interpreters.

Using qualified interpreters

Services Australia prefers the use of qualified interpreters. The use of
a customer's friend or relative as the interpreter is actively
discouraged. This avoids potential problems with language competency,
impartiality, content integrity and confidentiality.

Providing feedback

Staff are encouraged to provide feedback about their experience using
interpreters.

Feedback helps identify how services can be improved. It can include the
quality of the phone line, the interpreter's performance and
professionalism, complaints, compliments, or system issues.

To provide feedback, see the Resources page, Forms (staff) > Interpreter
feedback form.

The Resources page contains links to Language and Office codes, guides,
forms, mySupport, Services Australia and external websites.

Contents

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)

Guidelines for using an interpreter

Interpreter services for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Related links

Language Services

Written material in other languages

Booking appointments in the Centrelink Appointment System

Identifying if a customer who is a migrant, refugee or visitor is
eligible for financial assistance

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Accessing an Indigenous interpreter

Nominees

Using the National Relay Service (NRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
