-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of raising AoS debts and the role of
the National AoS Team and service centres in this process. This includes
where liability lies for repayment of the AoS debt.

AoS

An AoS is a legally binding agreement signed by a person to financially
support someone who is applying to migrate to Australia on a specific
type of visa.

Recoverable payments

If an assuree receives a recoverable social security payment during the
AoS period:

-   the assurer is liable to repay the amount of payment received, and
-   an AoS debt will be raised against the assurer

If it is a joint AoS, all the assurers are equally liable. The AoS debt
begins to accumulate from the date the assuree is granted a recoverable
income support payment.

Recoverable social security payments are outlined in the Social Security
Guide under section 9.4.1.10 Overview of the AoS scheme. See the
Reference page.

The AoS debt is raised as ‘Determined’ debt every 12 months or once the
AoS period has expired.

Bank guarantee

Where an AoS is a mandatory requirement for entry into Australia, a bank
guarantee must be provided before the AoS arrangement can be accepted.
This bank guarantee will be cancelled at the end of the AoS period
unless a recoverable AoS debt has been incurred. See AoS bank guarantee
and term deposit.

Where an AoS debt has been incurred, Services Australia will draw on the
bank guarantee every 12 months to repay the AoS debt. This will cease
once the bank guarantee is depleted, or the AoS debt stops accruing.

If the AoS debt is less than the bank guarantee, the remaining funds
will be refunded to the assurer who lodged the bank guarantee at the end
of the AoS period.

If the debt exceeds the bank guarantee amount, normal recovery will take
place following recovery of the bank guarantee every 12 months until the
AoS period expires.

See Recovery of Assurance of Support (AoS) debts.

AoS debts

Before the migration to Process Direct in September 2018, AoS debts were
raised in the Debt Management and Information (DMIS) system of Customer
Record.

AoS debts are now raised in Process Direct via AoS Yearly and Expiry
Review work items. They have a status of ‘For Manual Action’. If an
assuree receives an AoS recoverable payment during their AoS period,
Process Direct generates the following reviews as needed:

-   AoS Quarterly Reviews
-   Yearly Reviews, and
-   Expiry Reviews

To complete the review, AoS Processing staff need:

-   ZC.C4.PD.AOS.PROCESSING.STAFF (AOS3) access role, and
-   NV_CLK_RVW AoS skill tag

Request access via ESSentials.

An AoS debt is only raised when:

-   there is a current AoS arrangement in force
-   the assuree is not receiving sufficient support from their assurer,
    and
-   the assuree is in receipt of an AoS recoverable payment

Services Australia will automatically raise all AoS debts for recovery
12 months from the date the assuree is first granted a payment, and
continue either until the:

-   end of the AoS period (after 1,2, 4 or 10 years), or
-   assuree no longer receives a recoverable income support payment

An AoS debt will first be recovered from any lodged bank guarantee. If
the bank guarantee has been depleted, the assurer will need to repay any
outstanding debts.

Multiple AoS debts may be raised on assurer(s) record when there are 2
assurees and both claim a recoverable payment. Debts will first be
recovered from the:

-   AoS bond (debt reason ASB), or
-   assurer (debt reason ASN) when there is no bond to recover

ASB and ASN debts are raised with separate debt IDs. If the assuree
received different payment types, each payment types are raised with
separate debt IDs.

AoS debt reasons

-   ASB – Assurance of Support Bond Recovery (Auto) – Debt to be
    recovered from the bond
-   ASN – Assurance of Support debt -automatic (Assurer) Auto – Debt to
    be recovered from the assurer
-   ASO – (Assurance of Support Recovery –old (Assurer) Manual – Debt to
    be recovered from the assurer

Joint assurers

Joint assurers are jointly and equally liable to repay the entire AoS
debt amount. For example, there are 2 assurers. The AoS debt amount is
$10,000. Both assurers are liable for the entire amount, however they
can decide the amount each assurer will repay in order to finalise the
debt.

Joint assurers debts are raised as multiple liability debt with the same
debt IDs.

Manual Debt

The quarterly, yearly, expiry and bond return reviews are not
automatically generated when the assuree has been granted a recoverable
payment on a multiple record instead of the assuree’s AoS record.

Service officers need to raise a manual debt directly on the assurer
record in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) and issue
manual debt letters.

When the AoS yearly or expiry reviews are generated in Process Direct
and contains incorrect debt details, AoS processing staff may need to:

-   zero out the debt to finalise the review
-   raise manual debts, and
-   issue manual letters

See Table 2 for manual debts.

Commencement reviews

A commencement review is not debt related. It is created 3 months after
the AoS is accepted to follow up the AoS start date.

A commencement review manual work item only creates if the Assuree(s)
status has not changed from ACCepted to CURrent within 13 weeks of the
status moving to ACCepted.

This review is to ensure ACCepted Assuree(s) are followed up after 13
weeks to ensure they move to a CURrent status.

If the Assuree(s) status has changed to CURrent by week 13, normally
through the Services Australia - Home Affairs automatic datalink, the
commencement review will auto complete. No manual action is needed.

AoS Expiry Review

An expiry review manual work item is only created for an AoS skilled
service officer to action if:

-   the AoS case has expired, and
-   an Assuree(s) has received a recoverable payment prior to expiry

This review ensures an AoS determined debt is raised for all Assurer(s)
in the AoS case. The expiry review will enable an AoS debt to be created
in DMIS for the Assurer(s) to repay.

Service officer will finalise the DMN activity, the final debt is raised
on the assurer record in DMIS system.

If there is no recoverable payment amounts, the expiry review will auto
complete and no user interact is needed.

AoS Quarterly Review

After a recoverable income support payment is granted to the assuree,
the:

-   Assurance of Support – Review for Assuree (SU057) is issued to the
    assuree, and
-   Assurance of Support – Review for Assurer (SU058) is issued to the
    assurer(s)

Quarterly review forms are issued every 3 months to review their
circumstances and to establish the assuree’s on-going entitlement and
rate payable.

AoS processing staff will process the quarterly review when SU057 and
SU058 are returned.

The assuree(s) will continue to receive the recoverable payment and the
assurer’s debt will continue to accrue, if the:

-   assurer is not providing any or adequate support, and/or
-   assuree is not receiving any or adequate support

If the assuree does not return the review form 35 days from date of
issue, their payment will be suspended. Their payment will then be
cancelled in an additional 21 days (56 days from date of issue).

No suspension or cancellation will occur if the assurer has not returned
the review form.

See Review system stages in Resources.

AoS Yearly Review

Once an assuree has received a recoverable payment for 12 months, a
yearly review manual work item is created. This enables AoS processing
staff to create an AoS debt in Debt Management and Information System
(DMIS) for the assurer(s) to repay.

This review ensures an AoS determined debt is raised for all assurer(s)
in the AoS case.

AoS debts are raised on the assuree’s record every 12 months via an AoS
Yearly Review in Process Direct. AoS processing staff will process the
AoS Yearly Review (For Manual Action status). Once the Yearly Review is
processed:

-   a debt activity (DMN) is created on the assurer’s record in Customer
    First/Customer Record, and
-   a Statement of Account letter (Debt Statement) is issued

AoS processing staff will finalise the DMN activity, resulting in a debt
being raised on the assurer’s record in the DMIS system.

AoS Bond Return Review

Where an AoS debt has been incurred, Services Australia will draw on the
bank guarantee every 12 months to repay the AoS debt. This will cease
once the bank guarantee is depleted, or the AoS debt stops accruing.

If the AoS debt is

-   less than the bank guarantee, the remaining funds will be refunded
    to the assurer who lodged the bank guarantee at the end of the AoS
    period
-   more than the bank guarantee amount, normal recovery will take place
    following recovery of the bank guarantee every 12 months until the
    AoS period expires

A bond return review manual work item will only be created for AoS
processing staff to action where the:

-   assurer still has at least one debt in Debt Management and
    Information System (DMIS), and
-   status is Determined

The system cannot identify a debt as being an AoS bond debt. Staff need
to check DMIS to see if an AoS bond still exists. An AoS bond debt will
still exist where it has not been repaid from funds received from the
Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) within 41 days of a debt being
raised.

Once the review has been finalised and the bond return activity is
completed, a letter is automatically issued to CBA requesting the return
of the full or partial bond amount to recover any AoS debt.

Where the assurer does not have any determined debts, the bond review
will automatically complete without any further user interaction.

When making an unfavourable decision, see Advising verbally of an
unfavourable decision.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains links to Payment Summary Tool, AoS Debt
Proforma, Contact details, Review system stages, AoS visa subclasses,
and Office Locator.

Contents

Recovery of Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Related links

Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by
disaster events

Debt pause has lifted - debt recovery restart from 1 July 2022

General debt raising information

Activation, cancellation, transfer and expiry of an Assurance of Support
(AoS) case

Assessing and coding the Assurance of Support (AoS) Mod AR

Assurance of Support (AoS) bank guarantee and term deposit

Assuree makes a claim for an Assurance of Support (AoS) recoverable
payment

Assurance of Support (AoS) reviews

Recovery from mutually liable co-debtors

Categories of debt raised under subsection 1223(1)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
