
This document outlines processes that can apply to migrants, refugees
and visitors. These include assessing a young person as independent when
claiming Youth Allowance (YA) or Disability Support Pension (DSP)
because they are refugee, granting exemptions from the Activity Test for
refugees on arrival in Australia and helping refugees obtain a Tax File
Number (TFN).

Independence as a refugee

Customers claiming YA or customers aged 16 or 17 years claiming DSP may
meet the criteria as a refugee to be paid at the independent rate.

Mutual obligation requirements exemption for refugees

An exemption from mutual obligation requirements is granted to newly
arrived refugees for the 13 weeks from their date of their arrival in
Australia (the exemption period is adjusted to 11 weeks and 6 days at
the new claim).

Following their mutual obligation requirements exemption, most newly
arrived refugees remain Centrelink managed until 6 or 12 months after
their arrival in Australia. There are a number of factors that determine
when a newly arrived refugee needs to be referred to an employment
services provider and the level of servicing they will receive. See
Refugee entrant service offer for more information.

Obtaining a TFN for newly arrived refugees

There is a process in place with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to
provide refugees who have newly arrived in Australia fast access to a
TFN. This only applies where the customer is eligible for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

A TFN is required to be paid FTB. This arrangement helps refugees to
gain access to FTB as quickly as possible after arriving in Australia.

Contents

Assessing independence when a customer is a refugee

Activity test exemptions for refugees

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer

Refugee entrant service offer

Refugee Activities (RAC) as an approved activity

Negotiating Job Plans for refugees following the "Refugee in First 13
Weeks' (REF) exemption

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
