
Initial contact and identification of services for migrants, refugees and visitors to Australia 005-01000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines advice on services and products to give customers
from culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) backgrounds, including
newly arrived residents. Initial contact can be by visiting a service
centre, by phone or by contacting an agent or representative of Services
Australia.

Seeking assistance from the agency

When a customer contacts to seek assistance, it is the responsibility of
the agency to provide support to the customer by delivering a package of
products and services that are best suited to meet their needs.

The agency seeks to help people settling in Australia, helping them
overcome any barriers to participation and giving them access to
government services. This includes access to Centrelink payments and
other entitlements if they are eligible.

Service Officers must ensure that customers are aware of their
entitlements and obligations, the types of assistance and choices
available to them, and referrals that can help them.

Customers seeking help in languages other than English will be offered
access through a wide range of information products in a variety of
languages. This includes multilingual fact sheets and forms on the
Services Australia website and at service centres, the agency's
interpreting services, and the Multilingual Phone Service (MPS).

Assurance of Support (AoS)

Sometimes a person may approach the agency stating they want to be an
assurer for a person applying for a visa to come to Australia under an
AoS arrangement.

The agency is responsible for:

-   assessing a person's ability to enter into an AoS arrangement, and
-   ensuring that anyone entering into such an arrangement is able to
    provide the support required

Visas

A visa is issued to non-Australian citizens to allow the holder to:

-   travel to and enter Australia, and/or
-   remain in Australia

The Department of Home Affairs is responsible for issuing visas and
provides access to a range of information about Australian visas and
citizenship.

Contents

Identifying if customer who is a migrant, refugee or visitor is eligible
for financial assistance

Cultural considerations for customers coming from culturally and
linguistically diverse (CALD) backgrounds

Citizenship Testing

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Referring newly arrived residents to external agencies and services

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Related links

Referring newly arrived residents to external agencies and services

Language Services

Written material in other languages

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
