
Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence Period 005-02020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines which payments and concession cards are generally
subject to a Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and/or a
Qualifying Residence Period.

Qualifying Periods of Residence prior to Grant

For most payments to qualify and be paid, a person must:

-   Meet a minimum accumulated qualifying residence period; or
-   Serve a Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP); or
-   Have an exemption from 1 or both of the qualifying residence periods

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming a payment or concession are required to have been an Australian
resident and physically in Australia for the required duration of the
NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods before the payment
or concession is payable.
Note: the period of residence required for the NARWP does not need to
have occurred immediately before claiming.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming
JobSeeker Payment may have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia
temporarily for 3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the
absence extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Payments and concession cards subject to the waiting period

-   Austudy
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) - Part A only
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Partner Allowance (PA) (new claims ceased 20 September 2003)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

NARWP changes from 1 January 2019

Payments subject to an increase to existing waiting period

From 1 January 2019, the 2 year (104 week) NARWP increased to a 4 year
(208 week) NARWP for any claimant who is granted a permanent resident
visa or temporary visa providing qualification for payment on or after 1
January 2019 for the following payments/benefits:

-   Austudy
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Low Income Card (LIC)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YAL)

Payments subject to a waiting period from 1 January 2019

A NARWP was introduced for any claimant who is granted a permanent
resident visa or temporary visa providing qualification for payment on
or after 1 January 2019 for the following payments/benefits:

4 year (208 week) NARWP

-   Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

2 year (104 week) NARWP

-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

1 year (52 week) NARWP

-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A

Payments not subject to change from 1 January 2019

-   Carer Payment (CP) - remains as 2 year NARWP
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B - no NARWP

Changes explained

This means a customer may have to serve either a 1 year, 2 year or 4
year NARWP depending on the grant date of the first Australian visa that
allows qualification for the payment or concession the customer is
claiming.

If the visa grant is:

-   before 1 January 2019, the customer is required to serve a NARWP of
    2 years (104 weeks) or nil for those payments that had no NARWP
-   on or after 1 January 2019, the customer is required to serve a
    NARWP applicable to the payment or concession they are claiming (as
    detailed above)

Note: for SpB only, the above determination is based on the application
date of the 309 or 820 visa, rather than the visa grant date.

People who hold a visa subclass 115, 835, 117 or 837 subclass will not
be affected by the increase to the NARWP or introduction of the NARWP.

No NARWP applies to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A, Parental Leave Pay
(PPL), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) and Carer Allowance (CA) claimants
whose first permanent resident visa or temporary qualifying visa (060,
070, 309, 820, 785, 786, 790 or 449) was granted before 1 January 2019.

For PPL and DAP, the NARWP does not apply if the child's date of birth
or entry to care is before 1 July 2019, even if the qualifying visa is
granted post 1 January 2019.

For LIC, the NARWP will generally be 2 years (104 weeks) if the person:

-   holds a temporary partner visa (subclasses 309 and 820), or
-   they hold or have held a special category visa 444 or visa subclass
    115, 117, 835 or 837

If the holder of a SCV or temporary partner visa (subclasses 309 and
820) is granted a permanent visa on or after 1 January 2019, they will
become subject to a 4 year (208 week) NARWP for the LIC.

The claimant will need to serve the 2 year qualifying period of
residence concurrently with the 4 year NARWP for Parenting Payment (PPP
and PPS).

The Resources page contains scenarios.

Start date for the NARWP

The NARWP generally starts on the day the person:

-   first became an Australian resident; and
-   was present in Australia

For Special Benefit, Family Tax Benefit, Parental Leave Pay, Dad and
Partner Pay and Low Income Health Care Card claimed by a person who
holds a 309 or 820 Partner Provisional visa, the NARWP starts on the day
the person:

-   lodges an application for the relevant visa; and
-   is present in Australia

Exemptions from the NARWP

There are a number of exemptions from the NARWP. There are also payments
and concession cards available to a person serving a NARWP.

Some exemptions from the NARWP are common across all affected payments
and concessions. For example, when the person is an Australian citizen.
However, some payments and concessions have specific exemptions, for
example certain visa holders can have an exemption to the Carer Payment
(CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) NARWP, but would have to serve the NARWP
for any other payment or concession.

Some temporary visas are NARWP exempt for specific payments only. For
example, visa subclass 060 and 070 holders would qualify for Low Income
Card and Special Benefit but would need to be granted a permanent visa
and meet relevant NARWP requirements, or qualifying residence periods
for any other payment or concession.

Customers whose affected payment was claimed within 2 years prior to 1
January 2017 and who were entitled to either of the following exemptions
are entitled to the 2017 NARWP Exemption grandfathered status:

-   NARWP exemption as a family member of an Australian citizen or
    permanent resident of Australia, or
-   Qualifying Residence exemption as the holder of a visa subclass 100,
    110, 801, 814, 832 or 833

This status is displayed on the Grandfathering Summary (GFS) screen.
Updates, if required for reasons of 'Appeal', 'Policy Decision' or
'System error or omission', can be made by authorised staff in
International Services on the Grandfathering Override (GFD) screen.

For more information about exemptions from the NARWP, see Newly Arrived
Resident's Waiting Period and Qualifying Residence Exemptions.

NARWP rules for New Zealand citizens

The NARWP savings provisions for New Zealand citizens determine the
length of the NARWP, how it is calculated and who it applies to. The
provisions take into account when the person became an Australian
resident and the payment they apply for.

A New Zealand citizen arriving in Australia using a New Zealand passport
is generally issued a Special Category Visa (SCV). For more information
on the residence status, see Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand
citizens.

Protected SCV holders qualify as Australian residents and can access the
full range of Centrelink payments provided they are currently living in
Australia and satisfy the relevant qualification criteria and waiting
periods such as the NARWP. Past periods of presence as an Australian
resident count towards the applicable waiting period.

Non-protected SCV holders do not qualify as an Australian resident and
will need to apply for and be granted a permanent resident visa before
any periods of presence as an Australian resident can be counted towards
the NARWP for all payments and concessions except Commonwealth Seniors
Health Care Card (CSHC) and Low Income Health Care Card (LIC). Periods
of presence as an Australian resident prior to 26 February 2001 can be
counted towards the NARWP if the customer now has a permanent visa.

Non-protected SCV holders do not require a permanent visa in the
following situations:

-   One-off payment of either JobSeeker Payment or Youth Allowance (YA)
    for a non-protected SCV holder under the New Zealand 10 year
    residence exemption
-   Parental leave payments, family assistance and concession cards
    (excluding Ex Carer Allowance Health Care Card (EHC).

Qualifying Residence Period

A qualifying residence period is a period of accumulated qualifying
Australian residence required to qualify for some payments. The period
may be 2 or 10 years depending on the payment.

Payments subject to a qualifying residence period

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)

Start date for qualifying residence

The qualifying residence period commences when the customer is present
in Australia as an Australian resident. The length of the qualifying
residence period is either 2 years (104 weeks) or 10 years depending on
the payment/allowance.

Serving the qualifying residence period

To satisfy the residence criteria generally the customer needs to have
been an Australian resident physically present in Australia for the
prescribed period of time, depending on the claim lodged. Temporary
absences from Australia during the period of residence are treated
differently depending on the payment. For a 2 year qualifying residence
period, periods outside Australia will not count towards satisfying the
requirements. For a 10 year qualifying Australian residence period,
short periods outside Australia can be included as long as the customer
continued to be an Australian resident during the absence.

Exemptions from the qualifying residence period

There are a number of exemptions from the qualifying residence
requirements. Exemptions for the qualifying residence period are not
necessarily the same as the exemptions from the NARWP. The qualifying
residence exemptions are also different depending on the payment being
claimed.

For more information about exemptions from the qualifying residence
period, see Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period and Qualifying
Residence Exemptions.

The Resources page contains contact details and scenarios showing
application of the 1 year, 2 year or 4 year NARWP.

Contents

Payments and concession cards available to customers serving the Newly
Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Related links

Australian residence requirements for payment

Australian residence rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST HCC) or Ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Farm Household Allowance
(FHA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parental Payment (PP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
