-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about recovering debts from AoS.

Ability to support the assuree

An assuree may claim an income support payment when the assurer is no
longer able to support them. In these cases, the National AoS team will
raise an AoS debt for the assurer. The Debt Recovery team will commence
recovery of the debt.

Assurer debt

If an assuree receives an AoS recoverable payment during the AoS period
the:

-   accruing AoS debt will belong to the assurer
-   assurer must pay the full amount back

Services Australia will contact the assurer to organise repayment of the
debt.

Where there are multiple assurers each assurer is jointly and equally
liable for the entire AoS debt amount (for example, if there are 2
assurers and the AoS debt amount is $10,000, both assurers are liable
for the entire amount. However, they can decide the amount each assurer
will repay in order to finalise the debt).

Joint assurer debts are raised as multiple liability debts with the same
debt IDs.

Every 3 months, a letter will issue to the assurer/s reminding them that
an AoS debt is accruing. Recovery will occur every 12 months from the
date the assuree is first granted a recoverable income support payment.
A Statement of Account letter will be issued every 12 months to the
assurer. This will advise the debt amount they must repay. This
statement will only cease once the AoS period has expired.

Assuree debt

If an assuree accrues a debt during the AoS period:

-   the debt is recoverable from the assuree only and
-   normal debt processing will occur

Do not include the amount of the assuree debt in any AoS debt
calculation for the assurer/s.

For example, when an assuree fails to report their earnings correctly
for JSP and they accrue a debt. Any debt raised for recovery in this
instance is recoverable from the assuree.

Bank guarantee

In some AoS cases, the assurer is required to lodge a security (term
deposit) with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA). The CBA will
then provide Services Australia with a bank guarantee so that the AoS
application can be finalised.

Recovery of debts

If a debt remains unpaid by the due date, the Debt Recovery team pursue
recovery for any outstanding debt. After a specific period of time, the
debt will be forwarded to a debt collection agency to follow up.

The Resources page contains links to Targeted Services Branch and the
Vulnerable and rural support programs page.

Related links

Assurance of Support (AoS) bank guarantee and term deposit

Raising Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Recovery from mutually liable co-debtors

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Negotiation of debt repayment with customers

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
