
Person permitted to enquire for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment customers 005-06040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information how a Status Resolution Support
Services (SRSS) payment customer can voluntarily appoint a Person
Permitted to Enquire (PPE).

SRSS customers can give permission for a person or organisation to
enquire on their behalf when contacting Services Australia through a PPE
arrangement.

PPE is available to adults and unaccompanied minors in receipt of SRSS
payments. PPE arrangements can be ended at any time by the SRSS
customer.

A PPE cannot make decisions, advise of change of circumstances or
complete reviews on behalf of the customer. The primary role of a PPE is
to ask questions on the customer's behalf to assist them in
understanding their payments, services and entitlements.

PPE authority

Enquiries from a PPE must be specific and should not be for information
the person would reasonably know. It is essential when disclosing
information, Services Australia employees provide only the minimum
information necessary to fulfil the needs of the situation.

The PPE for SRSS customers can ask about:

-   the current rate of payment
-   the cancellation or rejection reason
-   factors affecting payment, for example income and assets
-   overpayments and arrears information

A PPE for SRSS customers cannot:

-   make updates, for example, bank account, address, telephone
-   advise customer's change of circumstances
-   request a review of a SRSS debt
-   complete SRSS reviews

PPE details are recorded on a Display on Access (DOA) DOC.

If the PPE is the customer's partner. The authority is displayed:

-   PTR in the Enq: field in the screen header in Customer Record
-   Permitted to enquire - Yes, under Relationships in Customer Summary
    in Customer First
-   PTR in the Enquiry field in Customer Summary in Process Direct
-   PPE - Y on the Marital Status (MS) screen

If there is any doubt about the person's authority to make an enquiry on
the customer's behalf, do not answer the enquiry until clarification is
received from the customer.

Starting and ending PPE

Authorising a PPE can be done:

-   by lodging a completed Status Resolution Support Services Payment
    Authorising a person or organisation to enquire on your behalf
    (SU698) form with Services Australia if the SRSS customer is
    authorising a person or organisation, or
-   verbally is the SRSS customer is appointing their Department of Home
    Affairs (Home Affairs) contracted services provider

The Service Officer will need to create a Display on Access DOC which
will contain more information about this arrangement.

A customer can end a PPE arrangement at any time over the phone, in
person or in writing.

For SRSS customers with PPE arrangements, Services Australia must take
reasonable steps to confirm:

-   the person making the enquiry is from the organisation that is the
    PPE
-   the person is authorised to obtain information about the customer on
    behalf of the organisation

Person Permitted to Update (PPU) and nominee arrangements

PPU and nominee arrangements do not apply to SRSS customers, as the
payment is not paid under social security law.

An SRSS customer can be appointed a PPU or nominee for customers
receiving social security payments.

SRSS payment to a third party

If an SRSS customer or a court requests to issue the customer's SRSS
payment to a third party, immediately escalate the case to the SRSS
Helpdesk. They will determine if another arrangement is suitable and
advise Home Affairs of the outcome.

The Resources page contains a link to the Status Resolution Support
Services Authorising a person or organisation to enquire on your behalf
(SU698) form, contact details for the SRSS Helpdesk, a link to the
Multicultural and Tailored Services Branch intranet page and examples
and details of what can be disclosed to the Person Permitted to Enquire
(PPE).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
