
Additional processes and information for migrants, refugees and visitors 005-02000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various processes and information for
migrants, refugees and visitors who have arrived in Australia.

Government intent

Migrants, refugees and visitors with low English proficiency or poor
literacy in their own language, are among our most vulnerable members of
the community. They often have complex needs, particularly in relation
to health, welfare and language services.

Services Australia, Department of Health and Aged Care and the
Department of Home Affairs offer a range of payments and assistance to
support the needs of migrants, refugees and visitors in the areas of
human services, education and health for those entrants settling into
life in Australia.

Identity confirmation and refugees

Migrants, refugees and visitors are required to meet the Services
Australia Identity Confirmation requirements for new claims.

Although it may be difficult for these customers to provide the required
identity documents at the initial time of completing their claim, where
a customer genuinely cannot provide, or be supported to obtain their
identity documents, they may be able to use the Alternative Identity
Assessment process to satisfy the agency's identity requirements.

Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period (NARWP)

New Australian residents who have been granted permanent residence are
generally subject to a Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period before
they can access the various products and services delivered by Services
Australia.

The waiting period a customer must serve is determined by the grant date
of their first permanent visa, qualifying residence visa or specified
visa subclass that allows eligibility for the payment/concession they
are claiming.

Visas

A visa is issued to non-Australian citizens to allow the holder to:

-   travel to and enter Australia, and/or
-   remain in Australia

The responsibility of issuing visas lies with the Department of Home
Affairs. Visas can be issued to people before they arrive in Australia
and are known as 'Offshore Visas' or issued upon arrival in Australia
and known as 'Onshore Visas'.

Australian visas are issued and recorded electronically and linked to
visa holders' passports or ImmiCards. All visa records are stored in a
central database, which enables digital checking of visa details and
conditions.

Refugees, humanitarian entrants and Protection Visa holders

The Humanitarian Program has 2 components:

-   Offshore component offers resettlement for people outside Australia
    who are in need of humanitarian assistance, Visa subclasses 200,
    201, 202, 203 and 204
-   Onshore component offers protection to people in Australia who meet
    the refugee definition in the United Nations Refugees Convention.
    Specific Visa subclass is Protection Visa (Subclass 866)

Holders of the above visa subclasses are eligible for all Centrelink
payments upon entry to Australia (Offshore) or grant of the visa
(Onshore).

On arrival to Australia, Humanitarian entrants (Offshore visa holders)
are provided with settlement support by the Humanitarian Settlement
Program (HSP).

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they actually submit a complete claim with all
relevant supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Refugees

Refugees or holders of specific humanitarian visas are often faced with
major issues when first settling into Australia. Quite often, they are
coming from certain countries where they may have suffered torture,
witnessed the torture of someone close to them, experienced trauma by
being forced to flee their homes or countries, undergone victimisation
due to membership of political, ethnic or religious groups and
experienced war, political upheaval and fear for their lives.

For many refugees, the effects of torture and trauma are ongoing and
severely hamper their ability to communicate both verbally and in the
written sense, learn a new language, find suitable housing and to adjust
to the new 'way of life' within their host country.

Contents

Identity confirmation and refugees

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Australia’s Refugee and Humanitarian Program

Refugees

Processes specific for migrants, refugees and visitors

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
