
Ukraine conflict 005-22080818

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how Services Australia support Ukrainian
nationals in Australia affected by the conflict in Ukraine.

Background

On 20 March 2022 the Australian Government announced Ukrainians in
Australia on a temporary visa, can register for a Temporary Humanitarian
Concern visa subclass 786. The Department of Home Affairs managed a
two-step process which involved issuing:

-   a Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) (subclass 449) visa, and
-   then a Temporary (Humanitarian Concern) (subclass 786) visa

The offer of a Temporary Humanitarian Concern (786) visa expired on 31
July 2022.

This cohort may also have arrived in Australia on another temporary
visa. For example, a visitor visa subclass 600, this did not provide
access to payment or services.

Eligibility for payments and services at the time were dependent on what
visa subclass they held when contact was made.

See Resources for links to the Department of Home Affairs website.

Temporary Humanitarian Stay (449) visa

After arrival in Australia, Ukrainian nationals were granted:

-   first, a Temporary Humanitarian Stay (449), and
-   then a Temporary Humanitarian Concern (786) visa

These visa’s provided an automatic exemption from the Newly Arrived
Resident’s Waiting Period (NARWP).

Visa 449 holders can apply for:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Note: Visa 449 holders are not entitled to Medicare.

For more details, see Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and
Return Pending Visas.

Temporary Humanitarian Concern (786) visa

A Humanitarian Concern 786 visa lets the holder to stay in Australia for
up to 3 years.

Visa 786 holders can apply for:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)
-   Medicare

For more details, see Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and
Return Pending Visas.

Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)

On arrival, Ukrainian nationals had the option to:

register with HSP service provider, and

be supported by family or a representative from:

-   the Australian Federation of Ukrainian Organisations, or
-   their state-based counterparts

The support option welcomed Ukrainian nationals and looked after their
immediate needs.

The HSP service provider helps Ukrainian nationals by:

providing any immediate support needs. For example, cultural, religious,
health, nutritional, hygiene, clothing and footwear

linking them to:

-   health services
-   language services
-   education and training

helping them to:

-   set up bank accounts
-   find suitable accommodation
-   make contact with Services Australia
-   complete their Medicare enrolment, for visa 786 holders

Crisis Payment (CrP)

Once a customer is in receipt of an income support payment, they can
apply for a Crisis Payment.

Customers are only eligible to apply for:

a humanitarian Crisis Payment (CrP-HUM) if they first arrived in
Australia on a Qualifying humanitarian visa for Crisis Payment

all other CrP categories if the extreme circumstance happened in
Australia

-   customers are not qualified for events that happen overseas
-   this includes Crisis Payment Extreme Circumstances Other (EXO), if
    the event stopping their return home happened overseas, regardless
    of when the decision was made they could not return home

For more details see Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP).

Special Benefit (SpB)

Ukrainian visa 449/786 holders are residentially qualified for Special
Benefit.

Mutual obligations and exemptions

These customers are entitled to a temporary exemption:

-   from Mutual Obligation Requirement (MOR) for the first 13 weeks from
    the visa grant date.
-   to enable Nominated Visa Holders (NVH) time to settle into the
    community, and

This exemption only applies:

-   to the SpB NVH with mutual obligation requirements
-   once, not each time a new visa type is granted

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments

Under 18 years of age

-   Customers are referred to Social Work services (SWS) for a wellbeing
    check and identification of support needs
-   Social workers will decide if the customer’s parents are overseas,
    and if no suitable guardian is eligible to claim Family Tax Benefit
    (FTB) on behalf of the young person
-   Delegation is held by the social workers
-   Customers can study full-time

Over 18 years of age

-   a UTLAH assessment is not required
-   customers 18 - 21 can study for less than 12 months if approved as
    part of their Job Plan

For more details about the definition of an FTB child, see Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) child of a person.

Overseas Payment Issues

Due to the conflict in Ukraine and sanctions against Russia, customers
may be impacted if they:

-   are located in these countries, or
-   have payments made into these countries

This includes customers in Australia who are getting a Ukrainian and/or
Russian pension.

The international sanctions imposed on Russia stop Australian payments
being made to Russian banks. Although not all Russian banks have had
sanctions imposed on them, the Reserve Bank of Australia has suspended
delivery of all Centrelink payments to Russia.

Customers in Russia may elect to:

have their payments redirected to:

-   their own or a payment nominee’s Australian bank account, or
-   a bank account in other selected countries

have their payments suspended

Customers in Russia who have access to an Australian or non-Russian
debit/credit card may not be able to use them.

Ukrainian Payment issues

Customers in Ukraine who currently have their Centrelink payment paid
into a bank account in Ukraine can elect to:

-   change their payment destination to an Australian or third country
    bank account, or
-   appoint a payment nominee in Australia or a third country

The country must not be a sanctioned country, including Russia and
Belarus. Normal overseas payment procedures apply for these customers.

Exchange rate

Centrelink pensions to Ukraine are paid in US dollars. See Foreign
currency and exchange rates for more details.

Ukrainian pensions

Some customers may have issues providing a pension statement from the
Ukraine pension authority if they:

-   are currently in Australia, and
-   claiming an Australian payment

Due to the current situation, staff can accept a bank statement that
shows the Ukrainian pension amount instead.

-   If the bank statement shows the pension payments in a currency other
    than Ukrainian Hryvnia, use the currency the pension is paid in
-   For example, if the customer receives their Ukrainian pension into
    an Australian bank account, record the Australian dollar

Customers can provide their Ukrainian pension details verbally.

Tell the customer they need to provide an official statement from the
Ukrainian pension authority if it becomes available.

Russian Payment issues

Customers in Russia

For customers who get their Centrelink payment paid into a Russian bank
account encourage them to:

-   change their payment destination to an Australian bank account, or
-   appoint a payment nominee in Australia

Tell the customer their payments can also be made to a bank account in:

-   a European Union (EU) country
-   the United States (US), or
-   the United Kingdom

Staff must contact International Program (CIS) for help if a customer
wants payment to go to a different country.

Issues accessing the money

Customers can ask for the payments to be suspended if they do not have:

-   a bank account in Australia, or
-   a payment nominee outside of Russia.

Once the sanctions are lifted:

-   payments to customers may resume to their usual account, and
-   the customer will receive arrears

Russian pensions

Russian pensions are paid:

-   into Russian bank accounts
-   in the Russian Ruble

Customers may contact the Russian pension fund and provide bank account
details if:

they usually have their Russian pension paid into an Australian bank
account, and

they have not been receiving their Russian pension payments, and

the customer:

-   has an existing Russian local currency bank account, or
-   decides to open a new Russian bank account, or
-   makes payment nominee arrangements

After receipt of the bank account details, the pension fund will
recommence payment. This includes issuing any missed payments.

A customer's Russian pension will be held by the pension fund and will
not be paid if they:

-   do not have a Russian bank account, or
-   cannot or do not wish to open one, or
-   are unable to make payment nominee arrangements

Once the sanctions are lifted:

-   payment will be restored and
-   the customer will receive arrears of missed payments

If the customer is not currently receiving their Russian pension, it
should be maintained on their Centrelink record to avoid an overpayment.

Portability Extension

Any customer temporarily overseas may be eligible for a portability
extension if war/political disruption stops them returning home to
Australia.

These are assessed on a case-by-case basis.

Follow current processes, see Discretion to extend portability period.

The Resources page has links to the Multicultural Guide, Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk, Department of Home Affairs and Centrelink website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
