
Assuree makes a claim for an Assurance of Support (AoS) recoverable payment 005-03050020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions that take place when an assuree makes
a claim for an Assurance of Support (AoS) recoverable income support
payment, including the interview process with the assuree and assurer
when the claim is for an AoS recoverable payment.

Assurer(s) has agreed to provide financial support

An AoS is an agreement by an adult (over the age of 18) Australian
permanent resident or citizen, eligible New Zealand citizen or an
organisation (the assurer) to provide financial support to a new migrant
(the assuree) during an AoS period. The AoS period can be for 12 months,
2 years, 4 years or 10 years. There can be a maximum of 3 adults as
joint assurers. An organisation cannot be a joint assurer.

In agreeing to provide an AoS the assurer(s) is making a legal
commitment to support the assuree so that the assuree should not require
access to social security income support.

AoS recoverable payment

An assuree is able to claim an income support payment during the AoS
period. This is subject to meeting the eligibility criteria for the
payment being claimed. If an assuree receives a social security payment
that is an AoS recoverable payment from Services Australia during the
AoS period, those payments are raised as a debt to the assurer(s). Debts
are raised for recovery approximately 12 months from the date of grant
of the AoS recoverable payment.

Approximately every 12 months, an AoS debt status will be determined and
the assurer(s) will receive a statement outlining the total debt amount
due and options on how they can repay the debt. Voluntary repayments may
be made at any time. Every 3 months both the assurer and assuree will
receive an AoS review form to confirm their current circumstances. See
Resources for AoS review forms.

If a bank guarantee and term deposit has been provided, the debt will
initially be recovered from the term deposit funds held under the bank
guarantee. It should be made clear that recovery from the term deposit
under the bank guarantee does not extinguish any unrecovered debt
amounts. Any outstanding debt amount will still be recovered from the
assurer(s).

Interview with assuree and assurer(s)

Interview with assuree and assurer(s)

-   If a claim for an AoS recoverable payment is lodged by an assuree,
    the processing Service Officer assessing the new claim must
    interview both the assurer(s) and the claimant (assuree) before
    granting any payment. This process serves 3 purposes:

-   It establishes whether the assurer(s) is willing and able to provide
    adequate support

-   If the assuree is refusing support offered by the assurer(s), and if
    this refusal is reasonable (for example, in cases of family and
    domestic violence)

It ensures that both parties understand that any AoS recoverable payment
made to the assuree while the AoS is effective will become a debt which
the assurer(s) must repay approximately every 12 months

The only time assurer(s) should not be immediately contacted about their
responsibilities under the AoS is if contact may endanger the assuree
e.g. Family and Domestic Violence/Elder Abuse. If this is likely, a
social worker must be involved, and they may recommend that contact with
the assurer(s) be delayed.

The References page contains a link to Chapter 9 of the Social Security
Guide, which outlines whether an AoS is mandatory, discretionary or not
required for that visa subclass.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Types of Centrelink records

Assessing and coding the Assurance of Support (AoS) Mod AR

Assurance of Support (AoS) bank guarantees and term deposit

Requirements for an individual or organisation to be an assurer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
