
Investigating, raising, and reviewing Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) debts 005-22071350

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to investigate, raise and review Status
Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment debts.

SRSS debts

SRSS debts can occur for a few reasons, such as:

-   when a change of circumstance is received late for a period already
    paid to the customer
-   income from employment, investments or other sources has not been
    used when calculating the rate of payment
-   changes in the care of dependent children have not been advised or
    coded
-   changes in the amount of rent paid or where an incorrect amount of
    Rental Assistance Allowance (RAA) was paid to the customer
-   customer has not advised they have a change in relationship status
-   loss of entitlement to SRSS, for example non-engagement, in prison,
    left the country, assets over the limit
-   fraud
-   administrative or system error

Undetermined debt shells

If a potential overpayment is identified, the approved Social Services
Plan (SSP) triggers the creation of an undetermined debt activity within
the Debt Management Information System (DMIS). These triggers are run at
specific times during the day. This means there may be a delay between
the approval of the SSP and the creation of the undetermined debt.

Note: the potential overpayment does not become a debt until it has been
investigated and determined.

For more information on SSPs, see Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) Social Service Plan.

Debts considered not economical to recover

The SRSS Helpdesk processes any debts deemed uneconomical to recover.
These debts are not assigned to staff via Workload Manager (WLM).

Investigating a debt

All undetermined debt activities created for SRSS will have a
corresponding Social Services Plan (SSP) that triggered the payment
adjustment. To investigate a potential overpayment, the SSP that created
the debt may have to be compared with the previous SSP or latest SSP.

When investigating a debt, data held on both the Customer First native
and legacy screens, will need to be reviewed thoroughly to ensure all
information relevant to the debt has been considered by staff before the
debt is determined.

Debt offsetting from unpaid arrears

When investigating a debt for SRSS, issues on the customer's record may
be identified. The information may need to be corrected and a
reassessment of the customer's entitlement undertaken.

An offset may occur when a debt shell is created for a customer and a
subsequent reassessment results in an arrears payment being generated.

The arrears are offset against the overpayments, and any remaining
amount (if any) is then issued to the customer as a correct arrears
payment.

An offset can only occur when the components and dates of the debt shell
match the components and dates of the proposed arrears payment.

Debt offsetting makes adjustments in the Debt Management Information
System (DMIS) to:

-   correct the amount of the debt shell
-   finalise the debt shell if the arrears and debt shell are the same
    amount, for the matching components and timeframe

It is important to manually check the outcome of this process.

The Resources page contains the SRSS Debt worksheet, SRSS Debt Advice
Text Template, SRSS Debt Reason codes, SRSS Debt Review Outcome
Template, links to the SRSS Helpdesk and mySupport.

Related links

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment debt recovery

Social Service Plans (SSP)

Change of circumstances for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS)
payment customer

Deductions from Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payments to
repay money owing to Department of Home Affairs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
