
Identifying if a customer who is a migrant, refugee or visitor is eligible for financial assistance 005-01010000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information that identifies if a customer, who
has recently moved to Australia is eligible for financial assistance.

Service offer

Services Australia, the Department of Health and Aged Care and the
Department of Home Affairs offer a range of payments and services to
assist support the needs of migrants, refugees and visitors in the areas
of human services, education and health for those entrants settling into
life in Australia.

The agency seeks to help people settling in Australia, helping them
overcome any barriers to participation and giving them access to
government services. This includes access to Centrelink payments and
other entitlements if they are eligible.

Service Officers must ensure that customers are aware of their
entitlements and obligations, the types of assistance and choices
available to them, and referrals that can help them.

If a customer who has recently moved to Australia to settle, or is from
a culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) background makes contact
with Services Australia to see what assistance is available to them, it
is the responsibility of Services Australia to provide the right package
of services to the customer in order to meet their needs.

Offer customers seeking help in languages other than English to access a
wide range of information products in a variety of languages. This
includes multilingual fact sheets and forms on the Services Australia
website and at service centres, the agency's interpreting services and
the Multilingual Phone Service (MPS).

See First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow.

Refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa holders

The Humanitarian Program has 2 components:

-   Offshore component offers resettlement for people outside Australia
    who are in need of humanitarian assistance, Visa subclasses 200,
    201, 202, 203 and 204
-   Onshore component offers protection to people in Australia who meet
    the refugee definition in the United Nations Refugees Convention.
    Specific visa subclass is protection visa (subclass 866)

Holders of the above visa subclasses are eligible for all Centrelink
payments upon entry to Australia (offshore) or grant of the visa
(onshore).

On arrival to Australia, humanitarian entrants (offshore visa holders)
are supported by service providers through the Humanitarian Settlement
Program (HSP) or a Community Refugee Integration and Settlement Pilot
(CRISP) representative.

HSP service providers and CRISP community representatives are contracted
by the Department of Home Affairs in each state and territory to provide
settlement support.

Refugee servicing networks work with HSP service providers and CRISP
community representatives to deliver the Refugee and humanitarian
service offer (RSO).

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they actually submit a complete claim with all
relevant supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Refugees

Refugees or holders of specific humanitarian visas often face
significant issues when first settling into Australia.

Often they come from countries where they may have:

-   suffered torture or witnessed the torture of someone close to them
-   experienced trauma by being forced to flee their homes or countries
-   undergone victimisation due to membership of political, ethnic or
    religious groups
-   experienced war, political upheaval and fear for their lives

For many refugees, the effects of torture and trauma are ongoing and
severely hamper their ability to communicate verbally and in writing,
learn a new language, find suitable housing and adjust to a new way of
life in their host country.

Assurance of Support (AoS)

An individual or a person on behalf of an organisation may approach the
agency to be an assurer for a person applying for a visa to migrate to
Australia (an assuree). An AoS arrangement must be established before
the visa application can be finalised. In agreeing to provide an AoS,
the assurer(s) is making a legal commitment to support the assuree so
that the assuree should not require access to social security income
support.

For the assurer the agency is responsible for:

-   assessing a person's ability to enter into an AoS arrangement, and
-   ensuring that anyone entering into such an arrangement is able to
    provide the support required

An assuree is able to claim an income support payment during the AoS
period. This is subject to meeting the eligibility criteria for the
payment being claimed. If an assuree receives a social security payment
that is an AoS recoverable payment from Services Australia during the
AoS period, those payments are raised as a debt to the assurer(s). Debts
are raised for recovery approximately 12 months from the date of grant
of the AoS recoverable payment.

Assessing eligibility

When assessing a customer's eligibility to receive an income support
payment or concession card, Service Officers must ask a series of
questions to understand their circumstances. They must check response
against the qualification criteria of each payment and entitlement type,
or by running tools such as First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) to assess
a customer's eligibility for assistance.

Once a customer's eligibility for payment and other assistance is
established, customers will be advised of the eligibility criteria and
the claims process for payments, as well as the types of specialist
services that are offered by both internal and external specialists. The
advice will be offered in a variety of languages via multilingual fact
sheets and forms, through Translating and Interpreter Services (TIS) and
the Multilingual Phone Service (MPS).

Residence requirements

To qualify for a social security benefit or pension, a person must be an
Australian citizen, a permanent resident or a protected Special Category
visa holder.

A small group of non-permanent residents who are temporary visa holders
(for example, Temporary Protection or Partner) qualify for Special
Benefit and ancillary payments such as Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

The type of visa held by a customer indicates their residence status
within Australia.

Identity confirmation and refugees

Migrants, refugees and visitors must meet the Services Australia
Identity confirmation and refugees requirements for new claims.

Although it may be difficult for these customers to provide the required
identity documents at the initial time of completing their claim, where
a customer genuinely cannot provide, or be supported to obtain their
identity documents, they may be able to use the Alternative Identity
process to satisfy the identity requirements.

Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period (NARWP)

New Australian residents with permanent residency are generally subject
to the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying
Residence Period before they can access the various payments and
services delivered by Services Australia.

The waiting period a customer must serve is determined by the grant date
of their first permanent visa, qualifying residence visa or specified
visa subclass that allows eligibility for the payment/concession they
are claiming.

Special Benefit

Certain temporary or newly arrived residents may be exempt from NARWP
for Special Benefit. For example:

-   Temporary Protection visa subclass 060, 070, 449, 785, 786 and 790
    are exempt from NARWP for Special Benefit. They may qualify for
    Special Benefit if in financial hardship
-   Provisional Partner visa subclass 309 and 820 and newly arrived
    permanent visa holder may qualify for Special Benefit if they are in
    financial hardship due to a substantial change in circumstances
    beyond their control. They must provide evidence to substantiate
    their claim
-   Non-resident parent or guardian caring for an Australian citizen or
    permanent resident child may claim Special Benefit for the
    Australian citizen child if they are in financial hardship and have
    no means of support

For more information, see Residence assessment for customers claiming
Special Benefit (SpB).

Visas

A visa will be issued to non-Australian citizens to allow the holder to:

-   travel to and enter Australia, and/or
-   remain in Australia

The Department of Home Affairs issues visas. Visas issued to people
before they arrive in Australia are are known as 'offshore visas', and
those issued on arrival are 'onshore visas'.

Australian visas are issued / recorded electronically and are linked to
visa holders' passports or ImmiCards. All visa records are stored in a
central database, which enables digital checking of visa details and
conditions.

Contents

Initial contact with refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa
holders

Common types of Australian visas

Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer

Determining financial assistance for an unaccompanied humanitarian minor
(UHM)

Related links

Multicultural Guide

Crisis Payment (CrP) for humanitarian entrants newly arrived in
Australia

Initial Contact and identification of services for job seekers

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Assurance of Support (AoS)

Multicultural Guide

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
