
Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment debt recovery 005-06110000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS)
payment debt occurs and the action Services Australia is required to
take to recover the debt.

Reasons why a Services Australia SRSS debt may occur

A Services Australia SRSS debt can occur for a number of reasons, such
as:

-   when a change in circumstances is received or actioned for a period
    already paid to the customer
-   information not taken into account or is applied from the wrong date
    and the customer is paid the wrong amount of arrears payment
-   income from employment, investments or other sources have not been
    used when calculating the SRSS payment made to them
-   changes in care of dependent children
-   change in amount of rent paid or incorrect amount of Rental
    Assistance Allowance (RAA) paid to the customer
-   customer has not advised that they have become partnered
-   loss of entitlement to SRSS payment, for example in prison, left the
    country, assets over the limit
-   the Department of Home Affairs cancels SRSS entitlement for reasons
    such as: disengagement, change in visa or departing Australia
-   fraud, or
-   administrative or systems error

These debts will be raised on the Services Australia system.

Debt Management Recovery by Services Australia

While Services Australia facilitates the recovery of debts, the agency
is not responsible for any unrecovered amounts after all avenues for
recovery have been exhausted. If the customer ceases to receive the SRSS
payment, the agency will cease withholdings and the outstanding debt
balance is transferred to the Department of Home Affairs.

If a current/suspended customer has received an overpayment of SRSS
payment and has incurred a debt, Services Australia must:

-   make 2 attempts to contact the customer to discuss their SRSS debt,
    and
-   issue a letter advising them of the debt

Payment of a debt is due 28 days after the issue of the account payable
letter. The customer

-   is expected to repay the amount in full as outlined in the letter
-   must approach the agency if they are unable to pay the debt in full
    to enter a payment arrangement

If the customer fails to enter into a repayment arrangement, the agency
will apply a withholding of 5% to the customers SRSS payment to recover
the debt. If the customer is suspended and failed to repay the debt in
full within 28 days, the debt is transferred to the Department of Home
Affairs.

Note: an SRSS customer can ask to have a higher amount withheld from
their SRSS payment to recover the debt.

Withholding arrangements for SRSS debts are only available to current
SRSS customers. The SRSS debt cannot be recovered by withholdings from
their payment if:

-   a customer is no longer current on an SRSS payment, and
-   is now in receipt of an Income Support Payment or Family Assistance
    Payment, and
-   there is an outstanding SRSS debt on their record

SRSS debts for cancelled customers are transferred to the Department of
Home Affairs for recovery action without customer contact.

Debt recovery options are not limited to a withholding arrangement for
current customers wanting to make extra payments. They can choose any of
the following available payment methodds:

-   POSTbillpay
-   BPAY®
-   direct debit agreement
-   in person at any Australia Post office or postal outlet using the
    barcode on the account payable letter

Note: normal agency waiver provisions do not apply to Services Australia
SRSS debts.

Order of recovery - Services Australia debts vs Department of Home Affairs debts

Where an SRSS customer has multiple debts with both the Department of
Home Affairs and Services Australia that are subject to repayment,
Services Australia can only recover one debt at a time. In these
circumstances the Department of Home Affairs debt will be recovered from
the SRSS customer’s payment via a deduction. Any outstanding Services
Australia debts will be transferred to the Department of Home Affairs
for recovery action.

Note: only one Services Australia debt or Department of Home Affairs
debt can be recovered at any one time. For information on Department of
Home Affairs deductions, see Deductions from Status Resolution Support
Services payments to repay money owing to Department of Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the SRSS
helpdesk.

Related links

Deductions from Status Resolution Support Services payments to repay
money owing to Department of Home Affairs

Review of decision for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment

Guidelines for using interpreters

Quality Call Standards

Change of circumstances for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS)
payment customer

Review of decision for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
