[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in referring newly arrived
residents to make an application for Medicare. It outlines the
eligibility for Medicare for a newly arrived resident; the documentation
that they need to supply, and where the customer can be referred to for
more information or to make an application.

Access to Medicare

Medicare is available to Australian residents, migrants, eligible New
Zealand citizens, and applicants for permanent residency (conditions
apply) with the Department of Home Affairs. Residents who are covered
under a Ministerial Order may also be eligible for Medicare.

Applying for a Medicare card

Applications for a Medicare card must be made in person at a service
centre that provides Medicare services. When making an application for
enrolment into Medicare, newly arrived residents are required to supply
a passport or official travel documents for each person enrolling, along
with evidence of a valid visa.

Immunisation records

If the newly arrived resident or their children have had vaccines
overseas they should have them added to the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR). The AIR is a national register that records vaccines
given to people of all ages in Australia. The AIR also provides the
immunisation status for the assessment of family assistance and child
care payments.

To have vaccinations administered overseas added to the AIR, records of
these must be taken to an Australian vaccination provider. The
vaccination provider will:

-   check if the overseas vaccinations match the relevant schedule
-   tell them how to catch up if they have missed vaccinations
-   update the AIR

The

Resources page contains a link to information about adding overseas
vaccinations to the AIR.

Staff referrals

Staff should refer newly arrived residents to a service centre for
enrolment applications. For any enquiries related to Medicare
eligibility, refer the customer to the Medicare general enquiries line
132 011.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, the website and
forms.

Related links

Eligibility and enrolments in Medicare

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

Permanent residents eligibility for Medicare

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
