
Activation, cancellation, transfer and expiry of an Assurance of Support (AoS) case 005-03050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Assurance of Support (AoS) Processing
team activates, cancels, transfers or expires an AoS case. A received
application must be accepted, rejected, withdrawn or cancelled. If
accepted the AoS can be activated to current, cancelled, transferred or
expired.

Activating an AoS case

Activation usually occurs when the status updates from accepted (ACC) to
current (CUR). This happens when assuree(s):

-   arrive in Australia with the relevant visa (offshore visas), or
-   the relevant visa is granted while the assuree(s) are in Australia
    (onshore visas), whichever is later

The start date for each individual assuree should populate automatically
via the Department of Home Affairs datalink.

If the datalink with the Department of Home Affairs has not worked, AoS
processing staff can manually update.

Cancelling an AoS case

AoS accepted but the AoS affected visa not granted

In the following situations, an AoS may be cancelled (CAN) once accepted
(ACC) if request to cancel the AoS was made before the relevant visa
application was granted by the Department of Home Affairs:

-   withdrawal or rejection of the visa application by the Department of
    Home Affairs
-   request for AoS withdrawal by the assurer(s) and the visa
    application has not been granted

The assurer(s) will need to provide written confirmation from the
Department of Home Affairs the visa application:

-   had either not already been granted, and/or
-   the visa application has been cancelled

The Department of Home Affairs will be notified once the AoS application
has been cancelled.

When the assurer requests to cancel the AoS before the grant of the visa
application, the visa applicant(s) will need to find another assurer(s).
For a visa application to be granted, an AoS needs to be in place.

If the AoS is cancelled and the assurer(s) have lodged a bank guarantee
supported by a term deposit as part of the AoS application process:

-   the bank guarantee can be cancelled, and
-   the term deposit funds refunded

See Assurance of Support (AoS) bank guarantee and term deposit,
cancellation of a bank guarantee.

AoS accepted, and AoS affected visa has been granted

If the visa application has been granted by the Department of Home
Affairs, an AoS can only be cancelled (CAN) due to limited special
circumstances.

Non-discretionary cancellation reasons:

-   the assuree's visa has been cancelled by Department of Home Affairs
-   the assuree, other than for a Community Support Programme (CSP)
    entrant, is subsequently granted a refugee visa after arrival in
    Australia
-   death of a sole assurer or assuree will auto expire an AoS case, See
    Death of an assurer or assuree

Discretionary cancellation reasons require processing staff to gather
evidence and make a determination:

-   the incapacity of an assuree identified in an Assurance of Support
    to travel to Australia before the expiration date of a visa due to a
    deteriorating serious medical condition. This should be supported by
    a medical certificate issued by a registered medical practitioner
    and supported by medical evidence the condition will not improve and
    is likely to deteriorate
-   special circumstances exist such as an accident, disability, illness
    or other circumstance that has critically affected the assurer(s)
    ability to provide adequate support

If additional policy advice is required, the AoS business team will seek
confirmation from the Department of Social Services (DSS).

Note: financial hardship alone on behalf of the assurer(s) is not
considered a special circumstance to cancel the AoS.

AoS legislation does not permit the cancellation of an AoS if an assuree
is granted a permanent visa, or gains Australian citizenship. The AoS,
and the bank guarantee supported by a term deposit when applicable, will
remain in force until the expiry of the AoS.

Request for partial release of the AoS security

The assurer can request partial release of the term deposit funds held
as security for cancelled or deceased assuree(s) before the AoS expiry
date. An automatic 'Partial Bond Release review' activity in Process
Direct is created when an assuree(s) in an AoS case is deceased.

Where an assurer(s) requests the early release of part of the term
deposit, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) can be authorised to
release part of the term deposit in the following circumstance, provided
the assuree has not received an AoS recoverable income support payment:

-   There is a single bank guarantee secured by a term deposit in
    respect of 2 assurees, and one assuree dies, the relevant portion of
    security can be released.
    For example, a term deposit of $14,000 has been lodged to secure a
    bank guarantee.
    $10,000 for X, who is the primary applicant for a contributory
    parent visa, and $4,000 for Y who is the secondary applicant for a
    contributory parent visa.
    If X, the primary applicant dies, $10,000 of the term deposit lodged
    for X (who is deceased) can be released.
    A term deposit for $4,000 remains for the rest of the AoS period

Transfer of an AoS case

If the decision is not to cancel the AoS, the assurer(s) may attempt to
find alternate assurer(s). Effectively transferring the AoS
responsibilities to another person(s). These responsibilities include:

-   taking over the remainder of the AoS period
-   lodging a new application and be found to be eligible
-   lodging a bank guarantee supported by a term deposit if required

The existing AoS can then be cancelled to complete the transfer. A
transfer:

-   may occur in situations where Services Australia considers there is
    a special circumstance
-   would need to lead to a beneficial outcome for all parties

A new AoS will replace the old, and effectively transfers the
responsibilities of the existing assurer(s) to other assurer(s). The new
AoS period has the same start and end dates as the replaced AoS.

In the case of a joint AoS, if one of the assurers makes an application
to transfer, the remaining assurer(s) and the prospective replacement
assurer must all satisfy the requirements for a joint AoS. If both do
not meet the requirements, the request to transfer will be declined.

The agency may make a determination to transfer and cancel an existing
AoS due to special circumstances.

Non-discretionary:

-   court ordered directions to transfer an AoS

Discretionary:

-   a long term injury or illness (individual)
-   liquidation of a company (Body)
-   if family and domestic violence is substantiated

A transfer would only be beneficial to protect government outlays and
ensure ongoing support for the assuree(s).

If transferring the AoS, the AoS must not be cancelled until the new
assurer has provided all evidence, including the lodgement of bank
guarantee. Verbal request to transfer an AoS case is not permitted.

Expiring an AoS case

When the start date is recorded, the end date calculates automatically
based on the visa subclass stated in the AoS. A future activity is
created and automatically expires the AoS case at the end of the AoS
period. Letters advising the AoS case has expired are sent to the
assuree(s) and assurer(s) attached to the AoS case.

If a bank guarantee supported by a term deposit has a remaining balance
with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA), a letter will issue to
the bank confirming the amount of funds for release to the account
holder(s). An 'AoS Ended Assurer' letter is sent to the assurer.

The AoS Processing team is responsible for completing any expiry
activity, as it may involve a debt calculation if an AoS recoverable
payment was paid to the assure(s).

AoS start date for visa subclass 143

The 143 visa can be granted onshore or offshore.

For visa 143 holders granted onshore before September 2020, the system
incorrectly updates the AoS start date using their arrival date, instead
of the visa grant date.

If the date is incorrect, Service Officers must manually update the AoS
start date.

The Resources page contains a table of AoS status codes, AoS
cancellation reasons, examples of offshore and onshore visas and
possible reasons for a discretionary transfer.

Related links

Assurance of Support (AoS) bank guarantee and term deposit

Death of an assurer or assuree

Processing applications to become an assurer

The Assurance of Support (AoS) scheme

Recovery of Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

Raising Assurance of Support (AoS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
