
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of ceasing a current payment
arrangement, transferring SRSS debts to Home Affairs and recovering SRSS
debs from a customer’s SRSS payment.

Services Australia debt vs the Department of Home Affairs’ debt

A debt to Services Australia occurs if the customer has received an
amount of SRSS payment that they were not entitled to, for example:

a change in circumstances occurs for a period already paid to the
customer and the SRSS payment is reassessed

loss of entitlement to SRSS payment, such as:

-   change of visa status
-   relationship status
-   care of dependent children
-   accommodation
-   rent
-   left the country
-   in prison
-   liquid assets over the allowable limit

income received, such as:

-   income from employment
-   self-employment
-   compensation
-   investments

Administrative or system error

A Department of Home Affairs debt occurs when an SRSS customer is
required to repay amounts provided to them by a Department of Home
Affairs contracted service provider.

These may include:

-   financial loans
-   damages to a property
-   unpaid utilities bill
-   other services

Transferring Services Australia debts to the Department of Home Affairs

From 9 January 2023, Services Australia no longer undertakes any
recovery action in the management of SRSS debts. Services Australia will
investigate and where applicable raise SRSS debts and then transfer
these debts to the Department of Home Affairs for recovery action.

In situations where an SRSS customer has a current withholding
arrangement with Services Australia, this arrangement will cease. The
outstanding balance is transferred to Home Affairs to undertake any
future recovery action. Services Australia will make contact with the
customer to advise them:

-   their withholding arrangement has ceased, and
-   the outstanding debt has been transferred to Home Affairs for
    recovery

Recovery of SRSS Debts

Money owing to the Department of Home Affairs, will be deducted from the
SRSS customer’s payment. Department of Home Affairs will advise Services
Australia:

-   the debt amount via the data link, and
-   the deduction will be automatically applied to the customer's
    payment

Five per cent (5%) of a customer's total SRSS payment (after the income
test is applied) will be deducted each fortnight until:

-   the Department of Home Affairs' debt is fully repaid, or
-   the customer's SRSS payment is cancelled

Services Australia advises the Department of Home Affairs when the total
sum of money has been recovered. This advice will be provided
automatically to the Department of Home Affairs via the data link.

Notifying the customer of a Department of Home Affairs debt

The Department of Home Affairs is responsible for managing the details
of the debt including:

-   notifying the customer they have to repay money, and
-   advising the customer when the debt has been paid in full

Refer all enquiries regarding debts to the customer's Department of Home
Affairs Service Provider.

Related links

Department of Home Affairs and contracted Service Providers
responsibilities for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
