
Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer 005-02050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to obtain a Tax File Number (TFN)
from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for a newly arrived refugee
customer. The process differs depending on whether a refugee customer is
claiming an income support payment (ISP) or family tax benefit (FTB).

TFN and new claims

Customers who live in Australia and their partners must give a valid TFN
to get a Centrelink payment.

An exemption from providing TFN may be granted in limited circumstances.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is not payable without a TFN. This requirement
impacts newly arrived refugees and can cause delays in their access to
FTB payments and services.

To provide assistance as quickly as possible, Services Australia and the
ATO have an agreement to expedite the process for newly arrived refugee
FTB claimants when the customer has not received their TFN from the ATO
in 21 days.

Note: the fast track process applies where the customer is claiming FTB.

In limited circumstances a customer may be exempted from providing their
partner's TFN details.
See Provision of Tax File Number for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments.

If a newly arrived refugee is claiming an income support payment (ISP)
only, it is not necessary to fast track the TFN process. ISP payments
can be granted an exemption code which gives the ATO up to 28 days to
process the application and provide the TFN to the customer.

Privacy requirements

To ensure this process meets privacy and other requirements of both
agencies, a TFN application must be lodged online in the name of the
customer through the ATO Online Individual Auto Registration (IAR) tool.
If the customer has a Department of Home Affairs issued ImmiCard, see
Process for coding information.

Resources has links to:

-   ATO Online Individual auto registration (IAR) tool
-   Australian Taxation Office website
-   ATO shopfront locations page

Related links

Refugee, Humanitarian and Permanent Protection Visa sub-classes

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Provision of Tax File Number for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
