
Rates of Parenting Payment (PP) 007-02250000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the factors that affect the rate of Parenting
Payment (PP). PP is a fortnightly taxable income support payment paid to
single and partnered customers caring for a dependent child.

On this Page:

Rate of payment

The rate of PP depends on whether the customer is partnered or single:

-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) is subject to the PPS Income Test and
    the benefit/allowance assets test. The customer's income free area
    can vary as it depends on the number of dependent children in the
    customer's care
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) is paid at the benefit/allowance
    rate and is subject to the benefit/allowance income and assets
    tests. There are fixed personal and partner income free areas below
    which the incomes of the customer and their partner do not affect
    the rate of payment

PP is adjusted in line with the Consumer Price Index on the 20 March and
20 September. The PPS rate is also adjusted in line with the Male Total
Average Weekly Earnings (MTAWE) figure.

The rate of PP is not affected by the customer's age.

PP cannot be made to customers through the tax system.

Partner imprisoned

If a customer's partner is imprisoned, the customer is paid the member
of a couple (partner in gaol) rate, equivalent to the single with
children rate of JobSeeker Payment (JSP). This is adjusted to the member
of a couple rate from the date of their partner's release. While paid at
the member of a couple (partner in gaol) rate, the customer will be
subject to the partnered allowance income and assets test, and
conditions of payment (not at the PPS rate, or conditions/concessions).

Illness separated or respite care couple

A PP customer may also be assessed as a member of an illness separated
or respite care couple. In these cases, the customer is also paid a rate
equivalent to the single with children rate of JSP as above.

Entitlements to eligible customers

PP customers may be entitled to a range of other additional products and
services, including Pension Supplement for eligible customers over Age
Pension age.

If the customer can undertake these activities as part of their Job Plan
they may also be eligible for:

-   Approved Program of Work Supplement
-   Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

PP customers may be affected by compliance action if not complying with
their Job Plan.

Working Credit

Working Credits may enable the customer to keep some of their income
support payment while they are working. If the customer's and/or
partner's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some of that
income is employment income, the customer's payment may remain current
at nil rate for up to six fortnights and they may retain certain
benefits.

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income and assets tests

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Customer and partner who are under the age of consent with a dependent
child in their care

Admission process for incarcerated customers

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Employment income nil rate period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
