
Initial contact by customers claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP) 007-01010050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about claiming Double Orphan Pension
(DOP). DOP is a payment made to guardians to help meet the costs of
caring for a DOP child. DOP is not income or asset tested and is paid in
addition to Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

On this Page:

Testing eligibility

A customer claiming DOP who has not claimed FTB for the child must have
their entitlement to FTB assessed regardless of whether they choose to
receive FTB. Invite the customer to claim FTB, even if they choose not
to be paid FTB.

See Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP).

A DOP child must meet FTB child requirements.

DOP cannot be paid for a young person who is getting a War Orphan
Pension.

DOP can also be paid to an Approved Care Organisation (ACO).

Some customers may be eligible for an additional DOP component. This is
calculated when there is a difference between the current carer's and
previous carer's FTB Part A legislative rates.

Claiming DOP

Customers need to lodge a Claim for Double Orphan Pension (SC003). All
relevant questions on the claim should be answered and the claim must be
signed by the customer (and their partner, if applicable).

There may be occasions when a customer in vulnerable circumstances may
not be able to lodge a claim at the time of their first contact with the
agency. Record all contacts from a customer or their representative in
relation to a new claim for a vulnerable customer on the their record
until the claim is lodged. If the DOP claim is lodged within 14 days of
the first contact date, the customer may be eligible to have their DOP
backdated to that first contact. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers for further information.

DOP can be backdated to the day of qualification if the customer makes a
claim within 13 weeks of the:

-   birth of the child, or
-   death of the person receiving DOP for the child

When claiming DOP, the customer needs to provide:

-   Proof of the child's birth (if not already provided)
-   The child's birth certificate to confirm parentage/parentage
    unknown, if possible, evidence that the child is a DOP child. If the
    customer cannot provide sufficient evidence, DOP and Bereavement
    Smart Centre Processing staff should attempt to confirm details
    using information on the record and/or by contacting third parties
    such as the hospital, gaol or Births, Deaths and Marriages

When helping customers complete claim forms, Service Officers must not
make any notations, underline or make comments of any sort on a claim
form that is to be signed by a customer and lodged with Services
Australia. Make any notations or explanations to questions on a claim
form on a separate sheet of paper and attach it to the claim.

DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing staff complete all
processing for DOP claims.

Customers can contact the DOP Helpdesk on a free call number.

The Resources page contains Q999 letter text, links to the Services
Australia website for information about the Double Orphan Pension claim
form and information booklet. It also contains contact details for the
DOP helpdesk for customers and Processing Service details.

Related links

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Rates and Thresholds

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
