-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document explains how customers can make a claim for Parenting
Payment (PP) [] online, or with help from a Service Officer using
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). It includes information on how a customer
can start or access their online claim, what happens once they submit
their online claim, and processing by Service Officers.

Government intent

The objective of PP is to give principal carers of children with
recognition of their parenting responsibilities and opportunities for
financial independence.

PP eligibility

There are 2 rates of Parenting Payment. The applicable rate depends on a
person's relationship status.

To qualify for Parenting Payment Single (PPS) a person must:

-   be single
-   be the principal carer of an eligible dependent child under the age
    of 14 years old
-   meet the residence requirements for PP
-   meet the income and assets test
-   meet mutual obligation requirements

To qualify for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) a person must:

-   be partnered
-   be the principal carer of an eligible dependent child under the age
    of 6 years old
-   meet the residence requirements for PP
-   meet the income and assets test

For more information, Eligibility for Parenting Payment.

Grandparents or non-parent carers of children living in the same house
as a parent may not be eligible for PP. In most cases a grandparent or
non-parent carer will not be considered the primary carer of a child if
they reside in the same home as the biological parent. A principal carer
determination must be made. See Help for grandparents caring for
children and Resources page for a link to the Services Australia website
for payments and services to help non-parent carers.

Early claims for PP

Customers are not able to lodge an early claim for PP for an expected
newborn child. However, the start day for PP can be backdated if the
customer claims within 4 weeks of the child's birth or the date a PP
child entered their care as a dependent child. For all other
circumstances, see Early claims.

Customers with nominee arrangements

Correspondence nominees can submit an online claim for PP on behalf of
their principal.

If a correspondence nominee contacts to claim PP on behalf of their
principal, offer an online claim first. If they decline the online claim
offer, a Service Officer must run the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with
the nominee.

If a nominee is claiming on behalf of a person, encourage the nominee to
help the person claim PP using the person's Centrelink online account.
If the nominee is unable or unwilling, a Service Officer is to run ACC
with the nominee.

Online claims

[] Customers must be registered with an active Centrelink online account
to start an online claim.

Once registered, to start an online claim for PP, customers must:

-   sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   select Payments and Claims > Claims >Make a Claim menu option
-   on the Make a claim page, select the Get started button under the
    Families category
-   on the What would you like to do? window, select Apply for Parenting
    Payment

Customers transferring to PP will see a reduced question set as part of
their online claim if they are:

-   currently in receipt of an income support payment, or
-   have cancelled from payment in the last 13 weeks, and
-   have had no significant changes in their circumstances

Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

ACC can be used for customers deemed unable or unsuitable to claim
online or nominees.

'Channel hopping' within ACC allows:

-   the customer to start a claim online and have it continued by a
    Service Officer, or
-   a Service Officer to help a customer start a claim, to be completed
    by the customer online (an active Centrelink online account is
    required)

Once the Service Officer has completed the ACC:

-   tell the customer about documents to be provided, or action to be
    taken to submit their claim (exceptions will be made for vulnerable
    customers). The customer must:
-   answer all mandatory questions
-   verify their identity if there is no Identity Confirmation (ICI)
    recorded
-   provide all required documents
-   read the relevant verbal declaration script to the customer at the
    end of the ACC process

New claim appointment

New claim appointments are not conducted for Parenting Payment, however
a PPS customer whose youngest child is aged 6 years or older, will be
required to attend a Participation Interview, unless they have an
exemption from mutual obligation requirements.

Current PP customers - change in relationship status

For details about current PP customer transfers with a change in
relationship status, see:

-   Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
    Single (PPS)
-   Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
    Partnered (PPP)

Customers claiming PP when partner is already in receipt of PP

The provisions of the Social Security Act mean only one person at a time
can be paid PP as the principal carer of a child. This means only one
member of a couple can receive PP, even if the care arrangements are
considered equal. If a customer contacts to advise they are now the
principal carer of the child, their partner's PP will need to be
cancelled first. The customer can then submit a claim for PP if
required.

If a person submits a claim for PP and their partner is still in receipt
of PP, contact must be made with the customer and partner to confirm who
is to receive PP.

Actioning a facilitated claim review work item following a DSP Medical Risk Based Review (MRBR) with a notifiable event

Disability Service Officers initiate the facilitated claim review
activity when completing the Service Offer Interview (SOI). When the
Future Activity List (FAL) activity matures it is allocated via the
Workload Management System (WLM). The facilitated claim review activity
will display as Review Reason: Possible Notifiable event and contain the
following text: 'Medical Risk Based review finalised. DSP payment will
cancel on xx/xx/xx. Claimant to be contacted for PPP ACC to be actioned.

The ability to run ACC for the customer will only be available during
the 42 day Period of Grace (POG) following notification being provided
to the customer of the decision to cancel DSP.

If the POG expires before the ACC can be run, the customer will be
advised of existing channels to claim an alternative income support
payment.

If a customer has applied for a formal review of the decision to cancel
their DSP and is receiving payment pending review, ACC will not be
completed.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia Website for
information on Parenting Payment (PP), the claim information booklet,
change of relationship status forms, Payment and Service Finder, Office
Locator and information about a shared care system problem (P24845).

Related links

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Working Credit

Principal carer of a dependent child

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Shared care for social security payments

Family and domestic violence

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessment of income and assets for Parenting Payment (PP)

Employment assistance for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Parenting Payment (PP) customers

Change of circumstance for Parenting Payment (PP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Deferment, non-payment period or rate reduction period for Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP)

Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
