
Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) 007-07030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing extensions under
special circumstances for families unable to meet lodgement, and other
specific requirements for FTB and SIFS.

One year cut off

Families have 1 year from the end of an entitlement year to meet certain
family assistance requirements. The one year period following the
entitlement year is known as the lodgement year. These requirements
include:

lodging an FTB lump sum claim,

lodging a SIFS claim, and

confirming income by either:

-   lodging tax returns with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) or
-   advising they are not required to lodge a tax return

If families do not meet these requirements by the end of the lodgement
year, then:

-   FTB lump sum and SIFS claims will be rejected if they are lodged
    outside of the allowable time, and
-   FTB top ups and supplements will not be paid to instalment customers
    if income is confirmed late

Families may be granted an extension if they have special circumstances
which prevented them from meeting their requirement/s by 30 June of the
lodgement year. The extension may be granted up to the end of the
extended lodgement year, but no later as there is no legislative
provisions to do so.

A special circumstance extension cannot be granted for financial years
prior to 2012-13 as there were no legislative provisions to do so.

Prior to the 2018-19 financial year, families who claimed FTB were able
to seek a special circumstances extension to meet other requirements.

For FTB lump sum claim customers a special circumstances extension could
be granted to:

-   meet immunisation requirements for a child until the end of the
    calendar year in which the child turned 19 (for the FTB Part A
    Supplement from the 2012-13 up to and including the 2017-18
    financial years)
-   meet health check requirements for a child if the customer was
    impacted by the Healthy Start For School measure and the child
    turned 4 during the financial year (for the FTB Part A Supplement
    from the 2012-13 up to and including the 2017-18 financial years)
-   notify child education details for Schoolkids Bonus (from the
    2012-13 up to and including the 2015-16 financial years)

Changes to the timeframe for FTB lump sum claim lodgement and income
confirmation were promoted throughout the 2012-13 financial year. The
Resources page contains questions and answers relating to the changes.

Before undertaking a special circumstances assessment, staff must refer
to the table in the Resources page containing information about
circumstances for which an extension would not generally be granted.

Extensions for special circumstances

Special circumstances are by their very nature incapable of precise or
exhaustive definition. 'Special circumstances' are generally due to
situations that are unusual, uncommon or exceptional and each situation
must be assessed on an individual basis.

A special circumstances extension should only be granted in limited
situations where the customer and/or their partner has been prevented
from meeting the relevant requirements by the end of the lodgement year.
The circumstances must be solely due to circumstances which are unusual
or exceptional and are outside of the customer's control.

In all cases, consider why the customer was unable to meet the
requirement within the allowable period. When assessing a special
circumstances extension request, the nature of the event (or impacts
associated with the event) must have had a significant impact on the
customer's capacity to meet the relevant requirement within the
allowable period.

A special circumstances extension is not to be granted solely on the
basis that the customer advises they were not aware of the change in
lodgement periods or solely due to ‘running out of time’ to meet the
requirement.

An extension may be granted without a discussion with the customer if
there is sufficient information to support the extension on their
record.

Customers entitled to a special circumstances extension

Where special circumstances prevented the customer and/or their partner
from meeting their requirements, an extension to the 1 year timeframe
may be granted to:

FTB instalment customers and their 30 June partner to confirm their
income so reconciliation may not be subject to late lodger rules

FTB lump sum customers to:

-   Lodge their FTB lump sum claim
-   Confirm income for themselves and/or their partner

SIFS customers to:

-   Lodge a SIFS only claim
-   Confirm income for themselves and/or their partner
    Note: SIFS is not payable to new customers from 1 July 2017, however
    grandfathered SIFS customers can continue to access special
    circumstances extensions for claim lodgement and income confirmation
    from that date, provided they meet the special circumstances
    provisions

Allowable period for the extension

If an extension is granted, the period a customer has to meet the
specific requirements will be extended to a date after the end of the
lodgement year, but no later than 30 June of the extended lodgement
year, as there are no legislative provisions to do so. The extended
lodgement year is 12 months after the end of the lodgement year.

The time given will be directly related to the time the customer expects
to take to complete the outstanding requirement(s).

Timing of the request for extension

-   A request for and decision about a special circumstances extension
    for a lump sum claim requirement can only be made after a lump sum
    claim for relevant financial year has been lodged
-   A decision about a special circumstances income lodgement extension
    for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment customers can be made before
    or after the end of the relevant lodgement year and before or after
    the relevant requirement has been met

Regardless of when the request or decision is made, the extension end
date cannot be later than the end of the extended lodgement year.

A request for a special circumstances extension for a requirement can be
made after the end of the extended lodgement year; however, the relevant
requirement must have been met before the end of the extended lodgement
year.

Multiple extensions

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum or Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS) claim customers may be granted multiple extensions. If a customer
is granted an FTB lump sum or SIFS claim lodgement extension, the
extension will only apply to that requirement. A separate extension will
also need to be recorded if an income confirmation extension is
required.

Only one extension date can be recorded. If a customer is granted
multiple extensions the extension date will be the same for all
requirements.

If a further extension is granted, it will be applied to all recorded
special circumstances extension requirements, even though the extension
may only be intended for one requirement.

Income lodgement extension

Income lodgement extensions can be granted for lump sum claimants or
customers who have received FTB fortnightly in the relevant financial
year.

If a customer has not received FTB as fortnightly payments, including at
a zero rate they must first lodge an FTB lump sum claim and/or a SIFS
only claim for the relevant financial year. Claim and income lodgement
extensions can be granted at the same time; however legislatively a lump
sum claim must have been lodged before a decision about an extension can
be made.

If an income lodgement extension is granted, the extension can be
recorded for the instalment and/or lump sum claim periods. If a mixed
delivery customer is granted an extension, separate extensions will need
to be recorded to ensure the extension is correctly applied to both
instalment and lump sum claim periods.

An income lodgement extension can only be used by Services Australia in
the assessment of FTB entitlement for a financial year. The lodgement
extension does not extend to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).
Customers should still contact the ATO to discuss their reasons for late
lodgement in order to avoid an ATO penalty. The customer should be
advised to visit the ATO website for more information.

If a customer has been granted a lodgement extension by the ATO, details
of the extension will not be reported to the agency. The customer will
need to contact the agency to discuss their circumstances and request a
separate extension of time to meet family assistance income confirmation
requirements.

An income lodgement extension is granted at an individual level. An
extension granted to a customer will not apply to their partner. If an
extension is to apply (and is warranted) to the customer's partner, a
separate income confirmation extension will need to be recorded.

Non-lodger debts

A decision to grant an income lodgement extension for a Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) instalment or past period claim customer may result in a
delay in the raising of a non-lodger debt. If an income lodgement
extension is granted for a customer whose income has not been confirmed
before a non-lodger debt is raised, and the extension date is after 1
September of the extended lodgement year, the non-lodger debt will not
be raised until 15 days after the extension end date, providing the
customer continues to meet the conditions for being assessed as a
non-lodger.

If an income lodgement extension is granted after a non-lodger debt has
been raised, the extension will not have any impact on the debt. The
non-lodger debt will remain and will be subject to recovery.

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payment (PIP)

An income lodgement extension will not automatically apply to a PIP.
When a special circumstances income confirmation extension is recorded,
a warning will be displayed to alert the user to check the PIP deferral
screen and code a PIP deferral exemption, if appropriate.

Factors to be considered when making a decision about special circumstances

When considering a request for a special circumstance extension, the
following factors must be considered:

-   The nature of the event that prevented (or will prevent) the
    customer and/or their partner from meeting the relevant lodgement
    requirement (for example, natural disaster, bereavement, ill health,
    personal issues, accident)
-   Was the event outside the customer's control?
-   How has the event contributed to the customer being unable to meet
    the requirement by the end of the lodgement year?
-   When did the event occur?
-   What does the customer need to do to meet the requirement and what
    level of input is required by them?
-   How much time remains in the lodgement year?
-   How was the customer and/or their partner prevented from taking
    action to meet the requirement before they were impacted by the
    event/incident?
-   How much time remains in the extended lodgement year?
-   Has another agency (that is, the Australian Taxation Office (ATO))
    already granted an extension)?

Request for special circumstances extension is rejected

If a customer does not meet the special circumstances requirements,
their request for an extension will be rejected. In all instances, a
letter will be sent advising the customer of the decision and their
review and appeal rights.

A decision to reject a special circumstances extension should only be
changed as a result of a review.

A decision about a special circumstances extension will be recorded on
the Family Assistance Lodgement Period Management screen and in a DOC on
the customer's record. If a decision is already recorded, explain the
decision to the customer and advise their review and appeal rights.

The Resources page contains a table of examples for special
circumstances extensions, the Q999 rejection letter, scenarios for
determining extensions, FAQs relating to extension recording, reviews
and appeals, links to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) website, and
relevant paper claim forms.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as a lump
sum for a previous year

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12
to 2017-18

Initial contact by customers claiming Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS)

Schoolkids Bonus

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
