
Family Tax benefit (FTB) bereavement payments and the reconciliation process 007-11010170

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Family Tax Benefit (FTB) bereavement payments
are treated during the FTB reconciliation process for FTB instalment
customers. FTB bereavement payments are made for a period of 14 weeks
following the date of death of a child. This is known as the bereavement
period. The bereavement payment can be paid as a lump sum or as
instalments.

On this Page:

Bereavement payments

The rate of FTB bereavement payment is the rate of FTB that would have
been payable for the 14 weeks from the date of the child's death. The
rate takes into account changes in circumstances such as whether the
child would have turned 13 or 16 years of age during the 14 week period
as well as factors that affect the rate such care arrangements and child
support.

Bereavement payments of FTB are only payable where a child of the
customer has died. The delivery option for a bereavement payment
requested by the customer will determine how much of this bereavement
payment is to be included in the reconciliation of the relevant
financial year.

Bereavement periods and payments that fall within 1 income year are
reconciled using the actual income and rate of that income year whether
or not the customer opts for lump sum or instalment for the bereavement
period.

FTB supplements are included in the FTB reconciliation calculation once
adequate income or not required to lodge details are available. The
supplements are calculated based on a daily entitlement during the
financial year, including the bereavement period.

Bereavement period spans 2 financial years

Reconciliation of the bereavement payment will differ depending on
whether the bereavement payment was received as an instalment or as a
lump sum.

Paid as instalments: Bereavement payments received in each relevant
financial year are reconciled separately using the income and FTB rates
for that financial year

Paid as a lump sum: If the customer's FTB date paid to date is in:

-   the relevant financial year being reconciled, the bereavement
    payment is reconciled using the income and rates for that financial
    year
-   the previous financial year, income for the previous financial year
    is used and the FTB rates used are those in force when the child's
    death was advised

A person may claim an FTB bereavement payment on behalf of a deceased
customer. In this case, FTB reconciliation is based on the income of the
deceased person.

The Resources page contains an example of how to process reconciliation
where a customer and child die on the same day and a link to mySupport.

Related links

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
