
Assessment of income cancellation periods in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation 007-11010100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about reconciliation, which may
result in a customer's entitlement to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) not being
assessed for the full financial year if there were periods when FTB was
not current. This procedure explains how FTB can be assessed for periods
when FTB was cancelled due to income (CAN-INC).

Eligibility for FTB during CAN-INC periods

CAN-INC non-payment periods are not automatically included in the
reconciliation assessment.

Customers who had a non-payment period in the previous financial year
due to income (CAN-INC) receive a reconciliation letter advising:

-   FTB has not been assessed for the full financial year
-   make an annual lump sum claim to test their eligibility for FTB for
    the non-payment period

Assessing eligibility of an unclaimed CAN-INC period

The 12 months following the end of an entitlement year is known as the
lodgement year.

Customers have until 30 June of the relevant lodgement year to request
assessment of CAN-INC period(s) and to confirm income for FTB (for
example, by 30 June 2021 for the 2019-20 financial year).

Service Officers must identify the reason for the income cancellation to
determine whether the customer needs to submit a lump sum claim or if
the FTB Instalment Period Override (FIPO) screen may be coded.

Circumstances when FTB can be assessed after verbal request

A customer can verbally request the assessment of the CAN-INC period(s)
if the income cancellation was due to an update to family income
estimate that the customer provided.

The non-payment period will change to FTB/CAN-NIE if:

-   FTB was cancelled due to income in the previous financial year and
-   actual income details have been received and
-   reconciliation has occurred

The status can be seen on the DS List (XDS) screen.

In these circumstances, Service Officers can include the CAN-NIE
non-payment periods in reconciliation if the customer has remained
eligible since the date of cancellation. This can be done by coding the
FTB Instalment Period Override (FIPO) screen.

Note: a lump sum claim is not required in this circumstance. If a lump
sum claim is lodged this will be considered a request for a review of
the CAN-INC non-payment period and will be used to reassess any
non-payment period(s).

From 1 July 2020, customers whose FTB rate reduced to $0 due to a
customer provided income estimate will remains current at a zero rate.
FTB status will be either:

-   CZR-ITH - Part A income test or the Part B secondary earner income
    test reduces the relevant Part to zero
-   CZR-IEU - Part B is zero due to the primary earner income

These CZR periods will be automatically included in reconciliation from
1 July 2021.

Circumstances when a lump sum claim is required

A customer must lodge a lump sum claim to have the CAN-INC non-payment
period assessed if the income cancellation resulted from:

-   the automatic uplift (Uplift 1 or Uplift 2) of both customer and
    partners estimate (or just customer if not partnered) was applied
    and this caused the family income estimate to exceed the FTB income
    threshold, or
-   a change of circumstances occurred, and the existing family income
    estimate exceeded the FTB income threshold

In these circumstances, Service Officers must advise the customer to
lodge a lump sum claim, preferably online, for assessment of the
non-payment period. The claim must be lodged by the end of the lodgement
year. This may be extended if special circumstances exist.

Payment of arrears

Payment of arrears for the income cancellation period (non-payment
period) must take into consideration the normal rules of reconciliation
relevant to the particular case. Consideration needs to be given if the
review of decision is secretary or customer initiated.

Related links

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as a lump
sum for a previous year

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Date of event (DOV) for family assistance income estimates

Secretary initiated review of decision

Customer initiated review of decision

Types of Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
