
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing) certificates 007-17103159

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about certificates issued for
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing).

General eligibility for ACCS (Child Wellbeing)

Only a child care service can apply for ACCS (Child Wellbeing) for a
child. The child care service can do this by:

-   issuing a certificate that a child is or was at risk of serious
    abuse or neglect, or
-   applying to Services Australia to make a determination about a child
    who is or was at risk of serious abuse or neglect.

In most cases, the child care service must give a Certificate(s)
totalling 6 weeks before they can apply to the agency for a
determination.

In most cases, children will be enrolled at a child care service under a
CWA enrolment type. For CWA enrolment types both of the following need
to have occurred before payment of child care subsidy (CCS or ACCS) will
be made to the child care service.

-   The child care service has either issued a certificate or had a
    determination application approved by Services Australia, and
-   An individual is eligible for CCS for the child

Role of Services Australia

Services Australia have no role in the initial certificate assessment
process.

Changes to previously lodged certificates are able to be completed by
the child care service or will present to Services Australia for
finalisation.

Exceptional circumstance - increase in subsidised hours and/or ACCS percentage

In exceptional circumstances a customer may apply for:

-   an increase in ACCS (Child Wellbeing) subsidised hours (above 100
    hours). Applications will be assessed on a case by case basis by the
    Level 2 Policy Help Desk
-   a higher ACCS (Child Wellbeing) subsidy percentage (above 120%).
    Child care services are required to apply directly to the Department
    of Education who will determine whether an increase is appropriate

For more information, see Exceptional circumstances for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

ACCS Child Wellbeing and CCS reconciliation

Individuals in receipt of ACCS (Child Wellbeing) are required to meet
income and notification provisions for CCS reconciliation.

The CCS reconciliation process (including re-reconciliations) will
quarantine all periods where a child was assessed as eligible for ACCS
(Child Wellbeing). Customers will not be reconciled for an ACCS (Child
Wellbeing) period at the child level and the estimate held in the system
for those periods will remain in place, that is, actual taxable income
(ATI) will not readjust the customers calculated entitlement for those
periods.

Note: the quarantining rule is effective under either a certificate or
determination.

The Resources page contains a links to:

-   the Services Australia Additional Child Care Subsidy page, and
-   the Department of Education's Additional Child Care Subsidy page and
    the ACC Guide to Additional Child Care Subsidy (Child Wellbeing),
    which provides examples of information a service provider might use
    when considering if a child is, or is not, at risk of serious abuse
    or neglect.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing)

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing)
determinations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
