[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on claiming Double Orphan Pension
(DOP).

Payment information

DOP is a non-means tested payment made to new carers to help meet the
costs of caring for a DOP child and is paid in addition to Family Tax
Benefit (FTB). A DOP child must meet FTB child requirements. DOP can
also be paid to an Approved Care Organisation (ACO).

Some customers may be eligible for an additional DOP component. This is
calculated when there is a difference between the current carer's and
previous carer's legislative rate of FTB Part A.

There are savings provisions to enable some customers to retain DOP or
an additional component after changes were made to eligibility from 1
July 2008.

Claim requirements

Customers need to lodge a Claim for Double Orphan Pension (SC003). Proof
of the child's birth is also required. The process for issuing and the
customer lodging the DOP claim form is covered at the initial contact by
customers claiming DOP procedure.

A customer claiming DOP who has not claimed FTB for the child must have
their entitlement to FTB assessed regardless of whether they choose to
receive FTB.

DOP Smart Centre Processing staff will process and code the DOP claim
once the FTB claim has been finalised.

Customers cannot claim or receive DOP and Double War Orphans Pension
from the Department of Veterans' Affairs at the same time. This is
referred to as double dipping.

Contents

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) claims made by Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

Calculating the additional Double Orphan Pension (DOP) component

Raising Pension Supplement and Seniors Supplement Payment (SSP) debts

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
