
Eligible hours for Child Care Benefit (CCB) 007-03040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaced Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaced Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines the limit that applies to the number of hours a
customer may be paid Child Care Benefit (CCB) for registered care and
approved care for each child each week for the past period. It explains
the work/training/study test used to assess a customer's eligible hour
limit, exceptions and how the eligible hour limit is recorded. It also
explains how the test applied to Child Care Rebate (CCR).

On this Page:

CCB for Registered care

To be eligible for CCB for registered care, the customer and their
partner (if applicable) both must undertake an activity to meet the
work/training/study test or an exception applies. The activity to meet
the test only needs to be undertaken at some time during the week that
child care was provided, that is no minimum number of hours is required.

CCB for registered care can be paid up to 50 hours per child per week.

If the customer (and their partner) do not undertake any activities in a
week, they do not satisfy the test for that week.

CCB for Approved care

All CCB for approved care customers were eligible for up to 24 hours per
child per week without undertaking any activities to meet the
work/training/study test.

To have been eligible for more than 24 hours and up to 50 hours per
child per week, 1 of the following must have applied:

-   The customer was an eligible grandparent with primary care of a
    grandchild using approved care, or
-   The customer (and their partner) both must have undertaken
    activities to meet the work/training/study test or an exception
    applies. The activities to meet the test must have been undertaken
    for at least 15 hours per week (or 30 hours per fortnight)

Note: a person could have combined activities for the purpose of meeting
the work/training/study test. For example, part time or casual work
could have been combined with study, looking for work, or voluntary work
(that improves work prospects), to calculate the number of hours. This
is particularly important where a customer/partner is determining
whether they (and their partner) meet the number of hours required to
satisfy the work/training/study test for more than 24 hours of care per
child per week.

Child Care Rebate

To have been eligible for the CCR, both the customer (and their partner)
must have undertaken an activity to have met the work/training/study
test or an exception applied. The activity to meet the test had to be
undertaken at some time during the week that the approved child care was
provided, that is, no minimum number of hours was required.

Self-service options

Customers can no longer update their or their partner's
working/training/study details online for CCB/CCR purposes. If they wish
to update their details retrospectively they will need to contact the
agency for a Service Officer to update the CWTS screen. There are time
limits which apply.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Child Care Finder website and example text for letters sent when
backdating a change to a customer's weekly eligible hour limit
retrospectively.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care and
registered care

Assessing Child Care Benefit (CCB) claims for approved care and
registered care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
