-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how fringe benefits are included in adjusted
taxable income (ATI) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy
(CCS), Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad
and Partner Pay (DAP).

Reportable fringe benefits

Reportable fringe benefits are fringe benefits that must be reported to
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). This is done by the customer's
employer, on the employee's Payment Summary. It is a 'grossed-up' figure
calculated by the employer.

Customers must advise Services Australia the full amount of all
reportable fringe benefits. This includes any exempt reportable fringe
benefit amounts as a separate figure. Only reportable fringe benefits,
as reported on their Payment Summary (which will include any exempt
reportable fringe benefits) are assessed as part of the customer's ATI.

Fringe benefits received by Ministers of Religion are assessed in the
same way.

If a person is not sure whether a benefit they receive from their
employer is a fringe benefit they should check with their employer or
the ATO.

When the person lodges an income tax return for the financial year, the
ATO transfers actual income details to Services Australia. This includes
details of any reportable fringe benefit amounts. From the 2016-17
financial year onwards this data exchange includes details of any exempt
reportable fringe benefits.

Adjusted fringe benefit amount

From 1 January 2017, exempt reportable fringe benefits and other
reportable fringe benefits are assessed differently. As a result there
are two fields for reportable fringe benefits, the exempt reportable
fringe benefit amount field and the other reportable fringe benefit
amount field.

The adjusted fringe benefit amount for a customer is the total of both
the reportable fringe benefit amount fields, being:

-   Exempt reportable fringe benefits from certain not for profit
    employers (as described in Section 57A of the Fringe Benefits Tax
    Assessment Act 1986). Exempt fringe benefits will have fringe
    benefits tax rate formula automatically applied to reduce the value
    of the grossed up amount on the recipients Payment Summary, and
-   All other reportable fringe benefits from (non-exempt) employers.
    These reportable fringe benefits will be assessed at 100% of value
    (the grossed up amount as it appears on the recipients Payment
    Summary)

If a person is not sure whether the reportable fringe benefits they
receive are from a not for profit employer (as described in Section 57A
of the Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986) and therefore classed as
exempt reportable fringe benefits, they should check with their
employer's payroll area.

Prior to 1 January 2017 the total grossed up reportable fringe benefit
amount was automatically adjusted by the system to take into account the
fringe benefits tax rate. This reduced amount was then used in the
recipient's income estimate. From 1 January 2017 onwards this adjustment
is only made to exempt reportable fringe benefits.

Fringe benefit threshold

If the value of the customer's total fringe benefits is under the
relevant ATO fringe benefits threshold they will not have a reportable
fringe benefit amount. If the customer includes a fringe benefits amount
in their income estimate which is under the relevant ATO fringe benefits
threshold, the amount (the total of exempt and other reportable fringe
benefits) will be treated as nil in the customer's estimate of income.
The ATO website provides information about reportable fringe benefits
thresholds. The Resources page contains a link to the ATO website and
examples of assessing fringe benefits.

The fringe benefits tax rate and threshold changed from 1 April 2017.
This change impacts adjusted taxable income for the 2017-18 financial
year onwards.

A separate procedure applies for assessing fringe benefits for Social
Security payments.

Fringe benefit tax year

The fringe benefits tax assessment year is from 1 April to 31 March.
This means, for example, reportable fringe benefits received from 1
April 2017 to 31 March 2018 will appear on an employee's payment summary
for the 2017-18 financial year.

Customers should update their income estimate for FTB/CCS once the
fringe benefit tax year ends on 31 March. They should confirm with their
employer the reportable fringe benefit total that will appear on their
payment summary. PPL/DAP claimants must advise reportable fringe
benefits during the claiming process when estimating their income.

The Resources page contains a link to the ATO website and examples of
assessing fringe benefits.

Related links

Reportable superannuation contributions from 2009-10 for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Recording or updating income estimates for a previous years for family
assistance payments

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
