
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) automatic letters 007-07120010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines automatic letters produced for FTB customers to
reflect changes in entitlement as a result of daily processing. These
letters give details of the change in rate, how the rate was calculated,
and include information about the customer's review and appeal rights
and notification obligations.

Letter information

A single letter is used to combine information about the following
payments:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B (Part A and Part B
    supplements and Single Income Family Supplement are included after
    the end of the financial year)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Letters are limited to one page where possible, but may take up to two
pages depending on the events that have triggered the production of the
letter.

If the customer also receives Child Care Subsidy (CCS), they will
receive separate letters to advise them of changes to their CCS
entitlement.

Manual letter

In some circumstances, an automatic letter will not be generated and a
letter will need to be manually issued. These include cases where:

-   an automatic letter cannot be generated due to the number of changes
    recorded or the type of activity (for example, cancelling a payment
    with a reason of 'OTH'er)
-   an automatic letter is unsuitable (for example, bereavements)

Letter history

Letters created in the previous 28 days can be viewed and reissued from
the History Summary (HS) screen. Older letters can be retrieved through
the Advice History (AH) screen in the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR)
system in the Centrelink system.

Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity

If an automatic letter is not generated and the customer needs to be
advised of the change, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity will be created
to prompt a Service Officer to issue a letter manually. The Service
Officer will need to 'S'elect the MFU activity to create a manual
letter.

The Resources page contains a table that shows the events that trigger a
letter and the payment they apply to. Details of the message text
included within various Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation letters
are also displayed.

Related links

Creating a Q134 letter

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Letters and customer advices

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Issue Family Tax Benefit (FTB) clean skin letter

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
