
Exception processing of Paid Parental Leave scheme claims 007-07030170

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad
and Partner Pay (DAP) claims when a child's date of birth or entry into
care date is outside the claim lodgement timeframes, and how to manually
update PPL or DAP periods in exceptional situations. This process is
only to be used in limited circumstances.

PPL and DAP claims processing outside of claim lodgement timeframes

To be eligible for PPL or DAP, generally a customer must lodge their
claim within 12 months of the date the child was born or came into care
as part of the adoption process.

If a customer lodges outside this period:

their PPL claim will automatically be:

-   made not effective with reason code: ‘A12’ (12 months passed since
    DOB/DOC), if the child’s date of birth or adoption is on or after 1
    July 2020
-   rejected with reason code: C12 (12 months passed since DOB/DOC), if
    the child’s date of birth or adoption is before 1 July 2020

their DAP claim will automatically be made not effective with reason
code: ‘C12’ (12 months passed since DOB /DOC)

Note: for children that are born or enter care as part of an adoption
process on or after 1 July 2020, secondary and tertiary claimants can
claim PPL within 24 months of the child’s date of birth or entry into
care. These customers will not be eligible for the PPL period, but may
be eligible for any Flexible PPL days that the primary claimant has
given permission for them to claim. If a secondary claimant lodges
outside this period, their claim will automatically reject with reason
code: ‘C24’ (24 months passed since DOB/DOC).

In exceptional circumstances only, PPL/DAP claims may need to be
granted, where:

-   a review of the decision has resulted in a favourable outcome for
    the customer and the claim must now be granted
-   a Ministerial decision or Act of Grace ruling which has resulted in
    a changed outcome and the claim must now be granted
-   the customer lodged a claim and a system issue was identified that
    meant the claim could not be granted
-   a correction to incorrect data held on a customer’s record (for
    example, correction to child’s date of birth), results in the
    inappropriate rejection of a PPL or DAP claim, and the claim must
    now be re-granted
-   there are systems issues preventing the PPL or DAP claim being
    granted for the correct period and the period cannot be adjusted
    using standard processing procedures

Note: standard processing procedures apply when processing claims that
are inside of PPL/DAP claim lodgement timeframes.

Flexible PPL days for children that are born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020

Customers can access Flexible PPL days up to 24 months after their
child’s birth or adoption. However, to be able to access Flexible PPL
days, the primary claimant must claim PPL within 12 months of the
child’s birth or adoption.

Flexible PPL days must be claimed within 24 months of the child’s birth
or adoption. See Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave
(PPL) days for more information.

They can only be paid for dates that the customer is eligible and that
are:

-   after the end of their PPL period (if they had one or would have had
    one had it not been rejected or cancelled i.e. due to returning to
    work etc)
-   in the future (up to the child’s second birthday or anniversary of
    adoption)
-   no more than 42 days in the past
-   they are not receiving PPL for another child

If a customer has not accessed all of their Flexible PPL days within 24
months, their claim for PPL will automatically cancel on the second
anniversary of the child’s birth or adoption.

Exceptional processing can apply to Flexible PPL days only in specific
circumstances.

Additional Primary Claimant override

Where a customer has met the PPL exceptional circumstances eligibility
and another person has previously been paid PPL for the child, a manual
override code of APC (Additional Primary Claimant) will need to be coded
by a Families Override Officer to enable payment. See the Process page
for details of how to process the override and subsequent action about
PPL flexible days.

Customer already paid NBS and NBU or FTB Part B for the child

Customers cannot be paid PPL and Newborn Supplement (NBS) / Newborn
Upfront Payment (NBU) for the same child. This means that if PPL is
subsequently granted for a child NBS/NBU was previously paid for the
child, an overpayment will be raised.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B cannot be paid to the customer or their
partner at the same time as PPL (including the PPL period and any
Flexible PPL days). If PPL is subsequently granted, any FTB Part B paid
to the customer or their partner for the same time will be raised as an
overpayment.

Customer already paid an income support payment (ISP)

PPL and DAP are treated as ordinary income for determining eligibility
and calculating the rate of ISP. If PPL or DAP are subsequently granted:

-   any ISP paid to the customer or their partner will be reassessed,
    and
-   they may incur an income support overpayment

See Raising ISP debts for customers granted PPL and DAP.

Using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) – creating a new claim in Customer First

The customer’s original claim for PPL/DAP cannot be regenerated. A new
PPL/DAP claim must be created in Assisted Customer Claims (ACC). The new
claim will use all of the same details provided by the customer in the
original claim. For more information on ACC, see Viewing and processing
online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

The new claim activity will have a keyword automatically attached. Once
a Service Officer has assessed the claim, and is satisfied the customer
meets the full PPL eligibility criteria, the claim will need to be
referred to a Families Override Officer for an override to be recorded.
If an override is not recorded, the claim will reject.

Social Online Application (SOA) claim – creating a new claim in Process Direct

The customer’s original claim for PPL/DAP cannot be regenerated in
Process Direct. A new PPL/DAP claim activity must be created using a
manual SOA shell in Process Direct. The new claim activity will not
contain any of the original claim information other than the customer’s
CRN, personal details and date of receipt (date of claim). The details
provided by the customer in their original claim need to be manually
entered within this SOA shell.

The new claim activity will have a keyword automatically attached. Once
a Service Officer has assessed the claim, and is satisfied the customer
meets the full PPL eligibility criteria, the claim will need to be
referred to a Families Override Officer for an override to be recorded.
If an override is not recorded, the claim will reject.

Recording an override

To maintain the quality of the override screen approval to the screens
is only available to limited staff. Staff who need access to this screen
must provide a business reason outlining why the resource is required.
This ensures there is no delay in the approval of this resource.

Families Override Officers will need to have access to allow authorised
updates to the override screens, this includes the Quality Management
Officer (QMO) who is allocated the activity for checking. See the
Resources page for the resource required.

Activities completed on the override screens (P1OV/P1FOV) screen may be
subject to quality checking. Where a claim with an override is selected
for a quality check in Process Direct, the staff member allocated the
activity for checking also needs to have the override resource.

Letters

PPL and DAP letters will automatically be inhibited as part of the new
claim activity. Letters related to overpayments of FTB or NBS/NBU will
not be inhibited and must be sent to the customer.

If appropriate, manually create and send a Q999 letter in Customer First
to the customer with information about the decision to grant the claim.

The Resources page contains Families Override contact details, and text
for the manual Q999 letter. It also contains an example of when to zero
off arrears after finalising a claim and the resource required to access
override screens.

Related links

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Secretary initiated review of decision

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Create a new debt record manually on the DMIS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
