
Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families 007-01010000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to follow when an individual who
is caring for a child, expecting a baby, or expecting a child to enter
their care first makes contact about claiming a payment.

On this Page:

Inviting an individual to claim

A person making contact about a payment should be invited to make a
claim for payment, even if their eligibility for that payment is in
doubt.

Payments for families

The following payments and benefits are available to eligible parents,
grandparents or guardians:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) fortnightly instalments or a lump sum for
    the previous financial year
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) payable at the end of the
    financial year. Note: SIFS is not payable to new claimants from 1
    July 2017, however existing recipients may be eligible if they meet
    the grandfathering provisions
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP) for a DOP child
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme payments (for an
    eligible student)
-   Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

[] Online claims: these payments can be claimed online except AIC and
DOP.

Specific payment information

Links to information on specific payments are listed below.

A combined claim can be lodged for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL). Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) must be claimed separately.

[] A single online claim can be submitted to claim any combination of
FTB, PPL and Child Care Subsidy (CCS). When claiming FTB for the current
year, FTB can also be claimed for the previous financial year.

An early claim can be lodged for PPL, FTB or DAP before a child's
expected date of birth or entrustment to care.

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child: customers who are not
eligible for PPL but are eligible for FTB Part A will be automatically
assessed for the Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU) for a newborn or adopted child. There is no separate claim
required for NBS/NBU.

Customer contacts about claiming payments for families

[] Offer the customer the option of claiming online. Note: to claim
online the customer must have an active Centrelink online account.

An Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can be completed with the customer and
a verbal signature declaration accepted in the following situations:

-   families in crisis who are experiencing difficulty in understanding
    or complying with claim requirements, or who need a speedy outcome
    to meet immediate financial needs
-   remote Indigenous customers who have language or literacy barriers
    affecting their capacity to use forms or online claims (transfer the
    customer to the Indigenous queue)
-   the customer is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online
    claim, or
-   a correspondence nominee is applying on behalf of their principal

Claimants who indicate they require an interpreter should not be
referred to claim online. Record the conversation and book an
appointment with an interpreter at the customer's local service centre.
Check Office Locator for preferred appointment type. If unable to book
due to language barriers, transfer the call to the Multilingual Phone
Service (MPS)

See Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Contents

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(CCS)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as a lump
sum for a previous year

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Initial contact by customers claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS)

Initial contact with customers claiming under the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Resumption of JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment,
Farm Household Allowance or Austudy after Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or
Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Online estimator options

Principal carer of a dependent child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
