
Manual intervention for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation 007-19022145

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process undertaken by specialist manual
intervention (MIV) staff into Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation
results. Reconciliation of CCS is mainly an automatic process. However,
in certain circumstances the reconciliation activity will be left as
started and allocated to CCS MIV staff so the outcome can be manually
checked before completion.

This document is not intended to provide assistance in identifying MIV
affected records. See Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
reconciliation outcome for these details.

Exception management

A pending CCS reconciliation will need review by CCS MIV staff if a:

-   provisional reconciliation balance is an overpayment of more than
    $10,000
-   provisional reconciliation balance is an underpayment of more than
    $10,000
-   reconciliation result relates to a customer or only CCS child who
    has become deceased

CCS reconciliation may also be placed on hold due to:

-   CCS Reconciliation - No Valid Address. These work items create where
    the customer’s address is not recorded on the system. An address
    update with customer confirmation is required before the work item
    can be actioned
-   If reconciliation occurs within 28 days of any CCS child (excluding
    the last CCS child) becoming deceased, any
    reconciliation/re-reconciliation/2DL letters are not sent.
    Reconciliation debts will be parked and arrears/top-ups/withholdings
    will be held. Reconciliation will complete automatically once the 28
    days bereavement period has ended and the appropriate letters will
    be sent
-   CCS Disaster Affected. These work items have been created where a
    CCS reconciliation or re-reconciliation results in new debt for
    customers impacted by a declared major disaster or emergency
-   Debt pause. From 4 August 2021, Services Australia paused all debt
    raising and recovery for customers residing in locked down Local
    Government Areas impacted by COVID-19
-   From 10 January 2022, debt raising activity will gradually
    recommence, including CCS reconciliation and re-reconciliation.
    However, debt recovery remains paused until 1 July 2022

Note: a new debt is where a customer has had no previous reconciliation
debt instances relating to the relevant CCS year.

These work items will display for a customer's reconciliation or
re-reconciliation result when:

-   the outcome is a new debt, and
-   the customer's principle place of residence is within an Local
    Government Area (LGA), declared affected by a natural disaster or
    emergency for at least 1 day within a prescribed period, or
-   the customer has been granted a disaster payment such as Australia
    Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) or Disaster Recovery
    Allowance (DRA)

The 'CCS Disaster Affected' work item is used to prevent these debts
from being automatically raised during periods when debt raising
activities are paused for customers who have been impacted by a declared
major disaster or emergency. These activities do not require staff
intervention and will not be allocated to staff for action but all staff
are able to complete them if a customer requests. For more information,
see Customer Enquires about CCS Reconciliation.

ICT intervention: These are to prevent CCS reconciliation in very
limited cases where ICT want to check the reconciliation outcome. These
will not be allocated to staff and will not require any staff
intervention.

Privacy warning

There are restrictions with regard to disclosure and confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) and CCS customers, for example, Privacy, Person Permitted to
Enquire (PPE) and implied authority.

Service Officers cannot discuss results of CCS reconciliation with a
child care service. Child care services should advise customers to
contact Services Australia directly. Under no circumstances should
Services Australia (including specialists e.g. Social Workers,
Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Advisers, Multicultural Service
Officers) have direct contact with service providers, nor is it the
responsibility of the agency to act as a liaison point between customers
and their providers.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

Related links

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation outcome

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) results for family assistance
customer mismatches

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Debt offsetting during family assistance reconciliation and lump sum
claim processing

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Undoing a death action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
