
Absences for Child Care Benefit (CCB) and JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA) 007-03060040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines when Child Care Benefit (CCB) and JET Child Care
fee assistance (JETCCFA) for approved care can be paid for a child when
a family is charged for care that their child does not attend.

On this Page:

Types of absences

CCB, CCR and JETTCCFA can be paid for allowable or approved additional
absences.

CCB, CCR and JETCCFA cannot be paid for unapproved or disregarded
absences. When calculating child care payments, these absences will be
deducted from the total fee for the child, for that week and the
customer will be assessed as ineligible for CCB for these absences.

If there is no eligibility for CCB then there is no eligibility for CCR
or JETCCFA. Where a customer receives CCB at zero rate and their child
has a disregarded or unapproved absence, they are not eligible for CCB
for the absence (even though they are zero rate customers) and therefore
are also not eligible for CCR and JETCCFA.

The Process page contains further information on viewing absences on a
customer’s record.

Allowable absences

Customers can be paid CCB and JETCCFA for up to 42 absence days for each
child for any reason each financial year. This applies across all
services the child attends, not for each service.

Public holidays are counted as an absence and are not payable as an
additional absence over the 42 day limit if the child would normally
have attended the service on that day (if it were not a public holiday)
and fees have been charged for that day for the child.

The family's relevant 24, 50 or over 50 weekly CCB eligible hour limit
still applies to allowable absence days.

Additional absences

Evidence is required for CCB, CCR and JETCCFA to be paid for absence
days above the limit. Customers will need to provide any supporting
documentation required to the child care service. The child care service
will decide whether the absence is approved. The child must have used
all of their 42 absence days before they can access additional absence
days.

Unapproved absences

When a customer has exceeded their eligible 42 absence day limit and no
further evidence is provided, it is deemed an 'unapproved absence'.

Disregarded absences

Disregarded absences are absences that are considered to have occurred
within the hours for which no CCF fee reduction is paid. For example,
child care service claimed 60 hours with 2 x 12 hour absences and the
customer is only entitled to 24 hours care. The absences are disregarded
as they are absorbed in the 36 hours for which no CCF fee reduction is
payable. No Child Care Rebate (CCR) is payable for fees paid for any
disregarded absences now or at the end of the financial year.

CCB and Child Care Rebate (CCR) are not payable for absence days either
before the first day a child physically attends or after the last day
the child physically attends a service, as an absence for CCB purposes
can only be attributed to on which care would otherwise have been
provided. Customers whose child is due to start at a child care service
or who is required to provide notification that their child is leaving a
service and does not send their child during that period will be liable
for full fees. Any absences submitted by the child care service will be
disregarded for the purpose of CCB and the customer will be liable for
full fees.

Occasional Care

Occasional Care absences are not assessed against the 42 day absence
limit. This is because of the nature of when Occasional Care is
provided.

Registered Care

Absences are not recorded for children in the care of Registered Carers
(RCP). However, an RCP can include any absences they have charged for in
the 'week of care' section of the Receipt for Registered Child Care
(FA031) issued to customers, for which CCB can be claimed.

Viewing child care attendance online

[]Customers registered online can view details of their weekly child
care attendance reported by CCMS services using the 'View Child Care
Details' option.

Staff can view details via:

-   Staff portal if the customer is registered online, and
-   Families Assistance > View Child Care Attendance

CCB reconciliation

Approved child care services record absences so that families receive
their correct CCB entitlement. Services include this information in
child care attendance details that are used to reconcile CCB.

Child care usage/attendance used to calculate the customer's correct CCB
entitlement for the relevant year can be viewed from the CCB Calculation
Period Assessment (CPAC) screen.

The service can be selected to display the absence dates and whether or
not CCB was paid for the absence. Services have no Customer Reference
Number (CRN) displayed.

The Resources page contains examples of absences and a table that
outlines requirements for each type of absence above the limit.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care and
registered care

Eligible hours For Child Care Benefit (CCB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
