
The Child Care Management System (CCMS) 007-03080010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines general information on the Child Care Management
System (CCMS). CCMS is a national child care computer system used to
simplify the administration of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved
care related payments. It has been in full operation since June 2009.

ASP child care information

Under CCMS, Approved Service Providers (ASP) provide child care
information via specialised software via the internet to the Department
of Education on a weekly/fortnightly basis. The Department of Education
sends this information to Services Australia for the calculation of:

-   eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care
-   Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
-   payment of Special Child Care Benefit (SCCB)
-   JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA)
-   Child Care Rebate

Services Australia returns these calculations to the Department of
Education to enable the Department of Education to then pay child care
fee reductions for these payments to the ASPs.

Claims for CCB

For Services Australia to receive CCMS data from Department of
Education, the customer must complete one of the following:

-   claim for CCB for approved care (CCF) for reduced fees
-   lump sum CCB claim for approved care

The customer must also advise their Approved Service Provider/s (ASP) of
their and their children's Customer Reference Numbers (CRN).

Claims for CCB are finalised without linking the ASP to the child's
record as CCMS services do not have a CRN to identify them within the
Centrelink system.

Payments are then made once the customer has advised their ASP of their
and their children's CRNs and the service includes this information (and
other details) on their attendance reports to Department of Education.

Child care availability

The Department of Education is also able to collect information from the
CCMS about the national supply and usage of child care which is used to
update the Child Care Availability System.

Previous system

From 1 July 2009, CCMS has replaced the Child Care Operator System
(COS). COS has been decommissioned so child care services will no longer
be able to lodge any claims relating to periods prior to transition to
CCMS.

COS attendance can be viewed on the customer's record by selecting the
child, selecting Child in Care Details (CICD) screen and then placing a
'U' next to the child care service with ASP displayed next to it. The
attendance will display on the Child Care Usage APP (CIUA) screen.

Enquiries from ASPs

Education is responsible for the resolution of enquiries from Approved
Service Providers (ASP) in relation to procedure, policy, approval of
services, system issues and payment of CCB fee reduction. If an ASP
contacts they are to be referred to the Department of Education.

The Department of Education CCMS Helpdesk will attempt to resolve all
enquiries, and can work with Services Australia CCMS Support Team if
there are eligibility issues that require investigation.

Enquiries from customers

Services Australia is primarily responsible for resolving customer
enquiries relating to CCB, Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB) and
Special Child Care Benefit (SCCB) and will continue to process new
claims and customer entitlement changes. If a customer queries CCMS
information they are to be referred back to the relevant ASP.

Viewing attendance details

Weekly attendance details reported by Approved Service Providers (ASP)
can be viewed by customers registered for online accounts using the []
View Child Care Details option (staff can access via the staff portal),
or on the customer's record in Customer First.

Related links

Customer queries Child Care Management System (CCMS) information

Assessing Child Care Benefit (CCB) claims for approved care and
registered care

JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
