
Rate explanation screens for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments 007-07100010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the rate explanation screens for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments calculate a
customer's rate. This document also shows how these screens allow easy
access to other screens for further information.

On this Page:

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

The FTB Rate Explanation (REXFTB) screen provides a summary of a
customer's FTB rate calculation, including FTB component rates, overall
effect of the income and maintenance income tests, and shows whether an
FTB payment choice is being applied

The FTB Part A Explanation (REXFTBA) screen shows how a customer's FTB
Part A rate has been calculated, including the separate effects of the
income test and maintenance income test. It also shows whether an FTB
payment choice is being applied

The FTB Part B Explanation (REXFTBB) screen shows how a customer's FTB
Part B rate has been calculated, including the effect of the income test
and other factors affecting the rate. It also shows whether an FTB
payment choice is being applied

The FTB Choice Explanation (REXFTBC) screen shows how a customer's FTB
payment choice has affected their rate for each FTB component, and also
shows their legislative rate of FTB

The FTB Income Explanation (REXFTBI) screen shows the adjusted taxable
income details used for each assessment period for the customer (and
their partner if applicable)

The FTB Maintenance Assessment Explanation (REXFTBM) screen shows
details used to work out FTB Part A, including the customer's total
annualised maintenance income, Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA), MIT
ceiling and maintenance income reduction

The FTB Income Support Payment Explanation (FTBISPX) screen provides
information relating to:

-   whether a customer is/was in receipt of an income support payment
    for the purposes of FTB Part A assessment
-   income used in the calculation of the secondary and/or primary
    earner income tests for FTB Part B

The FTB General Explanation (FTBGENX) screen provides information to
assist in explaining the customer’s instalment component rates for a
particular date of effect

The FTB Change Explanation (FTBCHGX) screen provides information to
assist with identifying what has changed in a customer’s FTB assessment
for a particular date of effect, and the assessment data immediately
prior to the rate change

When a child/case end is transferred by Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In the majority of cases, this will result in a decrease in the
customer's ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised
maintenance income can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment,
causing a further reduction to the customer's ongoing rate of FTB.

Note: this is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a
system problem, however it can lead to an unintended and unexpected
reduction to the customer's ongoing rate. Occurrences of this issue must
be reported to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for escalation to the Policy
(Advice) Assessment Team for a workaround to be considered. The
Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Baby Bonus (BBY)

Baby Bonus was paid for children born or coming into care as part of the
adoption process before 1 March 2014.

The Period Rate Explanation (REXBBY) screen:

-   shows how a customer's BBY entitlement was calculated, including the
    payment option, and the rejection/cancellation reason if applicable
-   shows if the BBY entitlement had been paid at the full rate or
    reduced rate
-   allows access to the Baby Bonus Payment Summary (BBS) screen to view
    further details for each child

Note: BBY was discontinued from 1 March 2014.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

The PPL Calculation Summary (P1RCS) screen shows the:

-   assessment results for a claim
-   PPL period start and end date
-   date of the last Flexible PPL day connected to the PPL period
-   first and last Flexible PPL day that is not connected to the PPL
    period

It also lists all the activities related to the claim, including
provisionally assessed activities and a summary of the outcomes from
those activities.

To view all claim details related to the select claim and activity:

In Process Direct

-   PPL Claim details (P1CLM) screen
-   Flexible PPL (P1FLX) screen

In Customer First

-   PPL Claim Details (P1RCD) screen

The PPL Period Calculation (P1RCI) screen, only available in Customer
First, shows the details related to the PPL period.

The Period Rate Explanation (REXPPL) screen shows a customer's basic
rate of entitlement and withholding amount.

The customer’s claimed Flexible Paid Parental Leave days including
paymaster, can be viewed

In Process Direct:

-   P1FLX screen
-   PPL Employer Details (P1EMP) screen

In Customer First:

-   Flexible PPL Calculation (P1RCF) screen

Note: the below screens can be accessed by the Paid parental Leave Claim
Summary in Customer First:

-   PPL Calculation Summary (P1RCS) screen
-   PPL Claim Details (P1RCD) screen
-   PPL Period Calculation (P1RCI) screen
-   Flexible PPL Calculation (P1RCF) screen

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

The Period Rate Explanation (REXDAP) screen shows a customer's basic
rate of entitlement and withholding amount.

Previous rate calculations

The rate calculation screens show the customer's current rate
calculation as well as previous rate calculations on separate pages.
Each separate calculation corresponds to an assessment activity
completed on the customer's record.

Daily/period view

The rate explanation (REX) screens in period view show the assessment
details taken into account in calculating the final fortnightly rate
within the period, which may cover one or more paydays. If there have
been multiple changes in income or rate during the period, only the
latest details are displayed.

The REX screens in daily view show the details of each change during a
period. The daily view will show the same information as the period
view, but all rates are converted to daily amounts.

Access to REX screens

The screens can be accessed directly, or from within an activity to view
how changes recorded in the activity will affect the customer's rate
once the activity is finalised.

The REX and Rate Component (RAC) screens are linked in Customer First so
that the assessor can swap between the details of a rate change, the
circumstances which caused that rate and the explanation of the rate for
any assessment line selected from the Rate Summary (RATS) screen.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Viewing child eligibility details on the Assessment Explanation (AX) and
Assessment Details (ASDT) screens

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
