
Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07060030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how mandatory continuous adjustment (MCA) applies
to a customer's ongoing fortnightly rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) if
a potential overpayment is identified due to revised income. This
reduces the risk of an overpayment being calculated during FTB
reconciliation after the end of the financial year.

On this Page:

Potential overpayment

If a potential overpayment is identified due to a revised income, the
customer's ongoing FTB rate will be automatically reduced. It will be
reduced by the daily overpayment rate (possibly to zero rate) for the
remainder of the financial year to offset the overpayment.

A potential overpayment may be identified when:

-   a customer revises their family income estimate (this includes
    automatic uplift)
-   estimated annual maintenance income is recalculated. This can occur
    when child support entitlement or disbursement data is transferred
    from the Child Support Master Program, or when recording actual
    maintenance income details

Qualification and circumstance debts are not taken into account under
MCA. Qualification and circumstance debts are raised when they are
identified and normal recovery arrangements made.

FTB payment choices, arrears and bereavement payments

FTB payment choices: If a customer chooses to defer part of their annual
FTB entitlement under a payment choice, FTB is still subject to MCA. The
customer's legislative rate of FTB, not the rate they are receiving, is
used to assess whether there is a notional overpayment.

FTB arrears payments may be withheld under MCA if they are for a period
a potential overpayment was identified and has not been recovered.

FTB bereavement payments are subject to MCA. The MCA deduction can apply
to ongoing instalments or the lump sum payment if the deceased child was
the only FTB child (otherwise it only applies to the instalment option).

Revising income estimate for income support claimants

If a customer claims an income support payment and MCA is in effect, it
may be beneficial for the customer to provide a revised estimate in
order to recalculate any amount withheld due to a continuous adjustment.
The estimate:

-   will not be used in the assessment of their FTB for a single income
    support customer
-   can be accepted to recalculate the amount of payment reduction due
    to MCA as a result of the change in income
-   must be reasonable

The MCA calculation does not include Part A or Part B supplements or
Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS). These are only payable after the
end of the financial year to eligible families.

Switching MCA deduction off

The MCA assessment process can only be manually switched off if it has
not been correctly applied to the customer's rate of FTB. In most cases,
the MCA will be applied correctly and cannot be switched off. All cases
must be investigated thoroughly; this includes referring to the NNU page
and Operational Messages for system advice. If the system is not working
correctly and MCA has been incorrectly applied, Service Officers must
refer to mySupport for investigation.

There are no hardship provisions if the MCA has been applied correctly.
Cases where the customer is requesting MCA be switched off due to
financial hardship should not be referred to mySupport or the Families
and Childcare Helpdesk.

The following exceptions apply:

-   Incorrect coding has caused MCA to apply. For example, an extra zero
    was added to an income estimate making the estimate $100,000 rather
    then $10 000; and a DOC is on the record, stating it was a coding
    error
-   When a child or case end is transferred by Child Support for a child
    support collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
    retrospectively changes the case to private Collect and applies the
    full maintenance entitlement amount

These cases should be referred to the Families and Childcare Level 2
Policy Helpdesk for approval to have the MCA switched off.

Only Families Override Contact officers granted specific Security Access
Management System (SAMS) access can perform this task after receiving
approval from the Families and Childcare Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

The Family Assistance Guide 4.3.1.30 contains an example of an
adjustment MCA calculation. See Policy located on the References page.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, the Families and
Childcare Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query Form, the Access Support
Centre homepage and Families Override contact details.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
