
'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care 007-02050020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the 'with child' rate of payment
for customers receiving certain social security and Farm Household
Allowance payments where the customer has a child in their care but is
not considered the principal carer of the child. Please note that many
of these provisions relate to single customers only.

'With child' rate of benefit

The 'with child' rate of benefit is available to single customers in
receipt of a social security benefit. Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy
also have a 'partnered with child' rate. The following payments have a
higher rate of basic benefit available where a customer has a dependent
child, including shared care of a dependent child:

-   Austudy
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Each person caring for the child is advised in writing of the shared
care assessment, whether or not they are receiving a social security
payment.

The shared care arrangements need to be recorded separately for social
security payments and family assistance.

Once the shared care assessment has been made, a letter will be sent to
each carer confirming the details of the shared care assessment whether
or not carers are claiming or receiving a social security payment

For Parenting Payment (PP) customers, see Assessment of dependent
children, additional income free area and child income under social
security law.

Child is a dependent child of the customer

If the dependent child definition is met, the 'with child' rate may be
paid to the customer. This means that one of the following would need to
be met:

-   the customer has legal responsibility for the child, or
-   the child is not a dependent child of another person with legal
    responsibility and the child is wholly or substantially in the
    customer's care

Austudy customers do not have a percentage applied regarding shared care
but rely on the definition of dependent child. The requirements that
must be satisfied in relation to care arrangements are contained in
section 5(2) of the Social Security Act 1991; this does not require a
specific level or percentage of care, although the claimant must provide
at least some care if they are legally responsible for the child, whole
or substantial care if they are not.

For SpB the customer needs to have at least 30% care of a child to be
paid the 'with child' rate.

Family assistance

Customers can also claim family assistance for child/ren in their care.
If the customer is not in receipt of FTB, issue a Q888 inviting the
customer to claim Family Tax Benefit (FTB). See Resources page for
standard text. Customers caring for a child from a previous relationship
may need to take action to obtain child support to receive more than the
base rate of FTB Part A for a child. Customers may claim Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) to help with the costs of child care if they are eligible.

Child is not a dependent child of the customer

There are two ways in which a customer can be paid the 'with child' rate
even though the dependent child definition is not met. These are
described below.

Young person aged 16-17 years receiving benefit

Single customers receiving JSP (over 18) may be paid the 'with child'
rate if they are caring for a young person aged 16-17 who would be
considered a dependent child of the customer except that the young
person receives a social security benefit (or the child receives
Disability Support Pension for JSP customers).

Customer has at least 14% care of a child aged under 16 years

Single customers receiving JSP or YA (job seeker) may be paid the 'with
child' (higher) rate if they have at least 14% care of a child under 16,
even though the dependent child definition is not met due to the level
of care. Other dependent child requirements must be met.

The customer must have either legal responsibility (alone or jointly
with another person) for the day to day care, welfare and development of
a child or a family law order or parenting plan which states the child
is to supposed to live with the customer.

The customer needs to demonstrate that:

-   they have at least 14% care of the child in the current instalment
    period (one night per week during the fortnight), or
-   a pattern of care shows they have at least 14% care of the child
    over either a 14 or 28 day period. This may include a past or future
    period but should include at least part of the current instalment
    period

For YA (jobseeker) customers to qualify for the 'with child' rate, they
cannot be undertaking full-time study and must be assessed as being
independent and not living in the parental home.

Related links

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Death of a dependent child of a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) dependent customer

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Principal carer of a dependent child

Shared care for social security payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
