-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document describes eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Eligibility requirements

About the customer

A customer will be eligible for the subsidy if they or their partner
meet all of the following requirements:

-   meet the residence requirements
-   have a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child or a regular care child (a
    child is not eligible if they receive a disqualifying payment)
-   the CCS has not been claimed by another person for the same session
    of care, and
-   be liable to pay child care fees for the child

About the child

The child must meet all of the following requirements:

-   13 years of age or under
-   not in secondary school or has an exemption
-   attends an approved child care service, and
-   meets immunisation requirements or has an exemption

About the session of care

A customer is not eligible for a session of care if:

it is part of a compulsory education program

it is outside Australia, or

one of the following reasons applies:

-   care is provided aboard a transport vehicle, including on a bus for
    example (unless the transport is incidental to the session of care)
-   care is provided in domestic living arrangement such as the child’s
    own home or where the parent remains present
-   the individual providing the session of care is required to hold a
    working with children card, but does not at the time the session of
    care is provided
-   the child attends school (including home school or distance
    education program) during any part of the session

CCS and ACCS are not payable for children attending a Family Day Care
(FDC) service on the same day their parent /guardian is working as a FDC
child care provider (also known as a FDC educator). There are exceptions
in some circumstances. The Resources page has an example of how these
rules apply.

If it is suspected that a customer’s subsidy entitlements may be
affected by these rules, CCS is not to be cancelled. It could be the
service (in particular the FDC service or educator) who is acting
fraudulently and not the customer.

If the Service Officer suspects fraudulent activity, see Report
Suspected Fraud and Corruption.

Eligibility is assessed at the time the session of care is provided.

Liability for child care fees

An individual's liability to pay for child care fees is established when
the child is enrolled at child care and the provider and an individual
enter into a Complying Written Agreement (CWA). Details of the
arrangements in the enrolment notice, including who is liable to pay the
fees is submitted to the agency, which must then be confirmed by the
customer. Customers should be advised the name of the parent making the
CCS claim must match the name of the parent that enters into the CWA.
This is to ensure customers receive the correct CCS entitlement.

Foster carers who are deemed liable to pay for the child care fees by
the child care service, can claim CCS (that is, the foster carer pays
the child care fees and the receipts are in the name of the foster
carer). The relevant state authority may pay the remaining gap in the
fees. Any re-imbursement of fees from the relevant state authority does
not change the foster carer's liability in these cases.

Where the relevant state authority pays all the child care fees for the
child care provided, as there is no liability for the child care fees by
the foster carer, and therefore the foster carer is not eligible for
CCS.

Child age exemptions

To be granted a school status and/or age exemption it must be
unreasonable for the child to be left alone, and a person aged 18 or
above is not able to provide the necessary care.

School status exemptions:

-   Children 13 years and under attending secondary school, and
-   Children 13 years and under with a disability attending secondary
    school

Age and school status exemption:

-   Children 14 to 18 years with a disability attending secondary school

School status exemption

The customer must provide a Commonwealth statutory declaration stating:

-   why it is unreasonable for the child to be left unsupervised, and
-   confirming a suitable adult is not available to provide the
    necessary care

The Resources page has a link to the form.

Age and school status exemption

An individual may be eligible for CCS if their child:

-   is a National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participant
-   has a permanent condition but is not an NDIS participant, or
-   has a non-permanent condition or is undergoing an assessment for a
    specified condition but is not an NDIS participant

See also Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child
Care Subsidy (CCS).

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Before a customer can be assessed for ACCS, they must first be eligible
for CCS.

Multiple Child Subsidy (MCS)

To be eligible to Higher CCS (Multiple Child Subsidy (MCS)) a customer
must:

-   be CCS eligible
-   have 2 or more children aged 5 or under, and
-   have entitlement to CCS of more than 0%

For more information about MCS entitlement, see Entitlement for Child
Care Subsidy.

Assistance for grandparents caring for children

An eligible grandparent with 65% or more care of a grandchild may be
eligible for ACCS (Grandparent) and/or a waiver of the Activity Test for
Child Care Subsidy.

See also Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) or Help for
grandparents caring for children.

Salary sacrificing child care costs and CCS

Customers will only be eligible for CCS if they are liable for child
care fees and they have entered into a CWA with their child care
service. Where salary sacrificing results in an employer being liable
for child care fees, an Organisation Arrangement will be made with the
employer and the customer is not eligible for CCS.

The customer will need to clarify this with their employer if they are
unsure. Services Australia is not responsible for determining who has
legal liability for the child care fees.

Third party responsible for child care costs

This situation occurs where a child care arrangement is made between a
third party (such as an employer or third party agency) and a child care
service, AND the third party is liable for all or part of the fees.

The child care service must work out who is liable for the fees based on
who signs the CWA and who signs any relevant third party agreement. This
is a business decision for the child care service in accordance with
their business practices. If a third party is liable to pay 100% of the
child care fees, the individual is not eligible for CCS.

Content

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Related links

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Help for grandparents caring for children

In Home Care (IHC) for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
