[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and coding of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims. A
claim for FTB can include assessment of Newborn Supplement (NBS) and
Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) for a newborn or adopted child if the
customer is not claiming PPL or is not eligible for PPL.

Online or paper claim

[] Claims for FTB, PPL and DAP should be made online, or by lodging the
appropriate paper claim form. Extra assistance may be available to help
remote Indigenous customers claiming FTB/PPL/DAP.

Note: claims should always be coded and processed using the correct date
of receipt. This date can sometimes differ from the 'capture date' used
to confirm the date of a claim which has been scanned.

General information about claims

Customers may contact about a claim that was previously deemed not
effective.

[] Claims for PPL and FTB can be made at the same time. A single online
claim can be made to claim FTB for the current and previous financial
years. DAP must be lodged as a standalone claim.

Customers can claim PPL and FTB, or just FTB and have their entitlement
to NBS and NBU automatically assessed with their FTB claim. Customers
may change their initial claim choice, PPL can be claimed even after NBS
has been paid with FTB.

For children born or entering care on or after 1 October 2016, PPL and
DAP will be counted as ordinary income for calculating the rate of
income support payments.

Claims for newborn children who have not yet been named are to be
accepted, but may indicate that the customer has not applied to register
the child's birth. When linking the child and customer records the
child's given name is to be listed as 'Newborn' and a chosen name
followed up.

Viewing and processing claims

Service Officers can view claims in both Process Direct and Customer
First.

Process Direct

View and process claims via Inbox. See Process Direct navigation, common
screens and functions.

Customer First

View and process claims via Workspace using Search Online Claims under
the Claims Online heading.

Note: PPL, DAP and combined claims that were started before 20 June 2015
need to be viewed and finalised using the Staff Process Claim (SPC)
workflow.

Potential entitlement to another Centrelink payment

If potential entitlement to another Centrelink payment (for example,
Parenting Payment) is determined, discuss in person or send a Q999
letter in Customer First. The Resources page contains suggested Q999
text.

If a potential entitlement to ABSTUDY School Term Allowance is
identified:

-   transfer the customer to ABSTUDY to make a claim over the phone (the
    Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website),
    or
-   send a Q999 letter in Customer First

If an entitlement to Double Orphan Pension (DOP) is recognised, issue
the customer a Claim for Double Orphan Pension (SC003)

The Resources page contains suggested Q999 text and a link to the
Services Australia website.

Contents

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Exception processing of Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Manual processing of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Partner of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer claims family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Processing proof of a child's birth

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACOs)

Progress of claim - Families claims

Reassessment of Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) claims

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Recording ex-partner details

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rejecting a family assistance claim

Relationship Status for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rent Assistance (RA) processing in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Related links

Checking the status of an early claim for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave (PPL)

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family assistance customer becomes partnered

Foreign income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Process Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008)

Processing a claim to receive the family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme entitlement of a deceased person

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Verification of separation

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
