
Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-02040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the initial contact or change of care
arrangements for all customers. All types of care arrangements need to
be assessed and coded for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Customer not linked to child

Separate procedures apply if the customer:

-   wants to claim for a newborn or adopted child
-   wants to claim for a child entrusted to care as part of the process
    of adoption or surrogacy
-   is not FTB current and wants to claim FTB instalments for the child
-   is FTB current for another child and there has been an increase in
    care to 14% or more for the child not linked to the customer;
    reassess FTB for the additional child entering care

Mutual Centrelink and Child Support customers

A mutual customer to both Centrelink and Child Support can notify either
program of changes to their care arrangements for a child. Both programs
will use the same rules to make a care determination.

The program receiving the information will make the care determination
and the care information will be transferred to the other program.

For further information about alignment of care determinations between
Child Support and Centrelink mutual customers, see Transfer of
information between Centrelink and Child Support.

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

A separate procedure outlines shared care entitlements for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

Customer advises care arrangements

When a customer contacts to advise care arrangements for a child (or to
request a reassessment of their level of care under post July 2010
rules), preliminary assessment details need to be recorded for family
assistance and child support assessments to commence. The Service
Officer should check and record the care status and assessment
information (where required).

If there has been:

-   a decrease in the level of shared care provided, the record can be
    updated with the relevant information
-   an increase in the level of shared care provided, the record can be
    updated if the customer has supplied a Details of your child's care
    arrangements form (FA012) signed by both parties, or advised
    verbally about the increase in care and the losing carer's record
    has previously been documented advising of the change in shared care

Separated under one roof and providing care arrangements

If a customer is advising they are separated under one roof, always ask
the Family and Domestic Violence (FDV) Risk Identification Question
before issuing a Details of your child's care arrangements (FA012) and
Relationship Details - Separated under one roof (SS293):

Are you, or has anyone else been, concerned about your or your family's
safety?

If yes, explore further as per the FDV Risk Identification and Referral
Model (RIRM) to clarify the customer's circumstances. Consider if it is
appropriate to issue the FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In
some instances where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the
customer's safety at risk.

If no, advise the customer of the forms that will issue to their
ex-partner and ask the additional question: Is there any other reason we
shouldn't send these forms to your ex-partner to confirm your
separation?

-   If yes, explore further as per the FDV RIRM to clarify the
    customer's circumstances. Consider if it is appropriate to issue the
    FA012 and SS293 to the customer's ex-partner. In some instances
    where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the customer's
    safety at risk
-   If no, issue the forms

The Resources page contains information about a shared care system
problem (P24845) that occurs when a parent has transferred their FTB to
their current partner (step-parent), information about the letters
produced with the Child - Change in Care Arrangements script, and links
to the Services Australia Website, relevant forms and publications.

Related links

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Review of care decisions

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Shared care for social security payments

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Waiver of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) shared care entitlement

Child enters customer's care/custody

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Principal carer of a dependent child

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
