
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to view details of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim
assessment, and annual Child Care Rebate (CCR) calculation on a
customer's record. All CCB/CCR references relate to financial years
prior to 2018/2019.

Status and calculation details

The family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens enable
Service Officers to view the status and calculation details of:

-   reconciliation of FTB and CCB for a financial year
-   FTB or CCB lump sum claim for a previous financial year
-   annual CCR calculation after CCB reconciliation/CCB lump sum claim
    has been finalised for the relevant financial year

Reconciliation screens

For reconciliation, the screens show the difference between the amount
the customer was paid during the year based on their estimated income
and their actual FTB or CCB entitlement worked out using their actual
income and changes in circumstances during the year. If details have
changed since reconciliation, the screens will show the difference
between the latest reconciliation and the previous reconciliation
result.

For lump sum claims, the screens show how a customer's FTB or CCB lump
sum entitlement was calculated. If details have changed since the claim
was finalised, the screens will show the difference between the latest
calculation and the previous calculation.

The screens are accessed from the FAO Reconciliation and Claim Summary
(FRCS) screen. FTB reconciliation and lump sum claim details can be
viewed on this screen.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation

CCS is reconciled in Process Direct. For information, see Reconciliation
of Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Contents

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Manual intervention screens

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Related links

Customer enquires about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump
sum claim

Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Reassessment of Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
