
Enquiries about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim 007-11010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to check the progress or result of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or FTB lump sum claim as a result of
contact from the FTB customer.

Answering enquiries about FTB reconciliation or lump sum claim outcome

When an FTB customer enquires about a FTB reconciliation or lump sum
claim outcome:

Check their record to view the status of FTB reconciliation/lump sum
claim for the relevant financial year

If FTB reconciliation has not occurred or the lump sum claim has not
been finalised, discuss what information is still required or why
reconciliation is delayed

If FTB reconciliation has occurred or the lump sum claim finalised,
discuss:

-   the outcome, including Part A and Part B supplements and
    grandfathering provisions for Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)
    entitlement if applicable,
-   details of any top-up payment or overpayment calculated, and
-   any amounts used to offset a family assistance debt
    From 10 June 2019, FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim amounts
    and instalment arrears can be used to recover any family assistance,
    social security, student assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
    payment debts. This will occur even if the customer has a current
    payment arrangement. Previously, FTB amounts could only be used to
    recover family assistance debts.

If their details have changed for the relevant financial year they may
need to update their income estimate or advise they or their partner are
not required to lodge a tax return for the relevant financial year.
Update details on their record. This may trigger FTB reconciliation

If they or their partner returned to work during the relevant financial
year, check if return to work details need to be recorded or updated

From the 2016-17 financial year, FTB Part A supplement is subject to an
income limit. If a family's adjusted taxable income (ATI) is more than
the income limit for the relevant income year, the FTB Part A supplement
for that year will be nil. There are no exemptions from the income test.
Income support payment customers are subject to the income limit.

SIFS is not payable to new customers for 2017-18 and later financial
years. Grandfathering provisions apply to existing customers.

Additionally, the following requirements must be met by 30 June of the
lodgement year to receive full annual FTB entitlement (unless a special
circumstances extension has been granted):

-   income lodgement requirements for financial years 2012-13 onwards
-   immunisation requirements for FTB Part A supplement for financial
    years 2012-13 to 2017-18
-   Healthy Start for School requirements (if applicable) for a child
    turning 4 between 2011-12 and 2017-18

For the 2011-12 financial year or earlier years, the allowable period
was the end of the extended lodgement year.

Immunisation requirements

From 1 July 2018 onwards, FTB immunisation requirements are applied when
determining the rate of FTB Part A payable for a child.

For FTB lump sum claims, the child’s immunisation status is checked when
the claim is determined. If the child’s record has not been linked with
the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR), the FTB lump sum claim will
remain pending until the AIR link is attempted.

For FTB instalment claims from 1 July 2018, FTB end of year
reconciliation may be delayed if a child is serving an FTB immunisation
grace period due to the child not meeting immunisation requirements at
the end of the financial year. FTB reconciliation will not occur until
the child meets immunisation requirements, or the FTB immunisation grace
period ends, whichever occurs first.

See FTB immunisation requirements.

Shared care percentage system issues

There are 2 system issues that may impact the shared care percentage:

-   P24845 - shared care is not being correctly applied when a child is
    in the care of a parent who has transferred their FTB to their
    current partner (step parent). For more information, see
    Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family
    Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   PM69793/PM72350 - resulted in shared care percentages being
    incorrectly applied in some cases, causing incorrect
    re-reconciliation debts and arrears. For more information, see
    Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due
    to shared care

Related links

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information not received for family
assistance reconciliation or lump sum claim

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and the reconciliation
process

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Customer enquires about reconciliation overpayment

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
