-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers or their partners obtain a
Tax File Number (TFN) to meet requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP).

Partner TFN exemption

Family assistance legislation does not allow a customer an exemption
from providing their TFN under any circumstances. However, in limited
circumstances a customer may be exempted from providing their partner's
TFN details.

Urgent TFN process

There is a process to provide a 6 week exemption period for TFNs for
family assistance customers experiencing an urgent or extreme
circumstance.

This provision only applies where the customer has:

-   immediate financial needs associated with the birth of a baby (under
    6 months old) or a child coming into care
-   unanticipated financial needs such as medical costs or costs
    associated with an emergency, or
-   a community disaster where a customer is experiencing hardship as
    the local community is affected by an emergency such as a flood,
    bushfire or pandemic

Note: cases can only be referred to the Families and Childcare Level 2
Policy Helpdesk via the online referral form when these specific extreme
or urgent circumstances criteria are met. The Helpdesk cannot provide
approval over the phone. The online enquiry form must be lodged.

Customers not experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance

The Process page contains steps to follow for a customer who is not
experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance.

If the customer (or their partner) does not have a TFN or cannot access
their TFN, they can authorise Centrelink to request the required TFN
details from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) by completing a:

-   Tax file number - application or enquiry for an individual (NAT1432)
-   Tax file number - application or enquiry for an Aboriginal or Torres
    Strait Islander (NAT1589), or
-   Tax file number - application or enquiry for individuals living
    outside Australia (NAT2628)

The NAT2628 is also the appropriate form to be completed for
non-residents of Australia for taxation purposes either residing in
Australia or not, who are the partner of a FTB claimant or become the
partner of a FTB current customer. This form is also relevant for a
non-resident to apply for a TFN who has a visa not permitting them to
work in Australia.

Newly arrived refugees can authorise Centrelink to obtain a TFN online.

The NAT 1589 is an application form for Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islanders. This form allows the customer to authorise the ATO to provide
their TFN to Centrelink.

The NAT1432 outlines permanent migrants or temporary visitors to
Australia can apply for a TFN online if they are:

-   a working holiday maker
-   a New Zealander and automatically granted a visa on arrival
-   an overseas student and their visa has been amended to allow them to
    work
-   a person with a valid visa allowing them to stay in Australia
    indefinitely, or
-   a person with a business visa

TFN Identity Confirmation documents

If the customer or partner has never previously provided them, original
Identification documents need to be sighted and copied when the TFN
application is lodged. Acceptable identity documents for TFNs are listed
on the above forms.

Service Officer action when TFN application is received

The Service Officer needs to:

-   sight, scan and return original proof of identify documents provided
-   complete the OFFICE USE ONLY section and note on the form the TFN is
    needed for FTB/CCB
-   ensure the TFN application is completed correctly and in full, is
    completed in a black or blue pen, and is legible
-   if the customer has selected 'Yes' to authorise the ATO to provide
    Centrelink their TFN, check the CRN has been included
-   have the form checked by a Team Leader or Manager (APS 5 or above)
    to ensure details are correct and complete before posting to the
    ATO. Incomplete referrals will be returned to the originating
    Service Officer
-   scan the application and record details on the customer's record
-   post original application to the ATO

The ATO will advise the TFN within 28 days.

The Resources page contains contact details for the ATO and Families
Override Contacts, links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online enquiry
form and the tax file number application forms.

Related links

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Tax File Number (TFN) for ABSTUDY

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer

Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance

Tax File Number (TFN) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Employment Separation Certificate (SU1)

Request to reassess a rejected claim

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) override for family assistance
customers experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
