-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains what to do when proof of a child's birth is
scanned to a customer's record.

Proof of a child's birth

Customers may provide proof of birth for a child:

for a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme claim (including
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP). Note: DAP is not
payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023. Fathers
and partners will need to claim PPL)

to enrol them in:

-   Medicare
-   Medicare Safety Net
-   My Health Record, and
-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Proof of a child's birth can include:

Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) from the hospital or midwife

Electronic Proof of Birth (EPoB) provided by participating hospitals of
the Newborn Enrolment Trial

Other acceptable proof of birth for a child to support a:

-   claim for payment or
-   Medicare Enrolment Application

[] A scanned image of just the Doctor/Midwife - Proof of Birth
declaration on the back page of the FA081. This documentation must be
lodged in conjunction with:

-   the 'Add newborn child' service online or the 'Add child' service
    via the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, or
-   a claim for payment with the child's details and birth registration
    declaration. When lodged with the online claim or 'Add newborn
    workflow, this is acceptable proof of birth

[] Customers may use the Upload documents service online to upload proof
of birth. If the customer has not used the 'Add newborn child' or 'Add
child' service and has lodged a pre-claim the FA081 must be:

-   complete,
-   signed, and
-   uploaded in full

[] Electronic Proof of Birth (EPoB) provided by participating hospitals
as part of the Newborn Enrolment Trial.

Parents must confirm child information through the Add Newborn child
service online or via the Add child service in the Express Plus mobile
app to utilise the EPoB as valid proof of birth.

Once a customer has confirmed the EPoB information through the Add
newborn child service, these activities will be allocated to pilot staff
and the EPoB can be used:

-   to create a child record
-   as proof of birth of a child if the customer has lodged a pre-birth
    claim for FTB and/or PPL
-   complete Medicare enrolment and register child for a My Health
    Record

Note: in most cases, a child record is automatically created from the
EPoB information. The system completes detailed searches before creating
child records. Make sure appropriate searches are completed before
creating any new child records.

See Newborn Enrolment Trial for more information about the trial and how
to help customers with their enquiries.

Customers who are not using the online channels and are lodging the
FA081 must lodge a complete and signed FA081.

Despite what the customer states on the form, Centrelink and Medicare
can use this proof of birth. The Resources page contains examples.

Add newborn child/Add child services

A Customer who has previously finalised their pre-birth claim with a
status of assessed and pending proof of birth will be able to access
these services. The option will be available for a customer who has any
of the following service reasons:

-   FTB/PND-POB (may not display on the benefit status if FTB/CUR)
-   FTB/PND-POP (may not display on the benefit status if FTB/CUR)
-   PPL/ASS-PCB

Once processing of the pre-birth claim is completed, an Add newborn
child task is created in online services and an Add child task in the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile App. Where the customer and their partner
both lodge pre-birth claims for FTB and/or PPL, they will both receive
one of these tasks.

Process when proof of birth received and completed the 'Add newborn child' service online

If the customer (or their partner):

has not yet claimed payments, advise them of their potential entitlement
and how to make a claim

already has lodged a pre-birth claim that has been assessed pending
proof of birth, their claim can be finalised if they:

-   have provided proof of birth, or
-   the 'Add child' service via the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app,
    or
-   completed the FA081 in full (the 'Add newborn child' service is not
    available for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims)

When a Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) is scanned to the customer's
record, a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is generated. This
SOA activity contains no information apart from the Customer Reference
Number (CRN), personal details and the receipt date (date of claim).

-   Relevant information needs to be manually updated within the Work
    Item using information from the scanned form and associated
    documentation
-   Where a paper FA081 did not create a SOA activity, a SOA shell must
    be manually created via the Process Direct Landing page

Activities must be coded and processed using the correct date of receipt
(DOR). The DOR is the first date the customer's FA081 was received. The
DOR can sometimes differ from the 'capture date'. Staff can confirm the
correct date in Documents in Process Direct. This screen displays the
'date of receipt' and 'capture date'.

A letter from an agency confirming proof of birth for a foster care
child is not proof of birth. It can be proof of a change in care.

While the agency generally collects gender, for newborn children sex is
collected at birth with the options of Male or Female. Staff can record
this on the gender field. Customers can request a change of gender for a
newborn child; see Updating gender details on customer records.

Validation of serial numbers

The Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) and Claim for Bereavement Payment
(FA008) include a unique serial number. This helps Services Australia to
detect potential fraud.

The customer records the serial number online. A data load error occurs
if the serial number is:

-   duplicate
-   invalid, or
-   outside issued number range

Check or record the serial number on the Change Child (CCH) screen.

Cross check the serial numbers between the CCH screen and the form. If
the number on the CCH screen is:

-   incorrect, enter the correct number. If this number does not return
    an error message, continue processing
-   correct but the error remains on the CCH screen, Service Officers
    cannot process the claim. Refer the Customer Reference Number (CRN)
    to the Families and Child Care - Business Process Branch. Mark it
    'URGENT'

Note: the serial number is not required to be coded on the multiple
child CRN created due to a surrogacy/adoption arrangement.

Related links

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Partner of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer claims family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Newborn Enrolment Trial – Birth of a Child Pilot

Updating gender details on customer records

My Health Record - children/dependants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
