-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

There are two methods used to work out the rate of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A, depending on whether the family's adjusted taxable income
(ATI) is above or below the Part A higher income free area (HIFA). This
document outlines how the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A is
calculated using Method 2.

Method 2

Method 2 is used to calculate a person's rate of FTB Part A when their
family's ATI is above the Part A higher income free area (HIFA). See
Part A higher income free area for the amount of the HIFA.

The maximum rate payable under Method 2 is the base rate which can
include:

-   the base FTB Part A child rate for each child
-   Energy Supplement Part A at base rate where person is grandfathered
    (if shared care, multiply by shared care percentage)
-   Large Family Supplement (LFS) if entitled. Note: LFS is not payable
    from 1 July 2016
-   Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA) if entitled
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS) if entitled
-   Part A supplement. Note: Part A supplement is not included from 1
    July 2016 onwards

Income test

When family income exceeds the higher income free area (HIFA), the
system automatically applies the most favourable outcome for the
customer by calculating the FTB Part A entitlement using:

-   the Method 2 FTB Part A rate calculation and
-   an above HIFA Method 1 FTB Part A rate calculation

Method 2 FTB Part A rate calculation

The Method 2 FTB Part A rate calculation reduces the base rate of FTB
Part A by 30 cents in the dollar of ATI above the FTB Part A higher
income free area until a nil payment is reached.

Above HIFA Method 1 FTB Part A rate calculation

Prior to 1 July 2019, the above HIFA Method 1 FTB Part A rate
calculation reduced the customer's maximum rate by 20 cents in the
dollar above the lower income free area and this applied up to and
including any income above the higher income free area until a nil
payment rate is reached.

From 1 July 2019, the above HIFA Method 1 FTB Part A rate calculation
reduces the customer’s maximum rate by 20 cents in the dollar above the
lower income free area up to and including the Part A higher income free
area, then 30 cents in the dollar above the Part A higher income free
area until a nil payment rate is reached. To balance the impact of
increasing the taper rate for some families with higher incomes, a
one-off increase to the HIFA applies from 1 July 2019. See Rates and
Thresholds.

The References page contains a link to historical rates.

The Resources page contains examples of working out a person's FTB Part
A rate using Method 2.

Related links

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1)

Online estimator options

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Rates and Thresholds

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B Supplements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
