-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps Service Officers must take when a
customer claims both Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and an income support
payment.

Effect of income support payment entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Income support payment current customers who are eligible for FTB are to
claim FTB as instalments. FTB current customers have access to FTB
payment choices to reduce the risk of overpayment due to changes in
their circumstances during the financial year.

FTB customers may be exempt from the income test for FTB Part A while
the customer or their partner are current on income support payment.
Exception to this is during employment income nil rate periods (CZR),
waiting periods or periods where the pension status is current zero rate
(CZR) for reason Home Equity Access Scheme (PLS). During these periods
the FTB rate is based on the family's income estimate.

The FTB Part B income test applies to all partnered income support
payment customers eligible for FTB Part B. The FTB Part B income test
does not apply to single income support payment customers. The Part B
primary earner income limit does not apply when the customer or their
partner receives an income support payment.

Effect of income support entitlement on FTB contains more information.

Income support payments must be included as taxable income or tax-free
pension/benefit in a family's adjusted taxable income.

The FTB rate may be automatically adjusted if the customer or their
partner begins or ceases to receive an income support payment.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment processing priorities

If the customer is claiming both FTB and an income support payment,
there is no requirement for FTB to be assessed before their income
support payment new claim can be finalised.

If the FTB claimant or their partner has also lodged a claim for an
income support payment that has not been finalised, where practical the
income support payment new claim should be assessed first. An exception
to this is if a care determination is required, and the Service Officer
is not suitably trained to make the determination.

Care assessment referrals

An Assessment of Care Arrangements referral must be sent using the
referral option in Process Direct by claim processing staff not trained
in undertaking care assessments if:

-   a ‘Details of your child’s care arrangements’ (FA012) form has been
    requested and returned as part of a Low Income Health Care Card
    (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) or Commonwealth Seniors
    Health Card (CSHC) claim, or
-   the customer has indicated in their income support payment claim
    that there has been a change of care or shared care, and a care
    determination has not yet been made

Note: the referral must not be used for a newborn child where the
Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) has been received. Service Officers
can update the new child’s details when processing the income support
payment claim.

Where an Assessment of Care Arrangements is required, the assessment
must be completed before the claim can be finalised. When a referral is
required, staff using Process Direct select the referral type Assessment
of Care Arrangements, which will generate a work item
(ZCRF_AOCA_REFERRAL).

The Assessment of Care Arrangements work item will be allocated to
appropriately trained Families staff for action.

Reindexing cancelled families claims

Families claims including FTB, Paid Parental Leave (PPL), Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP) and combined FTB/PPL claims that have been cancelled
must be reindexed. This includes where the activity was cancelled to
allow another claim to be processed in Process Direct.

For more information about reindexing families claims, see
Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments.

The Resources page contains Q888 approved letter text.

Related links

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Child enters customer's care/custody

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
