
Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) 007-05020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Australian residence requirements for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP). It also explains how to record the residence details for a new
claim in Process Direct and Customer First.

Residence requirements for FTB, PPL and DAP

To be eligible for FTB, PPL or DAP, a customer must be residing in
Australia and satisfy one of the following:

-   have Australian citizenship
-   hold a permanent visa
-   hold a special category visa (subclass 444, either protected or not)
-   be a holder of certain temporary visas that qualify customers for
    some payments (there is no need for the customer to claim or
    otherwise qualify for Special Benefit) and be in Australia

A customer who is outside Australia temporarily is generally considered
to still be residing in Australia. See Family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme customer/child going overseas.

From 1 January 2019, a Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)
applies to some family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments.

Residence requirements for FTB

FTB customers must meet the above residence requirements at the date of
claim and throughout the entire period they receive FTB, including for
backdated periods.

Customers must also satisfy a 52 week NARWP for FTB Part A, or be exempt
from the NARWP. There is no NARWP for FTB Part B.

FTB children must also meet residence requirements. An FTB child must be
one of the following:

-   an Australian resident, or
-   special category visa holder living in Australia, or
-   be living with the adult

In deciding whether a child is 'living with' the individual, use the
ordinary meaning of 'living' with, that is, is residing, dwelling or
occupying the same home. The living arrangement must have a degree of
permanence, for example, a short visit with a child who is still
residing overseas is not likely to constitute 'living with'. For more
information, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person.

The customer's partner does not have to meet any residence requirements
for the customer to be eligible for FTB. However, if the partner is to
be included on the customer's FTB maximum rate Health Care Card (HCC),
they must meet the residence requirement for FTB and provide proof of
their eligibility.

Residence requirements for PPL

To be eligible for the PPL period:

-   primary claimants must meet the residence requirements for every day
    in the period from the date of birth or adoption of the child until
    the end of their PPL period
-   secondary and tertiary claimants must meet the residence
    requirements for every day in the PPL period from the date they
    become the primary carer of the child until the end of their PPL
    period

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020, PPL includes 30
Flexible PPL days. To be eligible for a Flexible PPL day customers must
still meet residence requirements on the date of birth or adoption of
the child and on the nominated Flexible PPL day.

Note: a PPL child does not have to meet any residence requirements for
the customer to be eligible for PPL. However if a child is overseas and
the PPL claimant is living in Australia it may be appropriate to discuss
who has primary care of the child.

Residence requirements for DAP

A DAP claimant must meet the Australian residence requirements for each
day in the DAP period. They do not have to meet the residence
requirements on the date of birth or adoption of the child (unless this
falls within the DAP period).

A DAP claimant must satisfy a 104 week NARWP at the start date of their
DAP period, or be exempt from the NARWP.

Note: a DAP customer's partner or child do not have to meet any
residence requirements for the customer to be eligible for DAP.

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

New Australian residents claiming FTB Part A, PPL or DAP are subject to
a NARWP if their first permanent resident or partner provisional visa
(309 or 820) is granted on or after 1 January 2019.

To serve the NARWP the customer must be physically present in Australia
for the relevant period (52 weeks for FTB Part A and 104 weeks for
PPL/DAP), as an Australian resident, special category visa holder or as
the holder of a specified visa subclass.

This means before the customer becomes payable they must meet the
following waiting periods:

-   PPL – one or more periods totalling at least 104 weeks must be
    completed before the date of birth or adoption of the child
-   DAP – one or more periods totalling at least 104 weeks must be
    completed before the start date of their DAP period
-   FTB Part A (including all additional and ancillary benefits and
    payments) – one or more periods totalling at least 52 weeks

There is no waiting period applied for FTB Part B.

NARWP requirements for FTB Part A, PPL and DAP

To meet the waiting period requirements the customer must reside in and
be physically present in Australia:

-   as an Australian resident, or
-   while holding a specified visa subclass

Periods outside Australia do not count as residence in Australia for
serving the NARWP regardless of the qualifying visa type.

Customers may not have to serve the NARWP if they:

-   have a specified exemption from the NARWP (e.g. refugee or family
    member of refugee)
-   hold, or have held a Special Category Visa (SCV) subclass 444
-   hold, or have held a Remaining Relative (subclasses 115 and 835) and
    Orphan Relative (subclasses 117 and 837) visa
-   were granted a visa providing qualification for FTB, PPL or DAP
    prior to 1 January 2019, or
-   are receiving a social security benefit, social security pension,
    Farm Household Allowance (FHA), PPL or DAP

PPL

Primary claimants must complete the NARWP before their child's date of
birth or entry to care to meet residency requirements.

To be eligible for the PPL period, primary claimants must satisfy the
residence requirements from the date of birth or adoption of the child
until the end of their PPL period. Primary PPL claimants must complete
the NARWP before their child's birth or entry to care to meet residency
requirements.

To be eligible for a Flexible PPL day, the customer must satisfy the
residence requirements on the date of birth or adoption of the child and
they must also have completed the NARWP the day before their nominated
Flexible PPL day.

Secondary or tertiary claimants must satisfy the residence requirements
from the date they became the primary carer of the child, until the end
of their PPL period. Payment cannot be transferred to a secondary
claimant if a primary claimant is still serving their NARWP on or after
their child's date of birth or entry to care.

If a customer is eligible for PPL due to an exemption from serving the
NARWP, their NARWP status:

-   on the first day of the PPL period is applied for the entire PPL
    period plus any connected Flexible PPL days
-   is checked for each individual Flexible PPL day that is not
    connected to a PPL period

DAP

DAP customers must complete the 104 week NARWP before the DAP period
start date.

FTB claims with a 309 or 820 visa granted on or after 1 January 2019

Where a customer is the holder or former holder of a Partner Provisional
Visa (PPV) 309 or 820 granted on or after 1 January 2019 and claims FTB,
they are subject to a 52 week NARWP for FTB Part A. The NARWP for these
visas is calculated from the application date, not the grant date.

If the application date is before 1 January 2019 in some cases, the
system is not calculating the NARWP from the correct start date.

Claiming FTB while overseas

A person can generally claim and be granted FTB while temporarily
outside Australia. A person will not be eligible for FTB if they are
overseas and any of the following apply:

-   The customer is overseas for more than 6 weeks and original date of
    departure is on or after 1 July 2016
-   The customer is the holder of a certain temporary protection-type
    visa
-   The customer is the holder of a certain partner provisional type
    visa and is not overseas for an approved reason (for example, acute
    family crisis)
-   The customer is the holder of a certain partner provisional type
    visa and has been overseas for any reason for more than 6 weeks

Claiming PPL or DAP while overseas

A person can generally claim and be granted PPL or DAP while they are
temporarily outside Australia. A person will not be eligible for PPL or
DAP if they are overseas and any of the following apply:

-   The customer has been absent for more than 56 weeks (short returns
    to Australia do not affect the original date of departure)
-   The customer is the holder of a certain temporary protection-type
    visa
-   The customer is the holder of a certain partner provisional type
    visa and is not overseas for an approved reason (for example, acute
    family crisis)
-   The customer is the holder of a certain partner provisional type
    visa and has been overseas for any reason for more than 6 weeks

Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

To be eligible for SBP, a claimant must have otherwise been eligible for
FTB if the child was not stillborn, within 26 weeks starting on the day
of the child's delivery. Therefore, the residence requirements described
in this procedure for FTB also apply to SBP claims.

If an SBP claimant is not able to meet the FTB residence requirements
within 26 weeks of the date of the child's delivery, but the claimant or
their partner become eligible for FTB for another child within 52 weeks
of the stillbirth, they may be eligible for SBP under the FTB Part A
eligibility test.

Customers are not required to serve the NARWP for SBP.

For further information, see Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment
(SBP).

Customer is not an Australian citizen born in Australia

If a customer is not an Australian citizen, proof of the customer's
residence status will be required to ensure residence requirements are
satisfied.

A visa permits a non-Australian citizen to enter Australia for a certain
period or to remain here indefinitely. The visa may state certain
conditions the holder must meet and whether the holder is permitted to
stay indefinitely or only for a certain period. The visa also states a
subclass number.

Customers who arrived on a special category visa (New Zealand citizens
who arrive in Australia using their NZ passport) do not usually have any
evidence to support their visa status.

The customer's visa can often be verified directly via the immigration
datalink with the Department of Home Affairs.

Immigration datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer and child's visa and movement information from 1 September
1994, and grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, manually record the residence
information. If Department of Home Affairs has provided the information,
it will take precedence over any conflicting information provided by the
customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record matches with
Centrelink, ongoing updates to movement information and visa changes
will automatically record on the customer or child's record.

The customer must provide and verify information about residence prior
to 1 September 1994, where necessary. Ask customers to provide a
passport number to help verify the Department of Home Affairs
information.

For current FTB customers, it may be necessary to update country of
residence, visa information or Australian citizenship details. For
assistance, see Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and
contingency procedures if datalink is unavailable.

The Resources page contains information about the E306FY - FTB NARWP
cannot be determined error, examples of PPL and DAP residence
requirements and explanations of NARWP exemptions.

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going
overseas

Discretion to extend portability period

Common types of Australian visas

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Residence and Portability screens

Victims of trafficking

Processing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Energy Supplement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
