
Immunisation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-17110601

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about immunisation for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

Immunisation requirements

Immunisation requirements are linked to:

-   payment of the FTB Part A supplement for financial years 2012-13 to
    2017-18, and
-   assessment of the rate of FTB Part A that can be paid for a child
    from 1 July 2018 - an FTB Part A rate reduction is applied for
    children who do not meet immunisation requirements

For more information on meeting immunisation requirements (including
exemptions) and how a customer’s payments are affected, see:

-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit Part A from 1 July
    2018
-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
    supplement for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

A child's immunisation status is assessed by the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) using information provided by the child’s vaccination
provider. Customers are not required to provide documentary evidence of
a child’s immunisation history to Centrelink.

The AIR transfers this information to Centrelink via a datalink. See
Establish a link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

Once the immunisation status is received, it is displayed on the Child
Immunisation Summary guided procedure. See View and update a child's
immunisation status and assess or update immunisation exemptions for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Customers can view the immunisation status for a child held on the AIR
on the child’s Immunisation history statement. If the AIR needs to be
updated the customer will need to contact their vaccination provider.

A child meets the requirements if they:

-   are up to date with vaccinations appropriate to their age, listed in
    the childhood schedule on the Department of Health’s National
    Immunisation Program Schedule - these vaccinations are typically
    given to children under 5 years of age
-   are on a suitable catch-up schedule according to the current
    Australian Immunisation Handbook
-   have an approved medical exemption from immunisation which has been
    recorded on the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR), or
-   have an exemption from the immunisation requirements (in extremely
    limited circumstances). For more information, see View and update a
    child’s immunisation status and assess or update immunisation
    exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Note: school age and adolescent vaccinations on the school programs
schedule (such as the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine) are not
included in the childhood schedule.

Contents

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefits (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement
for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Immunisation reviews and reminders for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Establish a link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Management of immunisation evidence

View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or update
immunisation exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Authentication and release of information for Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

Related links

Family assistance and Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Immunisation exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
