
Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments due to 3 or more non-lodger decisions (Sunset Clause) 007-11010140

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for payment cancellation when
customers cannot be paid based on an estimate due to 3 or more
non-lodger decisions. Family Tax Benefit (FTB) fortnightly payments may
be automatically cancelled if the customer (and their current partner)
had 3 or more non-lodger debts raised against them. This may be due to
failing to lodge an income tax return for the relevant income year or
failing to inform Services Australia they are not required to lodge.

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

If FTB fortnightly payments are not being paid due to less than 3 non
lodgement decisions a PIP will be applied. See Prohibition of Family Tax
Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP).

Cancellation of payment due to 3 or more non-lodger decisions

Cancellation of FTB based on an estimate (including an estimate of
maintenance income) will occur where a customer has:

-   3 or more non-lodger decisions, and
-   at least one non-lodger debt associated with these non-lodger
    decisions has an outstanding non-lodger debt status (for example,
    not fully repaid)

This process is known as the Sunset Clause.

Non-lodger debts that were fully repaid before 1 July 2010 do not count
towards the application of this provision.

FTB may be cancelled due to the Sunset Clause at any time during the
financial year. If FTB is cancelled, the FTB customer will also lose
access to:

-   lower threshold of the Extended Medicare Safety Net from the start
    of the following calendar year
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS)
-   Health Care Card via FTB

Reclaiming FTB

FTB cannot be restored if it has been cancelled due to the Sunset
Clause. Customers can lodge a new claim for FTB instalments, and elect a
payment choice, once they have:

-   lodged outstanding tax returns and Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) has
    been received from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for all
    outstanding non lodger decisions, or
-   advised they are not required to lodge a tax return, or
-   repaid in full all debts with an outstanding non-lodger debt status

Customers who lose entitlement due to the Sunset Clause can receive FTB
as fortnightly payments:

-   from the date their last outstanding tax return was lodged for all
    outstanding non-lodger decisions, or
-   from the date they last advised they were not required to lodge a
    tax return for an applicable year, or
-   when all non-lodger debts are fully repaid

No arrears or current year fortnightly instalments are payable for FTB
not received in the current financial year to date until the customer's
(and their partner's if applicable) ATI is confirmed in the next
financial year.

If the FTB new claim is assessing for a period not claimed (for example,
previous financial years), FTB must be made Not Effective (NEF). See Not
effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment.

A Families Service Support Officer (SSO) may consider deferral of the
cancellation of FTB in special circumstances.

The Resources page contains a table of reasons for Sunset Clause
deferrals, which includes family and domestic violence.

When actual income details are available or non-lodger details are
advised, FTB reconciliation can occur for the financial year. Any
non-lodger debt for that financial year will be reassessed.

To receive their full annual FTB entitlement, income lodgement
requirements must be met by 30 June of the lodgement year.

Once the non-lodger decisions are made, they remain on the FTB record
and will always be counted for non-entitlement purposes.

Unlike the PIP process, where payments are suspended 75 days after the
non-lodger accounts payable letter is issued, there is no grace period
in relation to the Sunset Clause.

Separated from partner or partner deceased

If a person separates from their partner and cancellation due to the
Sunset Clause was previously applied due to non-lodgement of the
partner's tax returns, the person can reclaim FTB. FTB arrears will be
paid from the date of separation.

If they reconcile with their ex-partner FTB will automatically cancel
due to the Sunset Clause once their relationship details are updated.

Similarly, if their partner dies and FTB was cancelled due to
non-lodgement of the deceased partner's tax returns, they can reclaim
FTB and arrears will be paid from the date of the partner’s death.

The Resources page contains a table of possible reasons for Sunset
Clause deferrals.

Related links

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Date of event (DOV) for family assistance income estimates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
