
Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing) determinations 007-17103142

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about how to view, vary and process
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing) determinations.

Eligibility

ACCS (child wellbeing) is available to CCS eligible individuals if:

-   a child is at risk of serious abuse or neglect, and
-   a certificate has been given by an approved provider, or
-   Centrelink has made a determination

For parents/carers to be eligible for ACCS (child wellbeing), they must
first apply and be found eligible for CCS. Where there is an eligible
individual, the child must be enrolled under a Complying Written
Arrangement (CWA) enrolment type. There are limited circumstances when a
provider may enrol a child under a Provider Eligible Arrangement (PEA)
for up to 13 weeks. PEA enrolments are permitted where:

-   the service is not able to identify a CCS eligible carer
-   the child is in a formal foster care arrangement

Application process for ACCS (child wellbeing)

Child care services are responsible for applying for ACCS (child
wellbeing) on behalf of the family.

The child care service can do this by:

-   issuing a certificate, or
-   applying for a determination.
    In most cases, the child care service must give a certificate(s)
    totalling 6 weeks before they can apply for a determination. The
    Provider Entry Portal (PEP) or third party software will regulate
    whether a certificate or a determination is required based on
    previous applications

Certificate Applications

A provider can give a certificate up to 6 weeks, allowing for immediate
access to ACCS (child wellbeing) if:

-   they consider the child is, or was 'at risk'
-   certificates for the same child has not been given for the same
    service provider for a total of 6 weeks in a 12 month period, and
-   the service is below its percentage limit, if one has been applied

A service can request a certificate to be backdated up to 13 weeks if
there was an exceptional circumstance that prevented the provider from
issuing a certificate.

While a certificate is in effect, the higher ACCS (child wellbeing)
subsidy rate is paid. This rate applies to the child at the service who
gave the certificate, and does not apply to enrolments at other services
or providers. For more details, see Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
(child wellbeing) certificates.

Determination Applications

A provider can apply for a determination where:

-   they consider the child is or was 'at risk', and
-   the child has been given a certificate previously for the same
    service for a total of 6 weeks in a 12 month period, and
-   the service is below its percentage limit, if one has been applied

Services can apply for a new determination while a certificate or
determination is in place. There is no need to wait until the
certificate or determination ends. Determination applications are for
periods between 1 to 13 weeks at a time, with the exception of the
following circumstance's, which can have extended determinations period
of up to 52 weeks if the child:

-   is on a long term protection order
-   is in formal foster / kinship care, or
-   is enrolled at one of the services participating in the Early Years
    Education Program

When Services Australia has approved a determination, the ACCS (child
wellbeing) rate will apply to all child care services the child attends
for the approved determination period, even if they are in someone
else's care, noting each service must also apply for a certificate.

Before a determination expiring, the child care service will be prompted
through their Practice Management Software (PMS) or the Provider Entry
Portal (PEP), for them to take action and lodge a new determination
application, if they deem the child to still be at risk.

Roles and responsibilities

Services Australia do not assess ACCS (child wellbeing) certificates,
unless a child care services requests a reduction in risk weeks when the
child is no longer at risk.

Certificates with a start date of:

-   less than 28 days are auto completed
-   more than 28 days are assessed for exception circumstances by the
    Department of Education

Services Australia will assess determination applications where the
service has requested backdating for 28 days or less and determine if
the evidence supports the claims the child is at risk for the purpose of
ACCS (child wellbeing).

Children in need of care under a State or Territory law or in foster care

Children identified as in need of care and protection and subject to a
court order placing them in the care of the state/territory or the
Minister/Secretary, will be taken to be 'at risk' for the purpose of
ACCS (child wellbeing). Children in formal foster care placement (or
formal kinship placement) meet the definition of 'at risk'. Meaning, the
provider will not need to provide information about the type of harm the
child is experiencing.

If the court order is less than 6 months old from the date the
application is lodged, no additional evidence is required if the child:

-   is under an order as detailed on the References page, or
-   in a formal foster/kinship care placement

If the court order is more than 6 months old from the date the
application is lodged, an additional letter is required from the State
Protection Agency or a supporting agency that has a working knowledge of
the foster care case confirming there is a:

-   current care order, or
-   formal foster/kinship care arrangement

Children in informal care placements, such as voluntary care placements
with extended family, may be eligible for ACCS (child wellbeing). Check
if the care arrangements are formal or voluntary to determine the
evidence required to support the determination application. Children in
informal care arrangements do not automatically meet the definition of
'at risk'. Any evidence needs to meet the evidence requirements and
describe the circumstances of the child.

The state protection agency may indicate that:

-   another type of order (such as an early intervention order, or
    family protection order) is in place, or
-   they are currently undergoing an investigation into child protection
    concerns

Whilst these orders do not remove the child/ren from the care of the
customer, they indicate the protection agency has ongoing concerns for
the child's safety and wellbeing. Statements of this nature are to be
taken as an indicator of child at risk. The 6 month age of evidence rule
applies to these letters. (Information regarding Temporary Protection
Orders / Apprehensive Violence Orders and Domestic Violence Orders is
contained in the Third Party Evidence section).

The Resources page has examples of evidence for children in need of
care.

Evidence requirements

A provider must supply evidence to support their application for a
determination, and all of the following conditions must be met:

-   the type of evidence needs to be acceptable
-   the source of evidence needs to be acceptable
-   the detail in the evidence must meet the minimum requirements
-   the evidence must be current
-   the evidence must support a finding the child is 'at risk' (in
    accordance with the definition for the purposes of ACCS (child
    wellbeing)

Changes to determinations

A child care service must advise Services Australia as soon as
practicable when they become aware a child is no longer at risk.
Services Australia can cancel, vary or revoke a determination at any
time when the child care service advises:

-   of a change of circumstances, or
-   the child is no longer, or was not, at risk of serious abuse or
    neglect

Services Australia is not able to change the start date of a
determination to make it earlier than the current determination period.
However, the end date of a determination can be changed if the service
advises the child is no longer considered to be 'at risk' from a
specific date.

Do not delete a child wellbeing determination.

Duration, start and end dates

A determination can only take effect from a Monday and, can be backdated
28 days from the date of application unless there was an exceptional
circumstance which prevented the provider from accessing ACCS (child
wellbeing) at an earlier point in time. If there was an exceptional
circumstance, the service can select a start date (Monday) up to 13
weeks before the date of submission. Any exceptional circumstance
determination applications will be assessed by the Department of
Education.

A determination must be given for full weeks, and can range from one
week to a maximum 13 weeks or periods of up to 52 weeks, if the child:

-   is on a long term protection order
-   is in formal foster / kinship care, or
-   Is enrolled at one of the services participating in the Early Years
    Education Program

There is no limit to the number of determinations that can be approved
for a child.

Determinations can only be approved for active enrolment periods.

ACCS (child wellbeing) and CCS reconciliation

The CCS reconciliation process (including re-reconciliation) will
quarantine all periods where a child was assessed as eligible for ACCS
(child wellbeing). Customers will not be reconciled for an ACCS (child
wellbeing) period at the child level and the estimate held in the system
for those periods will remain in place. As such, actual taxable income
(ATI) will not readjust the customer's calculated entitlement for those
periods.

The quarantining rule is effective under either a certificate or
determination.

Individuals in receipt of ACCS (child wellbeing) are still required to
meet income and notification provisions for CCS reconciliation.

For ACCS (child wellbeing) customers who do not meet reconciliation
requirements by the 2nd deadline, see Reconciliation of Child Care
Subsidy (CCS). CCS and ACCS (child wellbeing) will cancel from the first
CCS Monday after this date and all CCS will be raised as a recoverable
debt.

Exceptional circumstance - increase in ACCS (child wellbeing) subsidised hours and/or ACCS percentage

Exceptional circumstances a customer may apply for:

-   an increase in ACCS (child wellbeing) subsidised hours (above 100
    hours). Applications will be assessed on a case by case basis by the
    Level 2 Policy helpdesk
-   a higher ACCS (child wellbeing) subsidy percentage (above 120%).
    Child care services are required to apply directly to the Department
    of Education who will determine whether an increase is appropriate

See Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Reviews and appeals

As ACCS (child wellbeing) decisions affect both the child care service
and the customer, both parties are able to appeal ACCS (child wellbeing)
determinations.

See Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing) review and
appeals.

The Resources page contains links to Department of Education website
pages, a copy of the ACCS (child wellbeing) review request template,
information and scenarios for evidence requirements for ACCS (child
wellbeing). It also has links to the Level 2 Policy Help desk and the
Quality Management Application (QMA) intranet page.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing) certificates

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Exceptional Circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (child wellbeing) review and
appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
