
Reviewing mutual obligation requirements for the principal carer of a dependent child 007-04080000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when the principal carer of a
dependent child fails to take reasonable steps to comply with their Job
Plan.

Mutual obligation requirements

As part of the Participation Interview or standalone Job seeker
registration workflows, a job seeker's job competitiveness, readiness
and capability to look for and accept work will be determined.

A principal carer of a dependent child has part time mutual obligation
requirements and is required to look for work of at least 15 hours per
week to satisfy their requirements. Alternatively, a principal carer may
fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by doing a range of
approved activities, such as paid work, study, or a combination of paid
work and study, for at least 15 hours per week. The requirements, agreed
to in their Job Plan, will be monitored by either the agency or their
provider. Principal carer job seekers who are fully meeting requirements
are normally managed by the agency.

Some activities undertaken by the job seeker such as work and study will
be monitored via the system if the job seeker reports using self service
facilities.

Unable to participate

Job seekers who find they cannot do the activities agreed to in their
Job Plan must contact Services Australia (if they are agency managed) or
their provider to renegotiate their activities, and discuss challenges
they may be experiencing that impact on their ability to meet their
mutual obligation requirements. Every possible effort should be made to
ensure job seekers have appropriate Job Plans to reduce the likelihood
of incurring a compliance action by their provider or payment suspension
if managed by Services Australia.

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

The principal carer of a dependent child who is temporarily exempt from
mutual obligation requirements is not required to enter into or comply
with a Job Plan during the period of the exemption.

When a principal carer lives in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider.

Contents

Principal carer of a dependent child fails to attend compulsory
participation interview

The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed
activities

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

Participation Interview

Related links

Helping parents return to work

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

Non-compliance events

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Shared care for social security payments

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
