-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines the requirements for effective Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) claims and information on rejected or withdrawn claims. It
explains how to record details when a claim for PPL is not-effective
(NEF) or rejected, or withdrawn by the customer.

Effective early claims

Requirements include:

It has been lodged within the allowable early claim period

It is signed and made on the approved claim form or via the [] Online
Services

The following information or documentation is provided by the customer:

-   their Tax File Number (TFN)
-   their bank account details
-   the expected date of birth and primary care dates
-   the customer's nominated start date (for children born or adopted
    before 1 July 2023 only)
-   information and evidence (if required) for the residence assessment
-   information about the PPL work test
-   information about the PPL income test
-   their employer's Australian Business Number (ABN) if required (Note:
    in some instances, the employer may not be required to have an ABN)

Effective post birth claims

Requirements include:

It is made on the approved claim form or [] online

the claim must be lodged within 52 weeks of the child's date of birth or
entry into care

All information and documentation required to assess the claim have been
provided by the claimant, such as:

-   proof of birth
-   the nominated start date for primary claimants
-   the child's details, such as name, actual date of birth and birth
    registration information
-   bank details
-   Tax File Number (TFN)
-   information and evidence (if required) for the residence assessment
-   information about the PPL work test
-   information about the PPL income test

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

to get the maximum PPL period the customer must claim and start their
PPL period within the time limits for claiming the maximum PPL period

For primary claimants and secondary claimants that are being transferred
some or all of the PPL period the claim must be lodged within 52 weeks
of the child's date of birth or entry into care

For secondary claimants that are claiming some or all of the primary
claimant’s Flexible PPL days only:

-   the primary claimant’s claim must be lodged within 52 weeks of the
    child’s date of birth or adoption
-   the secondary claimant’s claim must be lodged within 104 weeks of
    the child’s date of birth or adoption

Requested information must be provided within 14 days (21 days for
remote area or overseas customers) of a claim being lodged, unless the
customer is required to return bank account (payment destination)
details and/or TFN, in which case all forms and documents are to be
returned within 28 days.

NEF claims

The customer can apply for a formal review of the decision that made the
claim Not effective (NEF). If the claim is still found to be NEF, a new
claim must be lodged. However, if the claim was NEF because it was
lodged too late, a new claim would still be too late and would be NEF.

If the claim is not effective a determination cannot be made about the
customer's entitlement. The customer must be told:

-   why the claim is not effective, and
-   they may have to lodge a new claim to be assessed for payment

Note: if a PPL claim is made NEF the employer determination will be
revoked and an Employer Obligation Ceased letter is automatically
generated to the employer.

When the customer provides the requested information to make an
effective claim, the PPL claim can be re-indexed from the date the new
information has been provided. An employer determination for this claim
is generated and employer response is again required. Employers may
query the receipt of an Employer Obligation Ceased letter and the second
employer determination.

Rejected claims

Customers must meet the eligibility requirements to avoid claim
rejection. Claims will either be automatically rejected according to
details recorded on the customer's record, or manually rejected when
assessing the claim.

A claim for PPL must be rejected if:

-   the customer is the biological parent of the child and they have not
    registered or applied to register the birth of the child (failure to
    provide all post birth details for child, including proof of birth
    results in a claim being made NEF)
-   the customer is not the carer of the child (an exception applies if
    care of the child was relinquished as part of the process of
    adoption or surrogacy)
-   the full PPL entitlement, Newborn Supplement (NBS) or Stillborn Baby
    Payment (SBP) has already been paid for the child
-   the PPL work test is not met. For children born or adopted on or
    after 1 July 2023, the Approval Giver must meet the PPL work test
    even if they are not claiming PPL for the child
-   the PPL income test is not met
-   the customer does not satisfy Australian residence requirements

Note: if PPL has already been claimed by the customer, but the full
entitlement has not been paid for the child, the claim will
automatically be made NEF or REJ, depending on the circumstances.

Notifying the customer of the outcome

Notification will be provided to the customer for all not-effective and
rejected claims, explaining the reason for the decision and action the
customer must take.

Note: if:

-   an Approval Seeker’s claim rejects because the Approval Giver does
    not meet the PPL work test,
-   the rejection notification will advise the Approval Seeker that the
    Approval Giver did not meet the PPL work test

If the Approval Seeker contacts, Service Officers:

-   can tell them their claim has not been granted due to the Approval
    Giver not meeting the PPL work test, as outlined in the letter
-   cannot tell them which aspect of the work test the Approval Giver
    did not meet

Withdrawal of claim

Customers may withdraw an effective claim for PPL at any time before
their payment status is CURrent for that child. For example, a customer
can withdraw their pre-birth claim as this has only had an eligibility
determination. The payability determination is completed at the post
birth claim assessment.

A customer can withdraw their claim in writing, verbally, or [] online.

When a customer chooses to withdraw a claim, the claim is taken never to
have been made. The claim is indexed and then coded Not effective (NEF).

Duplicate claim

Some customers may submit a claim more than once for the same payment
and child in error. These duplicate claims should be assessed as either
not effective or rejected depending on the circumstances. The online
claim helps to prevent this duplication of claims.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
rate publication, and example text for a Q999 letter for claims that
cannot be made not effective (NEF) due to a system limitation.

Related links

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Cancellation of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Creating a Q999 or Q888 letter

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Partner of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer claims family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review (CLK)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employee initiated reviews and appeals

Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children born
on or after 1 July 2023.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
