
Completing the Details of your child's care arrangements (FA012) 007-03020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relation to completing the Details of
your child's care arrangements (FA012) form that is completed by Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) customers who share the actual care of a child with
another person and a pattern of shared care exists over a certain period
and/or to confirm a child’s care arrangements.

Actual level of care

The rate of FTB for a child in shared care is determined by the actual
level of care a person has of a child in an assessment period:

-   Customers with actual care of children for more than 65% of the time
    may be entitled to 100% of the FTB
-   Customers with 35% to 65% actual care will be entitled to FTB based
    on the actual percentage of care they have of each of their children
-   Customers with less than 35% actual care of a child will not be
    entitled to FTB Part A or Part B. These children will not be FTB
    children

Customers who have children in actual care for 14% to 34% of the time
should complete a claim and test their eligibility for ancillary
benefits for a Regular Care Child.

Completing the form

Note: if a customer is advising they are separated under one roof,
always ask the Family and Domestic Violence (FDV) Risk Identification
Question before issuing the Details of your child's care arrangements
(FA012) and Relationships details - Separated Under one roof (SS293):

Are you, or has anyone else been, concerned about you or your family's
safety?

If yes, explore further per the FDV Risk Identification and Referral
Model (RIRM) to clarify the customer's circumstances. Consider if it is
appropriate to issue the FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In
some instances where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the
customer's safety at risk

If no, advise the customer of the forms that will issue to their
ex-partner and ask the additional question: Is there any other reason we
shouldn't send these forms to your ex-partner to confirm your
separation?

-   If yes, explore as per the FDV RIRM to clarify the customer's
    circumstances. Consider if it is appropriate to issue the FA012 and
    SS293 to customer's ex-partner in some instances where there is FDV,
    issuing the forms could put the customer's safety at risk.
-   If no, issue the forms

Points to note when completing the form:

-   All relevant questions should be answered
-   The form must be signed by the customer and the other carer (if they
    agree)
-   If there are more than two children, the customer will need to
    attach a separate sheet with the information for the extra children.
    Details of the other person who shares the care of the child must be
    given in this section

The rate of FTB payable is determined by applying the shared care
percentage used for Family Assistance, based on:

-   The percentage of actual care that the carers agree reflects the
    pattern of care, or
-   The actual percentage of care calculated according to the evidence
    provided by the carers. This can include a parenting plan, written
    agreement or court order, details of the actual times the child is
    in each person's care during the assessment period, and other
    evidence provided

The Resources page contains a link to the FA012.

Related links

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
