-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a family's income affects the percentage of
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) they will receive. Combined family income is
one of the three factors determines a family's level of Child Care
Subsidy.

Estimated annual income for CCS

CCS is an income tested payment, families need to provide an income
estimate for each financial year. The amount of CCS a family can get may
change as their income changes. The combined family income is used to
work out the percentage of CCS.

During the year, a family's CCS percentage is based on estimated annual
income. This is known as an estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI).

It is the same income estimate used to assess entitlement for other
Family Assistance payments, such as Family Tax Benefit (FTB). The income
estimate must reflect the financial circumstances of the customer (and
their partner, if they have one) for the entire financial year.

All customers are required to provide an income estimate for CCS,
regardless of their income support status.

Updating income estimates

It is important that families estimate their annual family income as
accurately as possible to receive their correct rate of CCS through the
year and reduce the risk of being overpaid.

Families should check their estimated income regularly and update it as
soon as their circumstances change.

Income apportioning when the customer is not partnered for the full CCS year

Different reconciliation processing applies for ex-partners for Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) for the 2018/19 year and from the 2019/20 year
onwards. This also applies to if a customer or partner dies. See
Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more details.

Family assistance reconciliation and payment choices

A checking process occurs after the end of the financial year, where the
amount of CCS a family has received throughout the year will be checked
against the amount that they should have received based on their actual
family income . This process is known as payment balancing or
reconciliation.

CCS is reconciled at the end of the relevant financial year. The
customer's correct CCS rate is worked out using:

-   actual income details transferred from the Australian Taxation
    Office, and
-   child care attendance details provided by the child care provider
    during the financial year

Families can reduce the risk of overpayment during reconciliation by
providing an accurate income estimate. To assist customers reduce the
risk of an overpayment throughout the year a CCS withholding percentage
will apply.

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Education website.

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
