
Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements 007-02050010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the principal carer of a
dependent child where a person is sharing the care of a child with
another person who is not their partner. These determinations apply to
Parenting Payment (PP), JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA)
and Special Benefit (SpB).

On this Page:

Principal carer assessment

The principal carer assessment must be made if one or both customers are
claiming income support as a principal carer.

Where neither party to the shared care arrangement would benefit from a
principal carer assessment then it is not required to be done.

For a customer to be treated as a principal carer for JSP, YA, SpB or to
qualify for PP, they need to have at least one qualifying child/PP child
in their care. Only one person can be assessed as the principal carer of
a child. A person must be the principal carer of a child for that child
to be a qualifying PP child.

Shared care arrangement

In a shared care arrangement where a principal carer assessment is not
required but shared care details already exist on the SSA Shared Care
(SSC) screen, users can update the SSC screen with the same percentage
used for the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) assessment.

A shared care arrangement is where a pattern of care exists over a
certain period. For example, the child stays with separated parents on
alternate weeks, or with the non-custodial parent on weekends or during
school holidays.

Review of entitlement

A review of a customer's entitlement to income support, including a
shared care assessment, should take place whenever there is a change in
the customer's circumstances, not just the shared care percentage. A new
principal carer assessment may be required if a customer contacts
regarding the care arrangements recorded for a child but do not reflect
the current pattern of care in relation to income support entitlements.

If customers share the care of more than one qualifying child and care
arrangements for the children are the same, it is not appropriate for
each customer to be 'allocated' a child so that they both can receive PP
or be assessed as a principal carer for JSP, YA or SpB. The care
arrangements for each child need to be assessed separately, but if care
arrangements for the children are the same, each child would be deemed
the qualifying child of the same customer. If the care arrangements are
significantly different for each child, the assessment of who is the
principal carer may be different for each child.

If the customer has a qualifying child solely in their care, their
qualification for PP or assessment as a principal carer would not be
affected by the level of shared care of another child. A customer only
needs to have one qualifying child in their care to be entitled.
However, a shared care assessment is still needed.

A customer who is not considered the principal carer of the child may
still benefit by receiving a higher rate of benefit or an additional
income free area if they are caring for a child.

In most shared care cases, the person with the greater degree of care
and control of the child is the principal carer of that child. A person
may be considered a principal carer of a child where the level of care
being provided is at least 10% more than the other carer(s). Care is
considered equal where there is less than 10% difference between the
level of care provided by the carer(s). Other factors must be considered
where the care provided by the carers is considered to be equal, in
determining principal carer status (such as whether the other carer is
claiming or already receiving income support). The shared care
assessment is not affected by the customer's relationship status.

If only one person has legal responsibility for the day-to-day care,
welfare and development of the child and the child is in the adult's
care for the majority of time, that person is the principal carer.

Once the principal carer assessment has been made, a letter confirming
who has been deemed the principal carer of the child must be sent to
each person sharing care of the child, whether or not they are claiming
income support.

The assessment needs to be recorded on each carer's record if they are
receiving an income support payment.

A child may still qualify the customer for PP or as a principal carer
during a child's temporary absence from the customer if there is no
change to the shared care arrangement.

Any disclosure of personal/ protected information must comply with the
confidentiality provisions in sections 201-208 of the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 and the Privacy Act 1988. Where a Service
Officer feels it necessary under these provisions, the name of the other
carer should be replaced with the term 'other carer'.

Alignment of Care

If a change to percentage of care is received from the Child Support
income support customer, the care details will be updated. If the
percentage of care has reduced to below 55% or risen above 45%, a Manual
Follow-up (MFU) will be created on the customer's record for a separate
principal carer determination. The principal carer determination will be
undertaken by Families and Child Care Smart Centre Processing staff.
Look up local Processing Services details for: Shared Care (FA Act and
SS Act decisions).

Current FTB customers claiming JSP, YA - job seeker

For current Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers claiming a JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) payment, their
principal carer status is applied automatically where the care
percentage of a child is:

55 percent or more:

-   the Principal Carer Circumstance Details (PCCD) screen must be
    populated with Y (principal carer)

45 percent or less:

-   the PCCD screen must be populated with N (ineligible reason of NPC -
    not principal carer)

46 to 54 percent:

-   an error message displays to advise staff that they must determine
    the principal carer status manually

Note: if there are more than two carers for a child, the percentages of
care noted above may not apply. A determination would be required to
identify the Principal Carer and manually update the PCCD screen.

For claims that meet the above criteria, the Child Override/Claim (CHOC)
screen is coded automatically with the customer's date of claim,
Newstart System (NSS), and claim (CLM).

The Resources page contains information about the letters produced with
the Child - Change in Care Arrangements script.

Related links

Shared care for social security payments

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Principal carer of a dependent child

Child enters customer’s care/custody

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
