-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how customers can provide acceptable proof of a
child's birth for their claim for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental
Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP), Child Care Subsidy (CCS),
Double Orphan Pension (DOP) or Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS).
Proof of the child's birth must be provided for the customer's claim to
be finalised, unless it is already recorded as provided for the child.

Newborn Child Declaration (FA081)

The FA081 is included in the Parent Pack issued to parents by doctors
and midwives after the birth of their child. The back page of the FA081
contains a birth declaration that must be signed by the doctor or
midwife. It also contains a serial number that is recorded online by the
customer. This serial number is also checked when staff are processing
the customer's claim.

The FA081 can be provided by parents to Services Australia to support
their claim for the following payments and services:

-   FTB, PPL, DAP, CCS, DOP or SIFS
-   enrolment in Medicare, Medicare Safety Net, the My Health Record
    system and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

If the customer advises that the hospital had not issued them with a
FA081 at the time of birth, refer the case to Level 2 Helpdesk for
further advice before finalising the claim.

Staff should contact the hospital to verbally obtain a child's sex if a
customer has provided a FA081 that does not specify whether their
newborn child is male or female. While the agency generally collects
gender, for newborn children the sex is collected at birth with the
options of Male or Female. Customers can request a change of gender for
a newborn child; see Updating gender details on customer records.

Providing proof of birth for a newborn child using the FA081

[] The easiest way for parents to provide proof of birth is to:

-   go online to finalise their claim, and
-   upload the Doctor/Midwife - Proof of Birth declaration on the back
    page of the FA081

If completed online, these customers will not need to complete the full
FA081.

If the customer:

has already lodged a pre-birth claim for FTB and/or PPL, they can
finalise their claim by:

-   accessing Centrelink services from their myGov account or the
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, and
-   selecting the Add newborn child option online or Add child option in
    the mobile app

has not lodged a claim and wants to do so, they can:

-   access Centrelink services from their myGov account, and
-   select the Make a claim option

If a customer has no reasonable online access, or wants to enrol in
Medicare services only, parents will need to fully complete the FA081
and return the whole form.

Other acceptable proof of birth

If customers are unable to provide the FA081 as proof of birth, to
support their claim other acceptable documents can be provided. See
Table 2 Item 1 for a detailed list.

Documents provided do not need to be certified originals. Any images or
copies of documents provided must be clear and legible.

Electronic Proof of Birth (EPoB)

[] Electronic Proof of Birth (EPoB) is an approved proof of birth
provided by participating hospitals as part of the Newborn Enrolment
Trial. EPoB can be used as proof of birth for a newborn child:

-   if the customer has lodged a pre-birth claim for FTB and/or PPL /or
    FTB
-   for Medicare enrolment and to register a child for a My Health
    Record

These customers may not be required to submit any other proof of birth
documents.

Note: if the child has not been named when they leave hospital, the
customer can provide their child's name by completing the 'Provide the
name of your baby' myGov task to enable the information to be used as
EPoB.

Information received from the hospital is pre-populated into the 'Add
newborn child' online task or the 'Add child' task in the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app, where the customer can go online to confirm their
child's details.

If the customer participates in the Newborn Enrolment Trial and has
lodged a pre-birth claim for FTB and/or PPL, they can finalise their
claim by:

-   accessing Centrelink services from their myGov account to complete
    the 'Add newborn child' online task, or
-   accessing the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to complete the
    'Add child' task
-   the customer will be advised if further proof of birth is required
    or if they are not required to lodge the FA081

More information about the trial and helping customers with their
enquiries can be found at Newborn Enrolment Trial.

Children born overseas

To support their claim, acceptable proof of the child's birth can
include any of the following:

-   Australian Citizenship by descent certificate
-   child's passport (Australian or otherwise)
-   Department of Home Affairs automatic data link verification
-   Birth certificate issued by the government of the country in which
    the child was born

Note: it is preferred that a child's date of birth is verified using an
Australian immigration document compared to a birth certificate issued
by the country in which the child is born. If no Australian document can
be provided, a foreign birth certificate or other suitable documents
that verifies the child's date of birth may be used.

When a document in another language is presented for Identity
Confirmation or Proof of Birth purposes, it must be referred to the
Language Services for translation. The exception is it is accompanied by
another acceptable identity confirmation document. This is required even
if the customer provides their own translated version.

Lodging proof of birth documents

If a pre-claim was made online or via FA100

[] Customers can upload acceptable proof of birth documents using the
Upload documents service. The customer will be required to use the 'Add
newborn child' service online or the 'Add child' service via the Express
Plus Centrelink mobile app to complete their claim. The 'Add newborn
child' and 'Add child' services will appear as a 'task' on the landing
page in their Centrelink online account and mobile app, provided their
pre-birth claim has been assessed. Alternatively, they can lodge a fully
completed Newborn Child Declaration form (FA081) or Notes and Claim for
Bereavement Payment of Parental Leave Pay and Family Assistance (FA008)
with the back page included.

If a pre-claim was not made

[] Customers can claim online and upload acceptable proof of birth using
Upload documents or claim using the Claim for Paid Parental Leave and
Family Assistance (FA100) form and include the back page from the FA081.

All images uploaded must be clear and legible and must be provided with
the child's details and any required claim information.

The Resources page contains:

-   link to the Medicare Enrolment Application form
-   a link to the Families and Child Care Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online
    Query form, and
-   scenarios of customers lodging proof of birth and staff action

Related links

How users create a myGov account and link services

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Upload documents service

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by claimants claiming payments for families

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Processing proof of a child's birth

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Newborn Enrolment Trial – Birth of a Child Pilot

My Health Record - children/dependants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
