
This document outlines information about the different types of letters
used for Parenting Payment (PP) to advise customers of changes to
entitlement, to request information needed to assess a customer's
entitlement or to provide information about assessment and notification
requirements.

Automatic letters

Automatic letters are produced as a result of claim processing or a
reassessment or cancellation activity. These include rate information
and how the rate was calculated and list the customer's rights and
responsibilities on the back.

Manual letters

If needed, letters can be manually issued from a suite of online advices
if an automatic letter is unavailable or is not suitable. If processing
on a customer record does not generate an automatic letter, an activity
will be produced to prompt a Service Officer to issue a letter manually.

A manual letter may be needed if an automatic letter fails to generate,
is not available or if the customer requests a letter.

Shared care and principal carer determinations

A letter must be sent to each person caring for the dependent child/ren
(even if they are not claiming payment) to advise the result of a:

-   shared care assessment, or
-   principal carer determination

Reissuing letters

Letters created in the previous 28 days can be viewed and reissued on
the customer's record. Older letters can be retrieved through the Advice
History (AH) screen in the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR) system.

Mutual obligation requirements and appointments

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customers

PPP customers will receive a letter around the time their youngest child
is aged 5 years and 9 months advising them of an appointment to discuss
their need to apply for another income support payment when their child
turns 6 years of age, and future mutual obligation requirements if they
continue on an income support payment.

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers

PPS customers will receive a letter around the time their youngest child
is aged 5 years and 9 months advising them of details of an appointment
to discuss their mutual obligation requirement when their child turns 6
years of age. They will also receive a letter around the time their
youngest child turns 7 years and 9 months of age advising them of an
appointment to discuss the need to apply for another income support
payment when their child turns eight years of age.

Exemptions and appointments

PPS customers who have an exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements will receive a letter before the exemption expires,
advising them of an appointment to discuss their future mutual
obligation requirements or extension of the exemption.

Contents

Parenting Payment (PP) automatic letters

Related links

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Letters and customer advices

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Using the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR) system and microfiche
requests for archived information

Using myGov accounts

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Principal carer of a dependent child

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
