
Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) 007-17103144

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process when a customer (or their partner) is
experiencing exceptional circumstances and requires this to be assessed.

Intent

During the CCS year the exceptional circumstances provision gives
families access to additional child care during family crises. This
assistance allows children to be safely cared for during exceptional
circumstances. Customers experiencing exceptional circumstances may
apply to Services Australia to have an increase in their CCS/ACCS
entitlement. In some instances their child care service may apply to the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

If partnered, the CCS customer needs to demonstrate the exceptional
circumstance affects both themselves and their partner. If the
exceptional circumstance only relates to one member of the couple, the
family's result will still be based on the member of the couple with the
lowest Activity Test result. For customers receiving ACCS, an
exceptional circumstance Activity Test result will apply at the family
level.

If two children:

-   have the same date of birth (for example, multiple birth such as
    twins or triplets), and
-   are the eldest children aged 5 or younger
-   the system will determine the Standard Rate Child as the child with
    the lowest number CRN

Exceptional circumstances will be available to change the Standard Rate
Child to another child sharing the same date of birth.

For reconciliation, exceptional circumstance considerations may also be
extended to customers who are prevented from meeting CCS reconciliation
requirements by the 1st or 2nd deadline due to extreme situations that
are beyond their control. Exceptional Circumstances provisions may also
be appropriate where CCS reconciliation outcomes are either delayed, or
adversely affected by ex-partner inaction or income.

Exceptional circumstances Activity Test results

CCS and ACCS customers may request access to additional hours of
subsidised child care if they have exceptional circumstances and:

-   it would be unreasonable for the customer and/or their partner to
    satisfy the Activity Test or care for their children, or
-   they are seeking a higher Activity Test result, or
-   they require access to more than 100 hours of subsidised care per
    fortnight

Applications for an exceptional circumstances Activity Test result are
assessed on a case-by-case basis.

Exceptional circumstances does not include where families use more
sessions of care than their subsidised hours because of child care
services' charging practices.

More than 100 hours of subsidised child care

The maximum number of hours a customer is entitled to receive for CCS
and ACCS is 100 hours per fortnight.

Customers experiencing exceptional circumstances can apply to Services
Australia to access more than 100 hours of subsidised child care per
fortnight.

Applications for increased hours are assessed on a case-by-case basis.
The period an increase in hours will apply will be determined by the
customer's circumstances, and can be no more than 12 months.

Exceptional circumstances does not include situations where a customer
(or their partner's) normal working fortnight (work and travel) is more
than 100 hours.

Exceptional circumstances examples

While it is not possible to provide a list of all the circumstance which
may meet the definition of exceptional circumstance the following list
provides examples of the circumstances which may be considered:

-   affected by family and domestic violence
-   experiencing serious illness or medical condition or hospitalisation
    preventing a customer (or partner) from working or caring for their
    child
-   experiencing serious mental health issues that prevent the customer
    (or partner) working or caring for the child
-   participating in a treatment or rehabilitation program to address
    substance abuse issues that prevents the individual working or
    caring for the child
-   impacted by significant trauma
-   experiencing short-term incapacity
-   attending a funeral or bereavement service or the resolution of an
    estate where long distance travel is required
-   responding to an emergency in their capacity as an employee (for
    example, SES during fires)
-   complying with a compulsory obligation imposed by the court (this
    covers undertaking community service, being on jury duty or being a
    witness)

The Resources page contains scenarios that may or may not be suitable
for an exceptional circumstances Activity Test result.

Evidence requirements

When seeking an exceptional circumstance determination, the customer
needs to advise:

-   the impact of the circumstance(s) on the customer and/or their
    partner's capacity to meet the activity test
-   the impact of the circumstance on the customer and/or their
    partner's capacity to care for their or their partner's child/ren
-   how the circumstances impact the child/ren
-   how access to subsidised child care would assist in the
    circumstances
-   why the child/ren cannot reasonably be left alone (if attending
    secondary school) and that no one over 18 years or above is able to
    provide suitable care
-   how long they expect the circumstance(s) to last
-   how many hours of subsidised child care they need to access per
    fortnight to assist in their circumstances

For exceptional circumstances to be recognised, the evidence provided
must outline that the customer is unable to participate in any
recognised activities and provide a safe level of care for the child/ren
due to those circumstance(s).

Customers are required to provide evidence to support their request,
which can include such things as:

medical certificate. Note: a standard medical certificate (including
Centrelink medical certificates) advising an individual 'is unable to
work' is insufficient. A medical certificate should:

-   confirm the customer's diagnosis (where a serious illness), and
-   include the practitioner's confirmation the customer is not able to
    engage in any recognised activities (not just work)

signed statement from an external professional such as, social worker,
counsellor, doctor or other party outlining the customer's circumstances
confirmation they are not able to:

-   safely care for the child/ren, and
-   engage in any activity (not just work)
    Note: information present on a customer record can be used as
    additional evidence. This may include evidence previously supplied
    by the customer, internal documents/notes and referrals from social
    workers and the Medical Assessment Team (MAT). Specific referrals to
    these teams are not required unless deemed necessary as per the
    requirements noted within Social work services or Job Capacity
    Assessment (JCA) Referral

court documents

death certificate

receipts and invoices of medical and funeral expenses

declaration of natural disaster

If documentation cannot be provided (for example, due to an emergency
situation), a Commonwealth statutory declaration supporting the
individual's submission must be submitted.

Evidence is not required for Ex-partner Most Recent Estimate (MRE)
Exception requests.

Note: customers using In Home Care (IHC) are also required to produce
background information from the IHC Support Agency (not the service
itself) to support the application for increased hours.

Duration of exceptional circumstances

An exceptional circumstance is expected to be temporary and not a
permanent arrangement. The period of an exceptional circumstance
increase in hours or increased ACCS percentage must be based on the
customer's circumstances and cannot be approved for an indefinite
period. Periods of exceptional circumstances are granted in weeks and
can be for a maximum of 52 weeks (26 fortnights) at a time per
application.

When a customer's exceptional circumstance approval expires, the
customer can contact Services Australia to apply for further periods of
increased subsidised hours or increased ACCS percentage if their
exceptional circumstances are still relevant and further assistance is
required. Evidence will be required as it is a new application.

More than 120% ACCS subsidy

The following customers requesting an increase in their ACCS percentage
above 120%, are to be referred to their child care service:

-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)
-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship),
    or
-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing)

The child care service will apply directly to the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment for an increased ACCS percentage.
Customers are required to provide evidence to support the application
made on their behalf by the child care service.

If granted, the Department of Education, Skills and Employment will
notify Services Australia and the increased percentage will be applied
to the customer's record.

Note: CCS subsidy percentages cannot be increased above the assessed
entitlement. Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
entitlement cannot be increased above 95%.

Children with the same date of birth for Multiple Child Subsidy (MCS)

If two children have the same date of birth (for example, multiple birth
such as twins or triplets), the system will determine the Standard Rate
Child as the child with the lowest number CRN.

A customer can request to change which child of a multiple birth is
determined as the Standard Rate Child. Note: the option to change the
determination of the Standard Rate Child only applies if the children
share the same date of birth.

Service Officers must escalate requests to change the Standard Rate
Child determination for case by case assessment.

Reconciliation - 1st and 2nd deadline extensions

Note: on 30 June 2020, the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment (DESE) announced that the 1st deadline date for 2018-19
financial year would be extended until 31 March 2021. This allowed
customers who had not met their CCS reconciliation requirements for
2018-19 to retain their CCS entitlement until 5 April 2021. The 2nd
deadline date for 2018-19 remained 1 July 2021.

If a customer is prevented from meeting the CCS reconciliation
requirements by the 1st and/or 2nd deadline, they can apply for an
extension if they are affected by exceptional circumstances.

Evidence is not required for this application, however staff must be
satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist.

CCS customers can apply for:

-   Additional time to meet the CCS reconciliation income requirements
    by the 1st deadline to prevent CCS entitlement being reduced to a
    zero rate
-   Additional time to meet the CCS reconciliation income requirements
    by the 2nd deadline to prevent CCS entitlement being cancelled and
    the CCS non-lodger debt being determined for recovery

If an extension is granted from the 1st deadline, the period a customer
has to meet the CCS reconciliation income requirements can be extended
from the 1st deadline (1 July of the 1st deadline year) until no later
than 30 June of the 1st deadline year. Applying this extension will
allow the customer to continue to receive the applicable rate of CCS
instead of dropping to 0%.

For the 2nd deadline extension, the period a customer has to meet the
CCS reconciliation income requirements can be extended indefinitely from
the 2nd deadline date, but only can be applied for in 6 month
increments. This extension will prevent CCS from cancelling but will not
prevent them from reducing to a 0% rate of CCS and the undetermined
non-lodger debt from being created. The amount of extension time given
will be directly related to the time the customer expects to take to
complete the outstanding requirement(s).

If an extension is granted for more than one member of the family unit
(for example, the customer and their partner/ex-partner), the extension
deadline dates must be the same. This applies to initial or subsequent
extensions to the deadline dates.

Ex-partner Most Recent Estimate (MRE) exception

If a customer is unable to meet the reconciliation requirements by the
1st deadline because of the inaction of an ex or previous partner, the
customer can request that the ex/previous-partner's most recent income
estimate (MRE) be used for reconciliation to occur.

This is referred to as a Most Recent Estimate (MRE) Exception. No
evidence is required for assessment.

If a customer is seeking an MRE Exception, they must be advised that
ex/previous partners still have up until the 1^(st) deadline date to
confirm income before deadline provisions take effect. Coding the MRE
Exception before the 1^(st) deadline will not force reconciliation to
occur immediately. MRE Exceptions are only applied from the 1^(st)
deadline and therefore the reconciliation process will not occur for the
customer until after that date.

Customers should also be warned of the potential for overpayments if the
ex/previous partner later lodges a tax return with income higher than
the MRE figure coded as part of this exception.

If a customer has separated and/or the partner has died outside of the
relevant CCS year (but not from the extended lodgement year), they are
also able to apply for the MRE Exception.

See Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more information on
ex-partner categories.

Reconciliation - Ex-partner Debt Exception (exceptional circumstances)

From 1 July 2020, where CCS reconciliation for the relevant year has
already occurred, and a CCS customer who was partnered for part of the
year incurs an overpayment due to an ex-partner underestimating their
income, the customer's reconciliation may be re-assessed using the
ex-partner's income estimate.

This is referred to as an Ex-partner Debt Exception. No physical
evidence is required in order for eligibility to be assessed.

The intent is that this exceptional circumstance exception should only
be applied in circumstances where the customer did not know, and had no
reason to suspect the underestimation of income by the ex-partner. By
being able to override the periods where the underestimation of income
by the ex-partner caused or contributed to some or all of the
reconciliation debt, the customer will avoid overpayments related
specifically to this.

Note: this exception can only be applied for the 2019-20 reconciliation
period and onwards.

Delegation for decision making

Requests to increase subsidised hours or ACCS percentage will be
determined by the following:

-   Increased hours for CCS and ACCS customers - after obtaining all
    relevant information and scanning evidence to the customer's record,
    Service Officers will refer the request to the Level 2 Policy
    Helpdesk for a determination. If it is evident that the customer,
    (their partner) or the child is not subject to an exceptional
    circumstance such as those provided in the Resources page, referral
    to Level 2 Policy Helpdesk is not required. The process of the
    customer not experiencing an exceptional circumstance is to be
    followed
-   Increased ACCS percentage - the Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment will receive the request from the child care
    service/provider and make the determination. When a decision is
    made, it will be referred to Services Australia to be applied to the
    customer's record
-   Reconciliation - 1st or 2nd deadline extensions - Staff taking the
    call from the customer are the decision makers for deadline
    extensions
-   Reconciliation - Ex-partner MRE Exception - Once it is established
    that the CCS customer may not meet or has not met the relevant year
    reconciliation requirements by the first deadline due to the
    inaction of an ex-partner, staff may code this exception at first
    contact
-   Reconciliation - Ex-partner Debt Exception - if the Service Officer
    is satisfied that the customer had no reason to suspect the
    ex-partner's income was incorrect and could not reasonably have
    foreseen the overpayment, the Service Officer will send the request
    to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk who will review and send to the Level
    3 Helpdesk for coding

Note: as increased CCS and ACCS Activity Test results and ACCS
percentage increases are recorded in the Exceptional Circumstances (EXC)
Table in Process Direct, all updates are subject to QMA.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Help desk
online webform and scenarios for exceptional circumstances Activity
Test, and ex-partner debt exceptions.

Related links

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
