
Child Care Benefit (CCB) rate 007-03060000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines the different hourly rates and annual indexation
of factors used to work out the rate of Child Care Benefit (CCB).

On this Page:

CCB rate

The rate of Child Care Benefit (CCB), depending on what type of CCB the
customer is claiming (approved or registered), will be determined on a
number of factors including the type of child care provided, child care
attendance, family income and the number of children in care. The rate
of CCB is based on the standard hourly rate for a particular type of
care.

The standard hourly rate for CCB depends on the type of care provided,
the amount of care and when the care occurs. There are four different
rates:

-   approved care standard hourly rate
-   approved care family day care - an additional loading applies
-   approved care long day care part-time hourly rate
-   registered care rate

Approved care

The [] online estimator can be used to calculate a family's potential
Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlement and
out-of-pocket child care expenses for approved care.

CCB for approved care is income tested unless the customer receives an
income support payment. Families CCB entitlements may be reduced to the
zero rate by the income test but they are still considered eligible for
CCB (if all eligibility criteria met) and therefore can be eligible for
the Child Care Rebate (CCR). Families may also choose to receive a zero
rate of CCB entitlement.

Registered care

Registered care is not income tested and is paid at the registered care
rate.

Indexation of CCB rate

Child Care Benefit (CCB) is indexed in line with the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) on the first Monday in July of each financial year.
Indexation involves increasing or decreasing (depending on movement in
the CPI) the following factors used in the CCB rate calculator:

-   standard hourly rate
-   income thresholds

Annual review notifications are sent to customers, advising a change in
rate has occurred for the new CCB financial year due to changes in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI). Letters sent via normal mail or online will
contain the new CCB percentage after indexation has been applied.
Customers who receive their notification via Electronic Message (EM)
will be directed to access their new rate via online services.

Contents

Absences for Child Care Benefit (CCB) and JET Child Care fee assistance
(JETCCFA)

Calculating the Child Care Benefit (CCB) percentage for approved care

Related links

Online estimator options

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Eligible hours for Child Care Benefit (CCB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
