-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines information for Service Officers to decide if
FTB, CCS and/or Paid Parental Leave scheme payments (Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)) are payable while a customer and/or
their child are overseas and for how long. It also explains the action
to be taken by the Service Officer and the customer before the
departure.

Leaving to live in another country

FTB, CCS, PPL and DAP are not payable to customers who cease to reside
in Australia.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country, their family
assistance will cancel from the date of departure (cancellation reason:
NRQ - Not Residentially Qualified). If a child leaves Australia to live
in another country, family assistance for that child will stop from the
date of departure.

There are no portability limits for CCS children. If a CCS child leaves
Australia to live in another country, CCS will not stop for a
portability reason. However, as CCS can only be paid for child care
provided in Australia, it would usually cancel after 26 weeks. This is
because the child has ceased to attend an approved child care service in
Australia.

If the customer’s payment is not portable for any reason, consider if
the partner is qualified and can claim the payment.

Temporary absence overseas

An absence is considered to be temporary if the customer continues to
reside in Australia. A customer leaving Australia temporarily will
generally continue to be entitled to FTB, CCS, and PPL/DAP payments for
up to the maximum portability period, from the original date of
departure from Australia, provided they are not return rule affected.

For original date of departure:

-   FTB (both Part A and Part B) can generally continue for up to 6
    weeks of a temporary absence of the customer and/or their child. At
    the end of this period FTB will cancel
-   CCS can generally continue if entitlement exists for the first 6
    weeks of an absence for the customer. At the end of this period CCS
    entitlement will stop being paid (CCS remains current, but
    entitlement will be nil)
-   PPL/DAP can generally be paid to Australian residents, if
    entitlement exists, for up to 56 weeks of a temporary absence There
    are no portability rules for PPL or DAP children. Note: DAP is not
    payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.
    Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL

Some customers can only be paid under approved absence rules. See
Approved absences for certain temporary visa holders.

If the customer or child is unable to return at the end of their maximum
portability period, Services Australia has the discretion to extend the
portability period under certain circumstances.

Any days a child is absent whilst overseas counts towards their eligible
42 allowable absence days. Customers will be liable for full fees where
the absence is an unapproved absence or a disregarded absence.

Note: if a CCS child has 14 continuous weeks of non-attendance at child
care, their enrolment is automatically ceased. In these cases, a
reassessment will occur. This will review the last day the child
actually attended care, and the customer will not be eligible for any
absent days after that day to the end of the enrolment. Any absent days
the customer is no longer entitled will be recovered from the child care
service, who in turn may pass this on the customer. For more information
see Absences for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) and Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

If a customer is receiving PPL or DAP while they are overseas, their:

-   PPL period will cancel when their absence exceeds 56 weeks, even if
    they have not received the maximum amount
-   DAP will cancel when their absence exceeds 56 weeks, even if they
    have not received the maximum DAP period

Note: the 56 week portability period starts from the date the customer
leaves Australia regardless of whether they have a child in their care
or are in receipt of family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments at that time. Return rules can impact the start date of the 56
week period. The Resources page contains a table providing information
about FTB and CCS portability periods and the effects on FTB and CCS
rates and PPL rules.

If the customer’s payment is not portable for any reason, consider if
the partner is qualified and can claim the payment.

Brief return to Australia - return rules for FTB and CCS

FTB - A person or child who is absent from Australia for more than 6
weeks, who returns to Australia and leaves Australia again less than 6
weeks later, is deemed not to have returned to Australia. If a customer
or their child leaves Australia temporarily within 6 weeks of their last
return to Australia and the previous absence was longer than 6 weeks,
their FTB will cancel as soon as they leave Australia again.

CCS - If a customer leaves Australia temporarily within 6 weeks of their
last return to Australia and the previous absence was longer than 6
weeks, their CCS entitlement will stop when they leave Australia again.
Return rules do not apply to CCS children. There are no portability
limits for CCS children.

These return rules do not impact the customer's entitlement to FTB
and/or CCS while they, or their child/ren, are physically in Australia
between overseas trips.

Multiple trips can be an indication that the customer and or child is no
longer residing in Australia. A customer is no longer eligible for FTB,
CCS, PPL or DAP if they cease to reside in Australia.

If the customer’s payment is not portable for any reason, consider if
the partner is qualified and can claim the payment.

The Resources page contains tables providing information about
historical:

-   FTB portability periods and the effects upon FTB rates, and
-   Child Care Benefit and Child Care Rebate portability periods

Approved absences for certain temporary visa holders

Customers who hold a visa subclass 309, 785 (granted on or after 16
December 2014), 790 or 820 and are in receipt of FTB, CCS or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments may continue to be paid for up to 6 weeks
of a temporary absence if the absence is for an approved reason. The
approved reasons are:

-   an acute family crisis (such as the death of a family member or
    hospitalisation of a family member suffering a serious illness)
-   humanitarian reasons (such as custody or adoption proceedings), or
-   eligible medical treatment not available in Australia

Payments made to these customers are portable for a specific negotiated
period (usually 2 to 3 weeks) up to a maximum of 6 weeks. These
customers must be referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS)
for assessment.

FTB, CCS, PPL and DAP customers who hold any other certain temporary
visas that qualify customers for some payments are not payable for any
reason if they leave.

If the customer’s payment is not portable for any reason, consider if
the partner is qualified and can claim the payment.

Defence Force and Australian Federal Police deployed overseas

Under limited and specific circumstances certain Australian Defence
Force and Australian Federal Police (International Deployment Group)
personnel who are deployed overseas may be entitled to an extension of
portability for FTB, CCS, and DAP for up to 3 years. These cases must be
referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS) for assessment.

The Department of Defence may cover any entitlements lost by defence
force personnel and their families due to overseas absences/postings.

These customers may request a letter stating when their entitlement
ceases (and the date from which the FTB reduction in rate occurred). The
letter will enable the relevant Department of Defence HR department to
calculate the shortfall and pay any lost entitlement if applicable. The
information can be provided via a Q999 letter or the standard letter for
any customer travelling overseas (XOB101 portability script letter).
Note: the portability script cannot be run for a CCS only departure, so
the XOB101 needs to be done manually.

Payment restoration

If a customer or child remains outside Australia after their payment has
stopped for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on
their return to Australia may be possible.

For CCS:

-   CCS payments will automatically recommence if the customer returns
    to Australia within 26 weeks of CCS payments stopping, provided they
    are still otherwise qualified for payment
-   If the customer’s CCS payments have already cancelled, CCS will need
    to be reclaimed

If the customer is unable to return to Australia after the maximum
portability period, Centrelink International Services (CIS) has the
discretion to extend the period of portability under limited
circumstances.

For Paid Parental Leave scheme payments:

DAP customers who lose residence qualification when they depart
Australia will have their payment cancelled from the day they depart
Australia. DAP cannot be restored on their return

PPL customers who lose residence qualification when they depart
Australia will have their PPL period cancelled from the day they depart
Australia. For children born or adopted:

-   or after 1July 2023, PPL will stop from the date of the customer’s
    departure. If the customer returns to Australia within 2 years of
    their child’s birth or adoption and is residentially qualified for
    PPL, they may be able to access their PPL days
-   on or after 1 July 2020 and before 1 July 2023, this will result in
    the cancellation of their PPL. This cannot be restored on their
    return. If the customer returns to Australia within 2 years of their
    child’s birth or adoption and is residentially qualified for PPL,
    they may be able to access Flexible PPL days
-   before 1 July 2020, this will result in the cancellation of their
    PPL. This cannot be restored on their return

PPL customers who cease to reside in Australia will have their payment
cancelled. It cannot be restored on their return

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia
through the Immigration Datalink. When the datalink advises of
departure/return information, the portability of the payment is
automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether the customer
notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities
should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Immigration Datalink I. If adversely affected, the customer can provide
evidence of alternative dates. Staff should consider applying the
alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise when they are leaving
Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations where customers should advise of a
departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have returned
to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Portability interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia. If the
script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be done
using the script. If the customer's child is leaving Australia without
the customer, the script cannot be used.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding:

-   where a customer clearly does not satisfy an approved reason, or
-   where they are departing to live in another country

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot be used for CCS.
Staff are responsible for manually coding customer advised departure and
return details for customers who cannot notify of their departure from
Australia via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their
Centrelink online account.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure If the customer is travelling outside Australia on
a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
regardless of the time of return, and are no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example,
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details for Centrelink International Services (CIS), Helpdesk
online query form and tables showing historical portability period rules
for FTB and CCS.

Contents

Changing Australian residence details for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme customer/child

Related links

Accepting information from nominees

Initial contact by a parent or guardian

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Changing Australian residence details for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme customer/child

Portability of concession cards

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Residence and Portability screens

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Returning to Australia

Discretion to extend portability period

Portability of add-ons

View/update overseas travel online

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending visas

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
