
Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation 007-11010110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer may be
subject to the FTB non-lodger process or the FTB late lodger process for
FTB reconciliation

Late lodger/late notifier

A late lodger refers to a person who lodges a tax return after the
deadline for meeting FTB reconciliation requirements.

A late notifier refers to a person who advises they or their partner are
not required to lodge a tax return after the deadline for meeting FTB
reconciliation requirements.

A person may notify either Services Australia or the Australian Taxation
Office they are not required to lodge.

Deadline for meeting requirements for FTB reconciliation

The deadline for meeting requirements for FTB reconciliation (including
lodging tax returns or providing 'not required to lodge' advice) reduced
from 2 years to 1 year, effective for the 2012-13 financial year
onwards.

To receive their full annual FTB entitlement, customers must meet income
lodgement requirements by the end of the allowable period.

Special rules apply for separated couples.

A separate process applies to Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation.

Non-lodger reminders

Non-lodger reminder mailout and Electronic Messages (EM).

A reminder letter is sent in March of the lodgement year to the
following FTB customers where they or their partner have not yet
confirmed their income for the previous financial year, either by
lodging their tax return or advising they are not required to lodge:

-   FTB instalment customers, including those who have been current at
    zero rate (CZR) for the whole claim period in the relevant financial
    year under an FTB payment choice or Prohibition
-   past period claimants

Follow-up reminder Electronic Messages (either SMS or email) are sent in
late May and early June of the lodgement year, to customers who still
have not met income lodgement requirements. For example, May 2022 for
the 2020-21 financial year.

Reminder notices are not sent to FTB lump sum claim customers.

Single Touch Payroll (STP)

Services Australia uses Single Touch Payroll (STP) data and other known
income details already held by the agency to:

-   identify customers who may need to lodge a tax return, and
-   prompt them to contact the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

An 'advise non-lodgement' task will show to customers who do not have
STP income details showing the customer and/or their partner need to
lodge a tax return. This task will:

-   show in a customer's online service and mobile app from March of the
    lodgement year
-   align with the non-lodger reminder letter and electronic messages

Non-lodger debts

In early July, following the end of the lodgement year, a bulk selection
process identifies all FTB customers who:

-   have not confirmed their family income for the relevant financial
    year, and
-   who are at risk of having a non-lodger debt from late October

These customers are assessed as 'potential non-lodgers'.

An outstanding lodger may be:

-   a customer
-   their current partner, or
-   a previous partner (separated after the lodgement year has ended)

From the last Monday in October following the end of the lodgement year,
if actual income has not been received for the outstanding lodger, a
non-lodger debt will be raised.

The debt will comprise of all FTB paid to the customer for the relevant
financial year.

Recovery action:

-   Starts 28 days from the date the account payable letter is sent
-   If a non-lodger debt is solely due to the outstanding income of a
    previous partner, recovery of the debt is immediately written off
    following notification of the separation

Note: if a special circumstances income lodgement extension is granted
before the non-lodger debt is raised, the non-lodger debt will not be
raised until the special circumstances extension period has lapsed.

If actual income details are received from the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) or the customer advises they or their partner are not
required to lodge a tax return for the relevant financial year,
reconciliation will automatically occur and the reconciliation result
will replace the non-lodger debt.

Non-lodger debt raising for the 2019-2020 financial year

In early August 2021 the agency temporarily paused a range of debt
activities to help ease pressure on people’s budgets during coronavirus
(COVID-19) lockdowns. The pause on raising debt ended on 10 January
2022.

FTB non-lodger debts for the 2019-2020 financial year were raised from
19 January 2022 and account payable letters sent to FTB customers who
had not met income lodgement requirements.

Debt recovery remains paused for customers residing in certain areas.
For non-lodger debts raised from 10 January 2022 to 3 June 2022,
recovery for customers who:

-   reside in an area impacted by COVID-19 related lockdowns or natural
    disaster events in 2021, will commence from 1 July 2022
-   do not reside in these areas, the standard recovery period applies

Exclusion: the raising and recovery of 2019-2020 non lodger debts for
customers in Local Government Areas (LGA) affected by the QLD January
2022 floods is paused from 10 January 2022 for a period of six months.

Self service options

[] Customers may notify that they or their partner are not required to
lodge a tax return for a financial year and provide their income details
via self service, provided it is within 3 years of the end of the
relevant financial year. Customers can do this in the advise
non-lodgement of tax return self service using either:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

These details may also be advised by phone or in person. The Resources
page contains a link to the Services Australia website for phone contact
details.

To advise non-lodgement, outside of the 3 year period, customers will
need to contact Services Australia. Staff can use the Non Lodgement
Exemption workflow in Customer First to record a non-lodgement
exemption.

Tax File Numbers (TFN)

For actual income details to be transferred from the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO), a person's TFN is used to set up an electronic link with
the ATO. The link status can be found on the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) screen. If a link has not been successful the
reason can be identified on the MCI screen. For information, see Mutual
Customer Identification (MCI).

Prohibition of FTB Instalments Payments (PIP)

FTB fortnightly payments are prohibited (reduced to a $0 rate) if the
customer or their partner:

-   has an outstanding non-lodger debt status, and
-   has incurred up to 2 non-lodger decisions, and
-   their FTB is paid based on an estimate of income or maintenance
    income

PIP applies until all relevant non-lodger debts are resolved or repaid.
There is a 75 day grace period starting on the date the relevant
non-lodger debt is raised, before PIP commences.

The Sunset Clause

FTB paid by instalments will be cancelled immediately under the Sunset
Clause if a customer or their current partner:

-   has had 3 or more non-lodger decisions, and
-   at least 1 of those non-lodger decisions has an outstanding
    non-lodger debt status, and
-   their FTB is paid based on an estimate of income or maintenance
    income

FTB cannot be reclaimed by instalment payments until all non-lodger
debts are resolved or repaid. A grace period does not apply to the
Sunset Clause. Customers can still claim FTB by lump sum when the Sunset
Clause applies, however their income will need to be confirmed before
they can be paid. A time limit applies to lodge the Lump Sum Claim and
confirm income.

Late lodgers and FTB instalments

Once all persons have confirmed their income for the relevant financial
year, FTB will be reconciled. If the customer or their partner confirm
their income outside the allowable period they will be assessed as a
late lodger.

For late lodgers:

-   Part A and Part B supplements and Single Income Family Supplement
    (SIFS) are generally not included in the annual FTB rate
-   return to work assistance (FTB Part B quarantine) will not be
    included
-   if the overall reconciliation result is a top-up, the amount will
    not generally be paid

If the customer had some or all of their FTB entitlement deferred during
the relevant financial year due to payment choices (MCFF) and/or
prohibition (PIP), the late lodger determination will make the following
calculations:

if a negative result is calculated between the legislative entitlement
based on estimates and the actual entitlement, the amount deferred
during the MCFF/PIP period (if eligible) will be offset or used to or
reduce the negative result and may result in a negative, positive or nil
reconciliation outcome

if a positive result is calculated between the legislative entitlement
based on estimates and the actual entitlement, the amount payable will
be equal to the lesser of the:

-   legislative entitlement based on estimates minus the amount paid, or
-   actual entitlement minus the amount paid

Late lodgement (of tax return) after acceptance of non-lodgement advice

If a customer or their partner lodge a tax return having advised during
the lodgement year they were not required to lodge, FTB will be
re-reconciled.

If the tax return is lodged late, they may be classed as a late lodger.

From June 2017, following receipt of late lodged tax return information,
a number of automatic checks are performed to determine if the customer
will be reconciled as a late lodger for the relevant year. If the
customer is assessed as a late lodger for the relevant year, FTB
supplements will be raised as a debt and a top-up will not be payable.

A customer and/or their partner will be treated as late lodgers where
either the customer and/or partner:

-   were not single and had an active child support assessment for the
    entire financial year, and
-   did not receive an Income Support Payment (ISP) for the entire year,
    and
-   had income above the tax free threshold

A customer and/or their partner will not be treated as late lodgers if
they were:

-   a full year income support customer with an active child support
    assessment, and
-   had income below the tax free threshold

In some situations activities may require manual intervention.

These changes apply to the 2015-16 and later entitlement years and
impact ongoing FTB reconciliation processes from 1 July 2017.

Late lodgers and FTB lump sum claims

An FTB lump sum claim cannot be finalised until actual income details
for both the customer and their current partner are available. If a lump
sum customer or their partner has lodged a tax return with the ATO,
income details can only be obtained after the claim has been processed.
Claim processing allows a link to be established with the ATO.

If actual income details are not available when the claim is processed,
the lump sum claim will be assessed but no entitlement paid (Assessed
Awaiting Income (ASS-AIU)).

2012-13 and later financial years:

If an FTB lump sum claim has been lodged within the allowable time and
either the customer or their partner does not confirm their income by
lodging a tax return with the ATO, or advising they are not required to
lodge a tax return for the relevant financial year, within the allowable
time, the FTB lump sum claim will be rejected.

If a customer or their partner lodge tax returns after the end of the
lodgement year, the customer will be assessed as a late lodger and the
lump sum claim will be automatically rejected as 'late income
confirmation'. For more information on FTB lump sum claim status codes,
see Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB).

If an income confirmation request is sent to the ATO for the customer
and/or their partner after the end of the lodgement year, and the ATO
advise no income tax return has been lodged by the individual, the claim
will be automatically rejected as 'income not available'.

2011-12 or earlier financial years:

If an FTB lump sum claim was lodged within the allowable time but the
customer or their partner lodges their tax return late, payment can
generally still be made on the claim. However, the following will not be
included:

-   FTB Part A or FTB Part B supplements
-   return to work assistance (FTB Part B quarantine)

If the partner did not lodge their tax return with the ATO by the end of
the extended lodgement year, the rate paid will be the lower of the rate
calculated using estimated income and rate based on actual income.

See: Special rules apply for separated couples.

Late notifiers and FTB instalments

If a customer or their partner advises after the end of the allowable
period that they are not required to lodge a tax return for:

2016-17 or later financial years

-   FTB Part A or FTB Part B supplements will not be included in the
    reconciliation calculations as the customer will be assessed as a
    ‘late notifier’ for FTB purposes
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) will be included in the
    reconciliation calculations, as the person is not to be considered a
    'late notifier' for SIFS purposes. SIFS will be payable if they meet
    the SIFS eligibility criteria

2015-16 financial year

-   FTB Part A or FTB Part B supplements will not be included in the
    reconciliation calculations as the customer will be assessed as a
    ‘late notifier’ for FTB purposes
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) will not be included in their
    reconciliation calculation

2012-13 to 2014-15 or earlier financial years

-   FTB Part A or FTB Part B supplements will be included in the
    reconciliation calculations. The supplement may be used to reduce an
    overpayment, but if the result is a top up (which may include
    supplements), the amount will be automatically inhibited and not
    payable
-   SIFS assessed under the SIFS income test will not be included in the
    reconciliation calculations

2011-12 or earlier financial years

-   FTB Part A or FTB Part B supplements will be included in the
    reconciliation calculations. The supplement may be used to reduce an
    overpayment, but if the result is a top up (which may include
    supplements), the amount is not payable and will need to be manually
    inhibited

For all financial years

If the customer had some or all of their entitlement deferred during the
relevant financial year due to payment choices (MCFF) and/or prohibition
(PIP), the late notifier determination will make the following
calculations:

if a negative result is calculated between the legislative entitlement
based on estimates and the actual entitlement, the amount deferred
during the MCFF/PIP period (if eligible) will be offset or reduce the
negative result and may result in a negative, positive or nil
reconciliation outcome

if a positive result is calculated between the legislative entitlement
based on estimates and the actual entitlement, the amount payable will
be equal to the lesser of the:

-   legislative entitlement based on estimates minus the amount paid, or
-   actual entitlement minus the amount paid

Late notifiers and FTB lump sum claims

If the customer or their partner notifies after the end of the allowable
period that they are not required to lodge a tax return for:

2015-16 or later financial years

-   their FTB claim will be deemed not effective and they will not be
    entitled to receive FTB for the relevant financial year
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) will still be assessed and
    may be if the customer meets the SIFS eligibility criteria

2014-15 or earlier financial years

-   Their FTB entitlement for the financial year will be calculated, and
    will include supplements
-   If the FTB lump sum claim had previously been rejected because
    income was not available, for the claim to be paid the 'not required
    to lodge' notification must have been received within 52 weeks of
    the original decision date

If the claimant lodges a tax return after the end of the allowable time
having previously advised they or their partner did not need to lodge a
tax return, the FTB lump sum claim will be considered not effective and
a debt will be raised for any FTB (excluding SIFS) previously paid. The
customer may still be eligible to receive SIFS as part of the FTB lump
sum and therefore SIFS should not be raised as a debt. These activities
will be managed by the Manual Intervention (MIV) team.

Note: for the 2017-18 and later financial years, customers will only be
eligible to receive SIFS if they meet grandfathering provisions.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details for the MIV team and Australian Taxation Office (ATO), a
table of late lodgement rules for pre and post 2015-16, and further
information about the reconciliation process.

Related links

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information not received for family
assistance reconciliation or lump sum claim

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Deferral of Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments due to 3 or more
non-lodger decisions (Sunset Clause)

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) process for family assistance
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
