-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for a claimant to
receive Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary claimant.
PPL is paid at a rate based on the National Minimum Wage rate for up to
18 weeks to the primary carer of a newborn child (aged under 12 months)
or an adopted child (aged under 16 years when adopted). It is payable
for a stillborn child or a deceased child.

PPL transfers and permission

A primary claimant can:

-   transfer some or all of their PPL period to another person
-   give permission for another person to claim some or all of their
    Flexible PPL days. Note: flexible PPL days are available for
    children that are born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020

For this person to be eligible as a secondary claimant they must be
eligible for PPL and have primary care of the child for the component
that they are claiming.

Pre requisite for a secondary claimant

A primary claimant must lodge a claim and be assessed as an eligible
primary claimant before a secondary claim can be made payable. The
primary claimant will be the birth mother of a newborn child or the
initial primary carer of an adopted child, unless exceptional
circumstances are met.

A secondary claimant may be:

-   the partner of the primary claimant
-   the child's legal parent (if not the primary claimant) or their
    partner
-   another person (only if exceptional circumstances are met)

For a person to receive PPL as a secondary claimant:

the primary claimant must lodge a claim and be eligible to receive PPL

the secondary claimant needs to lodge a claim and meet PPL eligibility
criteria, and

to be eligible for a:

-   full or partial transfer of the PPL period, either the primary or
    secondary claimant must be eligible for each day of the PPL period
-   Flexible PPL day, the secondary claimant must claim and be eligible
    for PPL for the child on each Flexible PPL day

Eligibility criteria

The eligibility criteria for a secondary claimant in normal
circumstances require the person to:

-   make an effective claim for PPL
-   be the primary carer of the Parental Leave Pay (PPL) child (since
    the primary claimant ceased being the primary carer of the child)
-   have a child born or entered care before 1 July 2023
-   meet the PPL work test
-   meet the PPL income test. For the PPL income test threshold, see
    Paid Parental Leave - income limits
-   meet Australian residence requirements

Additionally, the secondary claimant must:

-   not have returned to work since becoming the primary carer of the
    child, to be eligible for the PPL period
-   not be working on days that they want to claim Flexible PPL

Exception: the return to work or working rule does not apply:

-   if a child was stillborn or has died
-   if care of the child is lost without legal authority
-   if complying with a summons or other compulsory process to appear to
    give evidence, information or produce documents
-   to health professionals, emergency services or essential workers who
    have returned to work in response to a state, territory or national
    emergency
-   to defence force members or law enforcement officers who are
    compulsorily recalled to duty
-   if the newborn child is remaining in hospital following the birth,
    if it occurs within the period that starts on the day the child is
    born and ends on the day the child is discharged from hospital

If the above eligibility criteria are not met, the person may still be
eligible under exceptional circumstances for PPL criteria.

Tertiary claimants

Generally, only one transfer of payment will be allowed and a person may
not receive an amount of PPL not used by a secondary claimant. However,
it is possible for a second transfer to occur in exceptional
circumstances.

The References page contains eligibility criteria for tertiary
claimants.

Partial transfer of PPL period to a secondary claimant

Primary claimants transferring part (but not all) of their PPL period to
a secondary claimant must meet the full PPL eligibility criteria before
the secondary claimant’s application can be assessed, and before the
balance of the primary claimant’s payment can be transferred. This
ensures the secondary claimant's entitlement is correctly assessed once
their PPL period commences.

The secondary claimant must satisfy the full PPL eligibility criteria
for each day from the date primary care is transferred to them until the
end of the PPL period.

Full transfer of PPL period to a secondary claimant

If the primary claimant is transferring their full PPL period to a
secondary claimant, the primary claimant's claim must be assessed before
the secondary claimant’s claim. This ensures the secondary claimant's
entitlement is assessed correctly once the PPL period starts.

If a primary claimant is transferring their full PPL period to a
secondary claimant from:

-   the date the child is born (or enters care), the primary claimant
    only needs to meet limited PPL eligibility criteria before their
    application is assessed. The secondary claimant must meet the full
    eligibility criteria for each day of the PPL period
-   a date after the child is born (or enters care), the primary
    claimant must meet the full PPL eligibility criteria for each day
    from the date the child is born (or enters care) until the day
    before primary care is transferred to the secondary claimant. The
    secondary claimant must satisfy the full PPL eligibility criteria
    for each day from the date primary care is transferred to them until
    the end of the PPL period

In full PPL period transfer cases only, where the birth mother has
returned to work before submitting the PPL claim, it is essential the
secondary claimant submits their claim for PPL at the same time as the
primary claimant before the primary claimant's claim is assessed.

If the secondary claimant's record is not linked to or is in a different
Centrelink system environment to that of the primary carer, a workaround
for PPL secondary claimants may be required.

Flexible PPL days

Flexible PPL days are available for children that are born or adopted on
or after 1 July 2020.

The primary claimant can choose to grant permission for another person
(secondary claimant) to claim some or all of their Flexible PPL days.

The secondary claimant is required to claim these days. Claims for
Flexible PPL can be lodged up to 2 years after the child’s birth or
adoption. However:

PPL claims that include a full or partial transfer of the PPL period
must be lodged within one year of the child’s birth or adoption and
there are time limits for claiming the maximum PPL period

the primary claimant can remove permission:

-   at any time during the pre-birth phase (pre-birth claims only)
-   before a secondary claimant has claimed the day

Multiple secondary claimants can be linked to a child for the purposes
of claiming Flexible PPL days only.

Timeframe for claiming

Claimants are encouraged to lodge an early claim for family assistance
and PPL and it is important they are aware of the time limits for
claiming the maximum PPL period.

To be eligible for a full or partial transfer of the PPL period, the
claim must be lodged and is only payable for days before the:

child's first birthday, or

first anniversary of the day:

-   the child becomes entrusted to the claimant's care
-   the child enters care for a surrogacy arrangement

All claimants applying for PPL must submit their claims before the
child’s first birthday or anniversary of the day the child was entrusted
to the primary claimants care.

To be eligible for permission to claim Flexible PPL days, the claim must
be lodged and is only payable for days before the:

child’s second birthday, or

second anniversary of the day:

-   the child becomes entrusted to the claimant’s care
-   the child enters care for a surrogacy arrangement

Secondary claimants may lodge their claim after returning to work and
still be assessed for payment from the first day of their PPL period to
the day they returned to work. Secondary claimants may also be eligible
for any Flexible PPL days claimed after a return to work provided they
are not working on that day. See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer, for
a child born before 1 July 2023, returns to work for more detail.

PPL period start date

A secondary/tertiary claimant may not nominate a start date for the PPL
period. The start date is the day after the last day the primary
claimant received payments for the child or the primary claimant's PPL
period start date if the full PPL period is being transferred.

The secondary/tertiary claimant's PPL will automatically trigger from
the relevant start date if the primary claimant has already provided
proof of birth and advised of the change in primary care and the
secondary claimant has been assessed as eligible.

Effect of PPL on other payments

PPL is taxable income and is included in a claimant's adjusted taxable
income for family assistance payments.

-   PPL is treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of
    payment for income support payments
-   PPL customers (and/or their partner) cannot receive Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) Part B during the PPL period and Flexible PPL days

Customers cannot receive JobKeeper Payment or COVID-19 Disaster Payment
(paid by Services Australia on or after 3 June 2021) for the same period
they receive PPL.

PPL interaction with DAP

One claimant can receive both DAP and PPL for the same child. However,
PPL and DAP must be taken at different times.

An individual claimant can receive a maximum of 18 weeks of combined
payments for the same child under the PPL scheme (for example, PPL and
DAP combined).

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks PPL and DAP combined for the
same child (for example, 18 weeks PPL is paid to one parent at the same
time that 2 weeks DAP may be paid to the other parent).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website,
myGov and the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query form. It also
contains letter text, a comparison of primary and secondary/tertiary
claimant eligibility and scenarios of PPL transfers to
secondary/tertiary claimant.

Related links

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Online estimator options

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
