
Waiver of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) shared care enh1ment 007-02040040

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how, before July 2008, a customer with less than
30% care of a child could waive their Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
entitlement for the child. The care amendment from 1 July 2008 requires
a customer to have at least 35% care to be entitled to FTB. As a result
of this change, customers with at least 10% but less than 30% actual
care of a child were no longer able to waive their FTB entitlement. They
could still waive their right for a past period claim prior to 1 July
2008.

On this Page:

Prior to 1 July 2008

Between 1 December 2001 and 30 June 2008, a person with at least 10% but
less than 30% actual care of a child could waive their FTB entitlement
for the child for a nominated period. The child was taken not to be an
FTB child of this person for the waiver period. This means that the
person with whom the child spent the most time could receive full FTB
for that child for the waiver period.

This change ensured that where FTB was not payable to 1 person, for
example due to income, the other person sharing the care of the child
might receive the percentage of FTB that would otherwise not be paid for
the child. A person could waive their FTB entitlement even if they were
entitled to or had been paid FTB for the child.

Waiving entitlement to FTB for a past period

A person could waive their entitlement by completing a declaration on
the Details of your child's care arrangements (FA012) after it has been
completed by the other carer or they could provide their waiver details
in writing.

The person waiving entitlement would have to waive their full FTB
entitlement for that child but they did not have to waive entitlement
for all their children.

A waiver could involve a child who was an FTB child of 2 or more carers.

The person waiving their FTB entitlement did not need to claim FTB for
the waiver period and their actual percentage of care did not need to be
confirmed. However, the Service Officer would have to be satisfied that
the person waiving their entitlement had at least 10% but less than 30%
care of the child over the waiver period.

Backdating and end date of waiver

A waiver could be applied until 30 June 2008. There were time limits for
paying arrears to the other person caring for the child.

There was no time limit for using the waived period to reduce the other
carer's excess FTB debt for the same period.

The applicant could specify a date on which the waiver was to end, or it
ended automatically as of 30 June 2008. A waiver could be cancelled at
any time although this cannot be backdated. The waiver only continued to
apply while the conditions for the waiver continue to be satisfied or
until 1 July 2008. Where caring arrangements for the child changed, the
customer needed to notify so that the waiver can be cancelled and the
person who waived their entitlement could claim FTB if they wished.

Shared care waiver and maintenance income

The amount of FTB waived was not counted towards child support liability
or a reduction to the amount of child support the paying parent paid to
compensate for them waiving their right to FTB for a child, advise that
this is not acceptable as maintenance income. That was because this
benefit was not received by the payee from the payer and there was no
determined value as to how much it was worth. It did not satisfy the
definition of maintenance income.

Related links

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
