
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices 007-03050010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the different payments options
available for Family Tax Benefit (FTB). FTB instalment customers can
update their FTB payment choice at any time.

FTB claim options

FTB is worked out as an annual amount based on a family's adjusted
taxable income (ATI) for the relevant financial year.

There are two claim options available to families to help reduce the
risk of being overpaid. Families can choose to receive FTB as:

-   a lump sum payment after the end of the relevant financial year,
    where FTB entitlement is calculated once actual income details are
    available, or
-   fortnightly instalments, where their FTB rate during the year is
    based on their annual family income estimate. The customer’s correct
    FTB entitlement is calculated after the end of the financial year
    during the FTB reconciliation process

Customers subject to restricted cannot be paid FTB Part A or Part B as
fortnightly instalments unless an exemption or deferral applies.
Restricted payments include:

-   Prohibition of FTB instalment payments (PIP)
-   Non-payment of FTB instalment payments to zero entitlement customers

Families claiming FTB as a lump sum need to lodge a separate claim for
each financial year. Those claiming FTB fortnightly only need to claim
once and will continue to be paid as long as they remain eligible.

Income support payment customers must claim FTB as instalment payments,
however they may elect a payment choice.

FTB Part A and Part B supplements and the Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS) are paid only after the end of the financial year to
eligible families during FTB reconciliation or lump sum claim
assessment.

Choices for FTB instalment customers

Families can choose to receive part or all of their FTB entitlement
after the end of the year when FTB reconciliation occurs. There are
separate payment choices for FTB Part A and Part B.

A person's FTB payment choice can affect the payment of Rent Assistance
(RA), Energy Supplement, FTB Part A advance payments, Newborn Supplement
(NBS), Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU), Centrepay deductions and debt
withholdings.

Health Care Card (HCC) entitlement is not affected by their FTB payment
choice.

-   FTB Part A choices
-   FTB Part B choices

Families can update their payment choice at any time.

A family's correct FTB entitlement will be calculated after the end of
the financial year during the reconciliation process based on their
circumstances, regardless of any FTB payment choice that applied during
the financial year.

At every contact with individuals

Families can update their payment choice at any time.

Choosing the right payment option can help families reduce the risk of
an overpayment when their payments are reconciled after the end of the
financial year.

All income tested FTB customers who contact and who do not currently
have an FTB payment choice in place are to be informed of the payment
options available to reduce the risks of being overpaid.

Service Officers should check that the family's annual income estimate
is reasonable, and that they are aware of their FTB payment options and
the effect of their choice on their payments. Service Officers should
not:

-   persuade them in their choice, or
-   apply a payment choice without the customer’s informed consent

Service Officers should direct them to update their income estimate and
payment choices via self service, where appropriate.

Updating Payment Choices via self service

Families who elect to receive FTB as fortnightly instalments are
encouraged to view and update their payment choice for FTB using one of
the self service options.

The services will auto-select a recommended payment choice based on
their family circumstances. They are encouraged to accept the
recommended payment choice to avoid an overpayment. If they choose
another payment choice, a warning of a possible overpayment will
display.

Online service

[] The following individuals are able to view and update their payment
choice for FTB using their online account:

-   Current FTB customers with a status of either CUR or CZR (on zero
    rate)
-   Correspondence nominees (with an access level of at least 3) for
    eligible customers
-   A payment and correspondence nominee (with an access level of at
    least 3) for an eligible customer

Phone self service

[] Customers can hear and update their FTB payment choice using the
Interactive Voice Response (IVR) phone self service 136 240.

A record of their interaction will outline the recommended Payment
Choice presented to them and whether it was accepted. The Assisted tab
on the Process page contains information on the recording of the
interaction.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

[] Customers can view or update their FTB payment choices via the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Date of effect when changing payment choice

If a person changes their payment choice, the date of effect for FTB is
the date paid to plus one day, or a future date if requested by them.

If requested by the customer, FTB arrears can be paid only if financial
hardship exists or where Newborn Supplement (NBS)/Newborn Upfront
Payment (NBU) has not been paid due to a payment choice. The Resources
page contains a definition and example of financial hardship and an
example of revoking a payment choice for NBS/NBU to be paid. Advise
customers that payment of arrears may increase the chance of having to
repay FTB.

If a person chooses to receive less than their ongoing legislative rate,
they will be automatically paid any extra entitlement after the end of
the financial year once actual income details are available.

Where families are updating their payment choice online the date of
effect will normally be date paid to plus one, unless they are updating
their payment choice for the next financial year.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
frequently asked questions (FAQ) about the Payment Choices online
service and further information about FTB payment choices, their effect
on payments and services and examples of revoking a payment choice.

Related links

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer initiated review of decision

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Non-payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment payments to zero
entitlement customers

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
