
Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP) 007-06010010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes for assessing and coding a claim
for Double Orphan Pension (DOP).

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

DOP may be paid to a person or an Approved Care Organisation (ACO). DOP
is not income or asset tested. The DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre
Processing Team assess and code all DOP claims.

A separate procedure covers eligibility requirements for an ACO.

Eligibility

A person is eligible for DOP if they meet Australian residence
requirements and:

-   they have the care and control of a DOP child, and
-   the child is an FTB child of the customer (or would be except
    prescribed education scheme payments are paid to or for the child)

If the customer has not already claimed Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
for the child, they must claim FTB before their DOP claim can be
assessed. If the child is not an FTB child, they will not qualify as a
DOP child.

Customers who share the care of a DOP child for at least 14% but less
than 35% of the time will not be eligible for DOP. Advise the customer
of their potential entitlement to ancillary benefits and to lodge a
claim for FTB to test eligibility and be paid ancillary benefits.

Residence requirements for DOP

To be eligible for DOP a customer must be residing in Australia and
satisfy 1 of the following:

-   have Australian citizenship
-   hold a permanent visa
-   hold a special category visa
-   be a protected Special Category visa holder
-   be a certain temporary visas that qualify customers for some
    payments (there is no need for the customer to claim or otherwise
    qualify for SpB) and be in Australia

A customer who is outside Australia temporarily is generally considered
to still be residing in Australia. See Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going
overseas.

The Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) does not apply to
DOP.

Claiming DOP while overseas

A person can generally claim and be granted DOP while they are
temporarily outside Australia. A person will not be eligible for DOP if
they are overseas and any of the following apply:

-   They are overseas for more than 6 weeks and original date of
    departure is on or after 1 July 2016
-   They are overseas for more than 56 weeks and original date of
    departure was prior to 1 July 2016
-   They are the holder of a certain temporary protection type visa
-   They are the holder of a certain partner provisional type visa and
    is not overseas for an approved reason (for example, acute family
    crisis)
-   They are the holder of a certain partner provisional type visa and
    has been overseas for any reason for more than 6 weeks

Other payments

DOP cannot be paid for a child who is receiving another social security
benefit, pension or Labour Market Program payment or a pension paid
under Part II or IV of the Veterans' Entitlements Act.

However, DOP can be paid if the child or someone on behalf of the child
receives a prescribed education scheme payment such as ABSTUDY.

A more advantageous payment may apply. Children 15 years of age or older
may be classed as independent and eligible to receive Youth Allowance
(YA) or ABSTUDY. Also, the customer may be eligible to receive a Double
Orphan Pension through the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) which
may be paid at a higher rate.

Claim processing

The DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing team processes all
claims. They will assess the customer's eligibility and grant or reject
the claim as appropriate.

Customers can call the DOP Helpdesk. The Resources page contains contact
details for the DOP helpdesk.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff can only process updates that do
not affect DOP rates, for example, change of bank details. A warning
appears when a customer's other entitlements are being reassessed. Refer
these cases to the DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team for
review.

Start date

For most DOP claims, payment will be made from the date the claim is
lodged. However, the start day may be backdated to the day of
qualification if:

-   a claim is lodged within 13 weeks of the birth of the child being
    cared for; or
-   a claim is lodged within 13 weeks of the death of the person
    previously receiving DOP for the child

There may be occasions when a customer in vulnerable circumstances may
not be able to lodge a claim at the time of their first contact with the
agency. The customer then has 14 days to lodge a claim for the first
contact date to be assessed as the start date for payment. See Intent to
claim and vulnerable customers for further information.

Savings provisions and additional component

Savings provisions apply to customers receiving DOP before 1 July 2008.
Customers who have between 10-34% actual care of the child will be paid
Double Orphan Pension (DOP) (base and additional component) based on the
rate payable on 30 June 2008.

If a child became eligible for from 1 July 1998, an additional component
of DOP can be paid. The DOP additional rate is the difference between
the current carer's legislative rate of FTB Part A for the DOP child and
the legislative rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A received for the
DOP child immediately before the child became a DOP child.

An Approved Care Organisation (ACO) cannot be paid the additional
component.

Verification

Customers are required to provide evidence that the child is a DOP
child.

If the customer cannot provide suitable verification, DOP Smart Centre
Processing staff must confirm details if possible using information on
the record and/or by contacting relevant third parties such as the
hospital, gaol or Births, Deaths and Marriages. Record the source of the
information on a DOC.

The Resources page contains Q999 letter text, contact details for the
DOP helpdesk, Request for Information letter text, DOP grant letter
text, DOP additional rate calculator and whereabouts unknown and
parentage unknown scenarios.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Requesting information from a claimant

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 or over

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating the Additional Double Orphan Pension (DOP) component

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) reassessments and reviews

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Cancellation of Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
