
Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) applications 007-17103120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about how to process an application
and assess evidence for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship).

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) claims

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) applications can be lodged as a
standalone claim or as part of CCS claim.

If the ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) application is lodged as part
of a CCS claim, ACCS Processing Service Officers will also:

-   need to assess CCS, and
-   manage any exception processing

If a customer is not eligible for CCS, they cannot be considered for
ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship).

Assessing evidence

When processing ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) applications, ACCS
Processing Service Officers must review the evidence provided to
confirm:

-   the customer experienced an ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
    event (or multiple events)
-   this was within 6 months of lodging the application, and
-   this has caused them temporary financial hardship resulting in a
    reduction in their ability to pay child care fees

In some circumstances, the Australian government may approve periods of
reduced evidence requirements for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
applications. During these periods staff do not need to request further
evidence of how these events have reduced a customer's ability to pay
child care fees.

Where a natural disaster is declared, reduced evidence requirements may
also be approved in some circumstances. Where the customer or their
partner receive an applicable payment for an approved event, further
evidence to demonstrate financial hardship is not required.

If evidence is not provided, the application:

-   will be made not effective, and
-   considered not to have been made

The customer will need to make a new application for ACCS (Temporary
Financial Hardship) if they wish to be assessed again.

The Resources page contains a table of the types of evidence required
for each event.

Start date

As part of the application process, customers are asked to indicate the
date they would like the ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) payment to
start. The start date must be a Monday and can be any future date. It
cannot:

-   be more than 28 days before the application was submitted, and
-   start prior to the circumstance or event that resulted in temporary
    financial hardship

A customer does not need to be using child care prior to lodging a
claim.

In exceptional circumstances, an application can be backdated more than
28 days if the delay in lodging the application is not the fault of the
individual. Evidence may be requested to support this.

If more information is needed to process an ACCS (Temporary Financial
Hardship) application, customers will be asked to provide the
information within 14 days. If, after 22 days (14 days plus an
additional 8 days to allow for mail delivery by Australia Post), the
information is not supplied, the:

-   application will be not effective, and
-   considered not to have been made

The customer will be required to make a new application for ACCS
(Temporary Financial Hardship).

Duration of ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers are asked to select the number of weeks they would like to
receive ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship), as part of their
application. The maximum period payable for an event (or multiple
events) that caused financial hardship is 13 weeks.

If a customer continues to experience financial hardship due to an event
they received less than 13 weeks of ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship),
they can apply again using the same event, as long as the event is still
within 6 months of the date of the subsequent application. In this case,
the customer can only be granted the balance of the maximum 13 weeks.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) applications and multiple children

A determination of ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) is linked to a
particular child and a particular customer. If the customer has multiple
children, they can select which children the application relates to. The
application can be used to make multiple determinations (1 for each
child). It is important to note the application for each child must be
made within 6 months of the Temporary Financial Hardship event.

Example: A customer has 3 children and lost their job in May. The
customer applies for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) in June,
requesting the determination be backdated to May (can only be backdated
up to 28 days). The customer decides to apply for each child separately
to receive the subsidy sequentially for each of the children. This would
see the customer applying for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) over
39 weeks (13 weeks multiplied by 3 children). This is not allowable for
the last child as the claim made for the last child would more than
likely fall outside the 6 month period.

Note: receiving the subsidy sequentially, rather than concurrently, does
not result in the customer receiving more subsidy. If a customer chooses
this option, it is important to take into account the date the event
took place. Staggering claims may result in a final claim not falling
within 6 months of the event. Customers are also required to demonstrate
they are still in financial hardship with a reduced ability to pay child
care fees.

Using multiple events to claim ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers can nominate more than 1 event that has caused their situation
of temporary financial hardship, as long as the events occurred within
the last 6 months. This allows for situations where 1 event itself may
not place the customer in financial hardship, but when considered
together can result in a determination that a customer is experiencing
temporary financial hardship.

Claims lodged prior to the event date

Customers may lodge an ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) claim in
anticipation of an event occurring. These claims are still effective as
long as within 14 days of the claim lodgement:

-   the event occurs, and
-   all evidence has been lodged

These effective claims cannot be finalised prior to the event occurring.

Rates of ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) subsidy is:

-   100 per cent of the actual fee charged, (up to 120 per cent of the
    hourly rate cap)
-   for up to 100 hours per fortnight

The family will not have to meet activity test requirements. ACCS
(Temporary Financial Hardship) can be granted for a maximum of 13 weeks
per event.

In exceptional circumstances, a higher percentage and/or more than 100
hours per fortnight of subsidised child care can be approved.

Exceptional circumstance increase in ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) entitlement

In exceptional circumstances, customers can apply to receive an
assessment that is higher than 120% of the relevant hourly rate cap
and/or access more than 100 hours of subsidised child care.

It is important to note exceptional circumstances will only be granted
in extreme and unusual cases. Customers are required to supply evidence
to support their application, such as a medical certificate, or policy
report.

Exceptional circumstance for increased hours will not be granted if the
main reason for the request is the customer's entitled hours do not
cover hours the service is charging. (For example, the customer is
entitled to 100 hours per fortnight and the child attends 10 days per
fortnight. The child care service charges for 11.5 hour sessions,
meaning the customer is billed for 115 hours per fortnight.).

More than 120% - customers can request to be considered for more than
120% of the hourly rate cap. These requests must be made through their
child care service, who will lodge a submission for consideration
directly to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

More than 100 hours - customers can contact Services Australia to ask to
be considered for more than 100 hours of subsidised care per fortnight.
The maximum number of hours that can be considered is 24 hours per day
(24 x 14 = 336 per fortnight) in extreme cases. All requests for
additional hours are referred to the CCS Level 2 Helpdesk once all
information and evidence has been provided.

Reassessments and changes in circumstances

Customers must advise as soon as possible if their circumstances change
as this may affect their eligibility to CCS or ACCS. Notifiable events
may include an increase in family income estimate, or no longer being in
financial hardship.

A determination of ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) can be changed
if:

-   a customer advises they are no longer in financial hardship
-   a customer requests a change to start date and no sessions of care
    have occurred in that CCS fortnight, change the start date to the
    CCS fortnight in which the first session of care will occur
-   Services Australia determines the customer is no longer/or never was
    in temporary financial hardship

If a determination is changed, it can only reduce the number of whole
weeks for which it takes effect, not to increase the number of weeks of
ACCS (temporary financial hardship). Changes can include changing the
start date of the determination to a later Monday or bringing forward
the end date to an earlier Monday. To update ACCS (Temporary Financial
Hardship) determinations, see the Process page.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk, links
to the Child Care Subsidy forms, a link to the Q888 letter, and a matrix
of details of acceptable evidence to support an ACCS (Temporary
Financial Hardship) application.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)
eligibility and applications

Deemed refusals for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Exceptional Circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
