
Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) override for family assistance customers experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance 007-07010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers or their partners who are
experiencing an extreme or urgent circumstance temporarily meet
requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Stillborn Baby Payment
(SBP) whilst obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) from the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

Customers in extreme or urgent circumstances

Customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Stillborn Baby Payment
(SBP) assessed as meeting the guidelines of experiencing an extreme or
urgent circumstance can have an override coded, pending receipt of their
TFN. Note: this override does not apply to Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

This provision only applies where the customer has:

-   immediate financial needs associated with the birth of a baby (under
    3 months old) or a child coming into care (within the last 3
    months), or
-   unanticipated financial needs such as medical costs or costs
    associated with an emergency, or
-   experienced hardship where their local community is affected by an
    emergency such as flood, bushfires or pandemic

Note: cases can only be referred to the Families and Childcare Level 2
Policy Helpdesk via the online referral form when these specific extreme
or urgent circumstances criteria are met. The Helpdesk cannot provide
approval over the phone. The online enquiry form must be lodged.

If the above extreme or urgent circumstances do not exist, customers can
authorise Centrelink to request the TFN details by completing a TFN
application form.

If the customer is applying for or receives FTB or CCS, and has a
partner who is living outside Australia, the partner should:

-   complete a NAT2628 Tax File Number Application form, and
-   forward it to the ATO

To reduce instances of multiple TFNs being created, it is important to
establish if the customer has an existing TFN, or if they have applied
for one in the past. Customers attending a Service Centre who have a TFN
that has not been updated on their record, and do not know what their
TFN is, should be advised to use an Access Centre Front of House (FoH)
phone to contact the ATO. The ATO can provide a TFN over the phone to
the customer which can then be provided in writing to Services
Australia.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the ATO,
Families and Childcare Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online referral form, Tax
File Number application forms, Business Processing Branch homepage (for
a link to the Families Override webform via the Families Override
Contacts program link), and the agency's Current emergency management
events.

Note: this process does not apply to Newly Arrived Refugee Customers
obtaining a TFN. See Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived
refugee customer.

Related links

Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for Family Assistance

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
