-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the CCB reconciliation process. This is an
automatic process that determines a customer's correct CCB for approved
care entitlement for the relevant financial year. CCB reconciliation
starts from the fourth Monday in July following the financial year in
which the customer received CCB as reduced child care fees for approved
care. All CCB/Child Care Rebate (CCR) references relate to financial
years before 2018-19.

Reconciliation comparison

CCB reconciliation compares:

-   CCB received as child care fee reductions which is applied by the
    child care services during the relevant financial year based on the
    family's estimated income, and
-   CCB entitlement based on actual income and actual child care
    attendance

Reconciliation can result in a top-up payment, nil adjustment, or an
overpayment.

CCB reconciliation can occur once all required information is available.

Reconciliation will remain pending if expected actual income details for
the customer (and their partner) have not been transferred from the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO). As reconciliation is triggered on the
fourth Monday in July of each year, it is expected that all child care
attendance has been submitted by the child care services. If a customer
advises they are not required to lodge a tax return, see Recording not
required to lodge advice and previous year income.

Debt offsetting

Debt offsetting can automatically apply during reconciliation if the
customer has an outstanding CCB or Child Care Rebate (CCR) debt.

Zero rate customers

CCB reconciliation for customers who were zero rate for the entire year
will occur from the fourth Monday in July to ensure all child care
attendance has been submitted by the child care service.

This allows the customer's annual Chid Care Rebate (CCR) entitlement to
be determined sooner. When actual income details are received,
re-reconciliation of CCB may occur and the customer's annual CCR will be
recalculated.

Child Care Rebate (CCR)

A customer's actual CCR annual entitlement will be automatically
calculated when CCB reconciliation is finalised or a CCB lump sum claim
is finalised.

Customers whose income is too high to receive CCB may still be eligible
for CCR.

Previous partners

Different reconciliation processing applies if the customer had an
ex-partner during the financial year. Partial reconciliation can occur
from 1 July of the lodgement year for CCB if only the ex-partner's
actual income details are required for CCB reconciliation to occur.

CCB reconciliation not applicable

CCB reconciliation does not apply to:

-   periods where the customer or their partner are in receipt of an
    income support payment
-   CCB for registered care, as it is not income tested
-   JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA), as it is an entitlement
    paid on top of CCB
-   periods in receipt of Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
-   periods in receipt of Special CCB
-   non-lodger and/or late lodger as the process that applies to FTB
    reconciliation does not apply to CCB reconciliation

Privacy and confidentiality

There are restrictions with regard to disclosure and confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information for CCB customers, that is,
privacy, Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority.
Results of CCB reconciliation or lump sum claims must not be discussed
with the child care service.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website,
contact details for the Manual Intervention Team (MIV), mySupport and
examples.

Contents

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Re-reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Customer queries Child Care Management System (CCMS) information

The Child Care Management System (CCMS)

Transferring debts from customers to child care services pre 2 July 2018

Reconciliation of Child Care Rebate (CCR)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Child Care Benefit (CCB) and JET
Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA)

View child care details and payments option online

View child care attendance option online

View Child Care Details and Payments option for Child Care Rebate (CCR)
online

Related links

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Child Care Benefit (CCB) overpayments arising from reconciliation and
lump sum claims

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Returned payments and their effect on family assistance reconciliation

Reconciliation of Child Care Rebate (CCR)

Allowable and approved absences for Child Care Benefit (CCB) and JET
Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA)

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) for family assistance

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
