
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a Double Orphan Pension (DOP) can be
restored following cancellation of the payment.

Reasons for restoring DOP

The need to restore DOP usually occurs when a customer's qualification
for DOP has been re-established after a cancellation. This can happen:

-   as a result of changes in the customer's circumstances
-   because of a review of a Services Australia decision
-   after specified events that have temporarily made them ineligible
    for payment, or
-   the customer has provided more information about their circumstances

Restoring DOP

When restoring a customer's DOP payment, it is imperative to
re-establish the customer's eligibility and to recommence payment from
the date the customer became eligible again. If there have been changes
in the customer's circumstances, an update of the relevant information
on the system needs to be done before restoring the payment, to avoid
incorrect arrears being generated.

If the period of cancellation has been greater than 13 weeks, DOP cannot
be restored and the customer will need to lodge a new claim which will
be subject to normal DOP new claim backdating provisions.

Restorations of DOP are processed by DOP Smart Centre Processing.

Cancelled whereabouts unknown (WUK)

If the customer has continued to be qualified and has retained
payability for their payment during the period of cancellation, their
payment may be restored with full arrears.

This may be the case even when the customer recontacts more than 13
weeks after the decision to cancel. This is because the customer would
be taken not to have received advice of the decision to cancel if they
were not at their known address and/or advice of the decision was
returned to Services Australia.

This means that the date of effect of the favourable determination
(restoration) resulting from review of the decision to cancel is the
date of the original decision (date of cancellation), as per the
Legislation. See the References page for more information.

Each customer's circumstances must be looked at individually to
determine whether they could be taken not to have received advice of the
decision to cancel, and whether they retained qualification and
payability during the period, and therefore receive arrears upon
restoration.

Related links

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
