
Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims 007-17103136

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process CCS claims using Process Direct.

Claim or documentation lodged

A CCS Social Application (SOA) new claim is automatically generated on
the customer's record in Process Direct when:

-   an online claim is submitted by a customer or their correspondence
    nominee
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is submitted, or
-   a paper claim is scanned to the customer's record and the details
    are manually recorded via the ACC

Note: if documentation is provided separately, scan the documents to the
customer's record and update the relevant Task in Process Direct to show
the information has been provided.

Automated processing of CCS claims

For the majority of CCS online and staff assisted claims, the system
will determine if the claim meets the criteria for straight through
processing (grants or rejections). This is generally an overnight
process. In these cases, the customer will receive more timely advice
regarding the outcome of their claim. If the claim does not meet the
criteria for straight through processing, it will be allocated to an
appropriately skilled Service Officer for processing.

Claims requiring exception management or validation of selected data
items, and new claims after a customer has been cancelled due to the
second deadline:

-   will not auto assess, and
-   are allocated via Workload Management to a staff member to manage

All ACCS applications (Grandparent, Transition to Work, Temporary
Financial Hardship and Child Wellbeing) are allocated to appropriately
skilled staff to validate information and/or evidence supporting the
application.

Processing claims

Appropriately skilled staff are allocated claims that do not meet
criteria for straight through processing. Their role is to:

-   review and update customer and claim relationships
-   review warnings against customer circumstances
-   action any errors
-   validate evidence as prompted, and
-   ensure the claim outcome aligns with payment eligibility and
    entitlement

Exception management, where the claim needs staff assessment, may
include:

checking all required evidence has been provided, and requesting further
information if necessary

assessing ‘Other’ recognised activities

assessing age/school status exemptions

referring or assessing exceptional circumstances (e.g. request for more
than 100 hours of child care)

assessing CCS Activity Test exemptions

assessing or handing off any specialised processing (e.g. residence or
immunisation exemptions)

all CCS claims combined with an ACCS application

when a customer has been cancelled due to the second deadline (2DL):

-   checking income requirements are met, and
-   any outstanding CCS debts are repaid or an adequate debt repayment
    arrangement is in place

For ACCS applications, all evidence is to be reviewed to ensure it
sufficiently supports the customer’s application.

Progress of pending claims

Customers may contact requesting their CCS claim be processed urgently.
Referral for urgent processing is only considered where the customer
meets the definition of a family in crisis or a family experiencing
financial hardship. For more information about how to manage progress of
claim enquiries, see Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Claim assessment process

All CCS claims are processed in Process Direct which:

-   is used to check and record claim progress
-   contains the claim information provided by the customer online or
    collected through the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow
    (including ACCs completed from information provided in a paper
    claim)
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   uploads claim data into a CCS claim activity
-   includes staff tasks that need to be completed before the claim can
    be finalised

Although Process Direct has been built to assess and finalise the
majority of claims without the need for staff intervention, there is
still a requirement to confirm assessment results before finalising
claims.

Reindex CCS claims

There is no reindex function currently available in Process Direct for
CCS. To reindex a CCS claim:

-   use Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) to recreate the claim
-   see Reindexing a CCS claim (Table 1, Step 2) on the Process page

Start date for CCS

The Date of Receipt (DOR) for CCS claims is the actual date the claim is
lodged.

The start date or Date of Effect (DOE) can only be backdated a maximum
of 28 days, however the start date must be the Monday of a CCS
fortnight. This is unless residency requirements have been met from a
later date. In this instance, the customer will be eligible from the
date they meet residency requirements.

The start date is determined by the system when the claim is processed.
This is known as the Deemed Date of Receipt (DDOR).

Shared care percentage system issues - P24845 Workaround

A record may need further investigation where care may not apply
correctly when the claimant is a step parent.

If the claimant is a step parent and they and/or the other biological
parent are a Child Support mutual customer the P24845 workaround is
required.

The Process page contains more information.

Reclaiming CCS after the 2nd deadline

A customer cannot reclaim CCS again until they meet all the CCS income
requirements for outstanding financial years.

Note: an outstanding financial year is one where the either the first or
second deadline has been applied. For example, customers who received
entitlement during 2018-19, must have met the reconciliation conditions
for this year in order to re-claim CCS during the 2020-21 year.

The new CCS claim can only be backdated to the later of:

-   the date the customer met all the CCS income requirements, or
-   by using the 28 day backdating rules

The customer must also have either:

-   repaid any outstanding CCS debts, or
-   have an adequate debt repayment arrangement in place for any CCS
    debts
    (noting the general debt hierarchy rules apply, where the customer
    may have to pay off an older debt for another payment before they
    commence repaying the CCS debt)

Note: the granting of the CCS new claim, as long as the customer is
entitled to more than 0%, will meet this requirement as the customer
will have automatic debt withholdings applied.

The Resources page contains contact details, activity test update
examples, skill tag information, Level 2 Policy Helpdesk and a link to
the CCS claim form (FA084). There is also a link to the Services
Australia calendar that displays the start of each CCS fortnight.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims processing

Coding Activity Test details for Child Care Subsidy (CSS)

Add child claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Social Applications

Identify Confirmation

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Cancellation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Cancellation, rejection and not effective codes for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Online Document Recording

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
