-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to reassess a current Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) customer's entitlement when an additional child has entered their
care in the current or previous financial year.

Family assistance claims

An additional child can increase the rate of FTB and Rent Assistance
(RA) payable to the family.

Separate procedures apply for:

-   customers claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   customers claiming for an adopted child
-   non-FTB current customers claiming FTB for children in care other
    than a newborn or adopted child
-   customers claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
    Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Time limit for reassessment

A reassessment of FTB for an additional child for a period during which
the customer received FTB instalments can only be granted back to 1 July
of the preceding financial year. FTB instalment customers should request
a reassessment of FTB for an additional child before the end of the
lodgement year, for example by 30 June 2019 for 2017-2018.

Claiming options

[] All customers should be encouraged to use online services to advise
their child's details and for assessment of payments. This should be
encouraged due to the payment streaming, assessment of the customer's
circumstances, and re-use of existing customer information.

If a current FTB instalment customer does not complete the online claim
process, is not claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL), or if it is
unreasonable for them to access online services, their FTB can be
assessed as follows:

-   Newborn children (up to 12 months old): if all information is
    available (for example, the newborn Child Declaration (FA081) has
    been completed in full), and it is established the customer does not
    intend to claim PPL for the child, the information provided on the
    FA081 can be used to add the newborn child
-   Older children (excludes newborns): customers can verbally advise
    that an additional older child has entered their care and request a
    reassessment of their FTB for the additional child. The customer
    must provide any requested additional information for the
    reassessment to occur. A current year or lump sum claim is not
    required

Confirming care arrangements

A mandatory attempt to confirm the change of care with the previous
carer (in most cases) must be made to ensure that payments are made to
the correct person.

If the previous carer has not notified the change of care, or if the
change is contested, the customer must provide evidence to support the
actual care arrangements. If the losing carer is not current, and does
not have a Centrelink record, a record needs to be created if the
gaining carer is able to provide enough information for this to occur.
Once the record is created, the children then need to be linked to that
record.

If a change of care has occurred as a result of a child being removed
from their parent's care by a state welfare authority, or family and
domestic violence situation, and there is concern that the customer or
children will be placed at risk if the losing carer is contacted,
evidence supplied by the gaining carer can be used to confirm the change
of care.

If the customer requests a reassessment for an additional child but the
child is assessed as not in the care of the customer, the link child
activity must be cancelled, and a DOC recorded with details.

Verification of care arrangements (including care arrangements for grandparents)

If a grandparent or third party carer contacts to advise they have
gained care of a child, further information can be requested if the
following conditions are met:

-   the losing carer is the parent of the child, and
-   there are no Court Orders or Child Protection orders in place for
    the care of the child

This includes asking the following questions to help make a change of
care decision:

-   What is the reason for the change of care?
-   Is the child going into the care of a grandparent or third party? If
    so, do they live in the same residence as the parent?
-   What involvement will the parent continue to have with their
    child/ren while in the grandparent’s or third party's care?
-   Is the reason for the change of care due to work related reasons
    and/or study?
-   Who will be providing financially for the child while in the
    grandparent's or third party's care?
-   Is the child listed on the grandparent's or third party's Medicare
    card?
-   Who will be making the major decisions for the child regarding
    health education and discipline?

Any evidence relevant to the decision should be documented and scanned
to the record. For grandparent carers, see Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and applications.

If the Service Officer needs help in determining eligibility where there
has been a change of care of a child from the parent to the grandparent
or third party carer, get help from Local Peer Support (LPS) or a
Service Support Officer (SSO) using standard escalation protocols.

Child from a previous relationship

If the customer has care of a child from a previous relationship, check
if action to obtain child support is required to meet the requirements
of the maintenance action test.

Customers required to seek child support will need to take action within
the initial 13 week period to continue to be paid more than base rate
FTB Part A for the child.

Non-biological children

Customers claiming Family Tax Benefit Part A for a child who is not
their or their partner’s biological or adopted child may be eligible to
receive Double Orphan Pension.

Double Orphan Pension helps families with the costs of caring for
orphaned children or children who are unable to be cared for by their
parents in certain circumstances. For more information on eligibility
and how to claim, see Double Orphan Pension (DOP).

Care assessment referral activities for income support payment, LIC, CSHC and FST claims

Customers may advise of a child entering care, or a change to an
existing care arrangement for a child in care within the following
claims:

-   income support payment
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)

If the claim is allocated for processing in:

-   Customer First, there is no change to the existing protocols for
    referral and assessment.
-   Process Direct (PD), an Assessment of Care Arrangements Referral
    work item (ZCRF_AOCA_REFERRAL) will be generated and the assessment
    must be completed before the claim can be finalised.

The Assessment of Care Arrangements work item will be allocated to a
suitably skilled Families Service Officer to complete the care
assessment in Customer First.

After the care assessment has been completed, income support payment,
LIC, CSHC and FST processing staff will proceed to claim assessment and
finalisation.

FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claims and instalment arrears

From 10 June 2019, FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim amounts and
instalment arrears can be used to recover any family assistance, social
security, student assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payment
overpayments. This will occur even if the customer has a current payment
arrangement. Previously, FTB amounts could only be used to recover FTB,
Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child Care Rebate (CCR) debts.

Where exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances apply which may cause
the customer to suffer severe financial hardship, customers can request
to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery prior to any money being
taken from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up payments.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for ABSTUDY and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC), the Direct Referral to SSO
webform, mySupport, Services Australia Website and the Business
Processing Branch intranet page. It also contains examples of the date
of effect rules and Q999 letter text, and information about the letters
produced with the Child - Change in Care Arrangements script. Links on
this page may be unavailable to external audiences.

Related links

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing proof of a child's birth

Child enters customer's care/custody

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink
and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Recording legal residence status

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
