
Manual intervention where Australian Taxation Office (ATO) cancels Notice of Assessment (NOA) 007-11080010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the action required to complete Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation for a customer
where the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) cancels a Notice of
Assessment (NOA). From 1 July 2009, the ATO no longer advises the FTB
result on a person's NOA. All CCB/CCR references relate to financial
years prior to 2018/2019.

Cancellation of Notice of Assessments

The ATO may cancel a NOA due to a number of reasons including:

-   system faults
-   compliance action
-   income amendments
-   fraudulent lodgement

The cancellations are referred to as either:

-   pre issue cancellation when the ATO assessment is cancelled before
    the NOA has been issued
-   post issue cancellation when the ATO assessment is cancelled after
    the NOA has been issued

A pre or post issue cancellation for either the customer, their current
partner or ex-partner can affect a reconciliation result, or an FTB lump
sum claim for a previous income year made through the ATO before 1 July
2009.

Pre issue cancellations

Pre-issue cancellation will occur if an ATO income cancellation advice
is received before a wash-up transaction has been received. Any arrears
or debt will remain as 'parked' with no further action taking place on
them until new actual income amounts are received from the ATO.

Following the receipt of new income details, manual intervention will be
required if a reconciliation or FTB lump sum claim assessment previously
been calculated.

Post issue cancellations

Post issue cancellations will trigger an auto re-reconciliation when
correct income is known. A top-up or overpayment generated in the
initial claim or reconciliation calculation will stand until the new
income details are received. There will be limited Service Officer
intervention required when both the original and subsequent
reconciliation calculation involves overpayments.

Related links

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
