
Deferral of Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP) 007-11010130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process of assessing a deferral of the
Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP). A deferral
may be considered if the customer (or their partner) is not able to
lodge income tax returns due to circumstances beyond their control.

Deferrals

A separate procedure covers consideration of a deferral when FTB has
been cancelled due to the Sunset Clause.

Customers are encouraged to contact the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
to discuss lodgement options, extensions and gaining lost copies of
required documentation, before a deferral option is considered. The
customer should be advised to visit the ATO website for more
information.

A deferral can be granted before or after PIP has started, allowing FTB
instalments to continue or restart. The extension of time is to allow
the customer or their partner to lodge the outstanding income tax
return(s). If the deferral is required for more than 1 financial year,
each separate financial year must be added within the workflow.

Reasons for deferral

All deferrals and exemptions are recorded by running the Deferral
Exemption workflow.

A deferral may only be considered for the following reasons:

Tax return/s lodged if the recipient/partner has lodged the outstanding
tax return/s with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) but
reconciliation has not occurred

ATO extension to lodge if the ATO grants a customer an extension of time
to lodge, or suspends enforcement action

Family and domestic violence:

-   If it is determined that the customer and/or family may experience
    family and domestic violence if they request the partner to lodge
    their income tax return/s
-   If a customer has been identified at risk, experiencing or affected
    by domestic violence
-   If a customer cannot lodge their tax return because of the actions
    of their partner or ex-partner, it is possible to grant a deferral
    for a specified period
-   Deferrals can include where the violence was threatened or carried
    out against a child, or another member of the family who resides in
    the household and this has meant the customer has been unable to
    lodge their tax return
    For more information on assisting customers who may be at risk of
    family and domestic violence, see Family and domestic violence

Severe illness (including mental illness) if:

-   the customer or partner is a non-lodger and has a severe illness
    preventing them from lodging the specified income tax return(s), and
-   a Doctor's certificate is supplied which states that the
    non-lodgement is due to illness and how long the condition is
    expected to last

Severe financial hardship if the application of PIP would cause the
family reasonable expense or cause them to take on debt to meet
reasonable expense. The References page contains a link to the
definition of financial hardship for more guidance

Bereavement deferral after the death of a customer or the customer's
child. If PIP is to be applied, the deferral is coded to allow the FTB
bereavement payment to be paid after the death of a child, or arrears to
be paid after the death of a customer (for a period prior to the
customer's death)

A special circumstances PIP deferral may apply where a customer is
experiencing special circumstances that are preventing them from either
lodging a tax return or seeking an extension to lodge from the ATO

Service Officers are responsible for determining if a PIP deferral or
extension is appropriate and for conducting the initial assessment by
discussing the customer's effecting circumstances, reviewing the
customer's record, and documenting the deferral information to be
assessed by a Centrelink specialist where appropriate.

ATO referral

If the customer does not meet the PIP deferral criteria, they should
seek further advice and support from the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) for extension of lodgement options.

Social worker referrals

The Service Officer may consider offering the customer a referral to a
social worker due to the sensitive material discussed.

Social workers should be aware of this as an option when assessing
family and domestic violence deferrals for PIP.

Non-payment of FTB instalment payments to zero rate customers

Where a customer is also subject to the non-payment of FTB instalment
payments to zero entitlement customers, this will override any PIP
deferral that is recorded.

If a PIP customer with a zero rate preclusion in place resolves their
non-lodger status or an exemption is granted, arrears for the precluded
component/s will not be payable from the date the preclusion was
applied.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

Related links

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments due to 3 or more
non-lodger decisions (Sunset Clause)

Social Work Services

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child

Determining a deferral of Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment
Payments (PIP) due to family and domestic violence

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
