
Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant 007-09020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria to receive Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant under the Paid Parental Leave
scheme. PPL is paid at a rate based on the national minimum wage and can
be paid after a stillbirth or after the death of a child.

PPL as a primary claimant

A primary claimant may receive up to 18 weeks of PPL. Any unused PPL may
be payable to an eligible secondary/tertiary claimant, for example,
their partner.

It can be taken before, after or at the same time as:

-   employer-provided paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave, or
-   other leave entitlements (such as annual leave or long service
    leave)

PPL is made up a PPL period of up to 18 weeks (90 payable days), and
consists of:

-   a PPL period of up to 12 weeks (60 payable days), plus
-   30 Flexible PPL days

Exceptional circumstances

Primary claimants will most often be the birth mother, or initial
primary carer of an adopted or surrogate child. If exceptional
circumstances exist (for example, the parents of the child are
incapacitated and the grandparents become the primary carer of the
child), someone else may be eligible for PPL under the exceptional
circumstances criteria.

Customers who do not meet all of the eligibility to be paid PPL under
the exceptional circumstances provisions may still be eligible for PPL
as a secondary claimant under exceptional circumstances. For example,
the grandparent is the primary carer of the child but does not met the
work test. They may be able to claim the remainder of the PPL that was
not paid to the initial primary claimant.

Additional primary claimants

In some instances, PPL may be payable to a new primary claimant after
the birth mother/primary carer has received PPL payments.

Where a customer has met the PPL exceptional circumstances eligibility
and another person has previously been paid PPL for the child, a manual
override code of APC-Additional Primary Claimant will need to be coded
by a families override officer to enable payment.

Families override officers should refer to Exception processing of Paid
Parental Leave scheme claims for details about the override coding.

PPL eligibility criteria

To receive PPL as a primary claimant, a person must:

be the primary carer of a Parental Leave Pay (PPL) child. Exception:
This does not apply:

-   after a child has died or was stillborn, or
-   if care of the child is lost without legal authority

meet the PPL work test

meet the PPL income test. For the PPL income test threshold, see Paid
Parental Leave - income limits

notify that they have applied to register the child's birth. Exception:
This does not apply if the child is:

-   adopted
-   stillborn
-   born outside Australia, or
-   entrusted to care as part of a surrogacy arrangement

meet Australian residence requirements

Additionally, the primary claimant must:

-   not have returned to work since becoming the primary carer of the
    child to be eligible for the PPL period
-   not be working on days that they want to claim Flexible PPL
    Exceptions apply in some circumstances.

Note: surrogate birth mothers and birth mothers adopting out children or
legally losing custody may not return to work and continue to receive
the PPL period. Flexible PPL days can continue to be paid on days the
customer is not working, if these days are not more than 18 weeks
following the child’s birth. See: Claiming payments for children
entrusted to care as part of the process of adoption or surrogacy.

PPL is not payable for children in a customer’s care as part of a formal
foster care or kinship care arrangement.

PPL can be payable:

-   for formal foster carers who have had the child come into their care
    as part of the adoption process, where the placement is for the
    purpose of the adoption
-   in an informal foster care relationship where the child has entered
    care in exceptional circumstances

Primary claimant has returned to work

PPL can be taken before, after or at the same time as employer-provided
paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave, or other leave entitlements
(such as annual leave or long service leave).

If the customer has returned to work since becoming the primary carer of
the child, they:

-   will not be eligible for the PPL period after the return to work
    date, but may be able to transfer some or all of their PPL period to
    a secondary claimant
-   may be eligible for 30 Flexible PPL days, if the child’s birth or
    adoption is on or after 1 July 2020
-   may be eligible for some or all of the PPL period if they meet the
    PPL extended work test and the nominated start date is before their
    return to work date

Note: customers may participate in up to 10 'keeping in touch' days
prior to returning to work, but not within 14 days after the day the
child was born.

Return to work exceptions apply in some circumstances, including
bereavement. See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work.

Flexible PPL can be paid after the customer has returned to work.
However, it cannot be paid on a day that the customer is performing paid
work unless an exception applies.

Primary claimant transferring some or all of their PPL entitlement to another person

Full transfer of the PPL period

If the primary claimant is transferring their full PPL period to a
secondary claimant, the primary claimant needs to meet the PPL
eligibility criteria from the child’s date of birth/adoption until the
day before primary care of the child is transferred to the secondary
claimant.

When the transfer of primary care date is:

-   the child’s date of birth/adoption, the primary claimant is only
    required to meet the limited PPL eligibility criteria. The secondary
    claimant must meet the full eligibility criteria from the child’s
    date of birth/adoption to the end of the PPL period
-   after the child is born (or enters care), the primary claimant must
    meet the full PPL eligibility criteria for each day from the date
    the child is born (or enters care) until the day before primary care
    is transferred to the secondary claimant. The secondary claimant
    must satisfy the full PPL eligibility criteria for each day from the
    date primary care is transferred to them until the end of the PPL
    period.

Where the birth mother or initial primary claimant meets the limited
eligibility criteria (for example has returned to work before submitting
their PPL claim), the claim must NOT be assessed until both the primary
and secondary claimants have:

-   submitted a claim for PPL
-   claims ‘STArted’ or ‘ASS-PCB’
-   not had a payability determination made for PPL (i.e.
    rejected/assessed or granted claim) for the child

This process is required to ensure the primary and secondary claimant’s
PPL periods line up.

If the secondary claimant's record is not linked to or is in a different
Centrelink environment to that of the primary carer, a workaround for
PPL secondary claimants may be required.

Partial transfer of PPL period

For a partial transfer, the primary claimant’s period and secondary
claimant’s period must be a continuous period with no break in
eligibility.

Primary claimants transferring some (but not all) of their PPL period to
a secondary claimant must meet the full PPL eligibility criteria from
the child’s date of birth/adoption to the end of their PPL period
(transfer date). The secondary claimant must satisfy the full PPL
eligibility criteria for each day from the date primary care of the
child is transferred to them until the end of their PPL period.

Flexible PPL days

The primary claimant can choose to give permission for another person
(secondary claimant) to claim some or all of their Flexible PPL days.

The secondary claimant is required to lodge their own PPL claim to
nominate these days. A secondary claimant’s claim for Flexible PPL days
can be lodged up to 2 years after the child’s birth or adoption.
However, PPL claims that include a full or partial transfer of the PPL
period must be lodged within one year of the child’s birth or adoption
and there are time limits for claiming the maximum PPL period.

The primary claimant can remove permission:

-   at any time during the pre-birth phase (pre-birth claims only), or
-   before a secondary claimant has claimed the Flexible PPL day

For the purposes of claiming Flexible PPL days, multiple secondary
claimants can be linked to a child.

Timeframe for claims

Customers are encouraged to lodge an early claim for family assistance
and Parental Leave Pay (PPL). It is important they are aware of the time
limits for claiming the maximum PPL period.

For all primary claimants, PPL claims must be lodged before the:

child's first birthday, or

first anniversary of the day:

-   the primary claimant became the primary carer for exceptional
    circumstances
-   the child becomes entrusted to the customer's care for adoptions, or
-   the child enters care for a surrogacy arrangement

The PPL period is only payable for days before:

-   the child’s first birthday, or
-   the first anniversary of the child’s entry to care in the case of
    adoption
-   first anniversary of the child's entry into care for a surrogacy
    arrangement

Flexible PPL is only paid on days after the end of the PPL period and
before the child's:

-   second birthday, or
-   second anniversary of the day the child is entrusted into care for
    adoption/a surrogacy arrangement

Note: if a customer indicates they are claiming PPL because someone is
transferring PPL to them, they will be assessed as a secondary claimant.
The primary claimant will need to be located and the claims matched up
to ensure the correct PPL period dates can be determined. If the primary
claim has not already been assessed, or if the secondary claimant is
claiming the full entitlement, the claims will need to be assessed
together. See Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or
tertiary claimant.

Start date of the PPL period

When claiming PPL, primary claimants must nominate a start date for
their PPL period.

The PPL period start date:

can be no earlier than the child’s date of birth or the date the child
entered care

is determined once the customer provides the child's proof of birth or
proof of entry into care

can be backdated to the child’s date of birth/adoption if:

-   the customer claims and provides proof of birth within 28 days of
    the child’s birth/adoption, or
-   if they meet the PPL extended work test due to coronavirus
    (COVID-19)

See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

A customer's nominated start date or PPL period start date is not the
date that the customer will receive their first payment. However, the
customer's first PPL period instalment will be backdated to their PPL
period start date.

See Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start
date.

Note: for customers that are not eligible for the PPL period, their PPL
will start on the first Flexible PPL day.

Effect of PPL on other payments

Multiple birth

For a multiple birth, PPL can only be paid for one child and the higher
rate of NBS/NBU may be paid for the other children. However if there was
a significant delay between the births of the children from the same
pregnancy, for example twins delivered 5+ days apart, the births may be
considered separate birthing events and not part of a multiple birth. If
approved these cases may qualify to be payable for each child. Cases
with evidence of multiple birth with significant delay should be
forwarded to the Families level 2 helpdesk for assessment.

Where multiple children are adopted as part of the same adoption
process, PPL is only payable for one child.

Assessable income

Parental Leave Pay Scheme payments are:

-   taxable income and are included in a customer's adjusted taxable
    income for family assistance payments
-   treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment for
    income support payments

Note: Service Officers do not code the PPL and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
income on the customer’s record. It will be automatically included for
assessment when the PPL or DAP claim is actioned. See Coding income and
assets for Centrelink payments and services for more information.

Any PPL and DAP payments are taken into consideration as income for
customers claiming or renewing a Low Income Health Care Card.

Eligibility for other payments

Customers (and/or their partner) cannot receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part B at the same time as PPL.

One customer can receive PPL and DAP for the same child, however:

-   the PPL and DAP periods must be taken at different times, and
-   a maximum of 18 weeks can be paid to the one person

Note: usually only the secondary claimant can claim PPL and DAP, as the
primary claimant is generally not eligible for DAP.

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks PPL and DAP combined for the
same child. For example; the primary claimant receives 18 weeks of PPL
and their partner receives 2 weeks of DAP.

A customer can receive PPL for one child and DAP for another child at
the same time.

Customers cannot receive:

-   JobKeeper Payment for the same period they receive PPL
-   PPL and NBS/NBU for the same child. However, customers may change
    their claim choice and claim PPL after NBS/NBU has been paid. Any
    NBS/NBU paid to the customer will have to be repaid

After a stillbirth, customers who are not eligible for PPL may claim
Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP).

The Resources page contains Q999 letter text, PPL eligibility scenarios,
links to Services Australia Website, and a user guide for comparison of
PPL eligibility for primary and secondary/tertiary claimants. It also
contains links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query form, and the
Direct Referral to Service Support Officer (SSO) webform (via the
Quality and Technical Support homepage).

Related links

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Changing claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Payment rates and thresholds

Paid Parental Leave scheme claims income test and previous financial
year income estimates

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
