
Apportionment of income/maintenance reduction for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A 007-07060050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a reduction due to family income and
maintenance income is applied to a customer's maximum Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A rate when the income is above the relevant income free
area. The components making up the maximum rate of FTB are reduced
proportionately.

On this Page:

FTB Part A components

FTB Part A may include:

-   Standard Part A rate for each FTB child
-   Energy Supplement Part A if customer is grandfathered
-   Large Family Supplement (LFS) Note: LFS is not payable from 1 July
    2016
-   Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Rent Assistance (RA) only if more than base rate Part A is payable
-   Part A supplement, after the end of the relevant financial year

Note: from 1 July 2018, an FTB Part A reduction may be applied to the
maximum rate of FTB Part A that can be paid for a child who does not
meet FTB immunisation requirements.

Excess or maintenance income affecting rate of FTB Part A

When a customer has income above the income free area (i.e. excess
income) or maintenance income above the Maintenance Income Free Area
(MIFA) affecting their rate of FTB Part A, each component is reduced
proportionately. Note: Large Family Supplement (LFS) (if payable before
1 July 2016), Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA) and Newborn Supplement
(NBS) are not reduced under Method 1 as they are base rate components.

This means that if a customer loses entitlement to one component, Rent
Assistance (RA) for example, the customer's FTB Part A rate may reduce
by more than the amount of the RA that was being paid as the income
reduction that previously applied to the RA must now be applied to other
FTB Part A components.

If a rate needs to be manually calculated, it may be necessary to
apportion any income or maintenance income reduction between the
components to work out how much of each component the customer is
entitled to. Service Officers will normally only need to apportion
income and/or maintenance reduction when coding:

-   amount of arrears (adjusting system generated amounts)
-   manual rates

When a child/case end is transferred by Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In most cases, this will result in a decrease in the customer's
ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised maintenance income
can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment, causing a further
reduction to the ongoing rate.

This is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a system
problem, but it can lead to an unintended and unexpected reduction to
the customer's ongoing rate. Instances must be reported to the Level 2
Policy Helpdesk for escalation for a workaround to be considered. See
the Resources page for a link.

The Resources page contains an example of how to manually calculate a
customer's reduced rate and a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk
intranet page.

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 2)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
