
Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) 007-05040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when a change in circumstances is
advised by a person claiming or receiving PPL. They may also be claiming
or receiving family assistance.

Updating a change in circumstances

Customers may contact to advise a change in circumstances [] online, by
phone, or in person.

Customers and Service Officers can:

change the nominated tax rate (where PPL is paid to the customer by
Services Australia):

-   the tax rate will default to 15%, however customers can nominate a
    rate between 0%-50%
-   if PPL is delivered by an employer, customers must discuss tax
    deductions with their employer

change the nominated start date (NSD) for the PPL period (limited to
primary claimants only and where PPL is not yet current)

-   secondary and/or tertiary claimants cannot choose or change the
    start date for the PPL period. For these customers the start date is
    the day after the last day the primary claimant received payments
    for the child or where the full PPL period is being transferred, the
    start date is the primary claimant's PPL period start date
-   if the customer contacts to advise their claim has been assessed
    with the incorrect NSD, see Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim processed
    with incorrect nominated start date

advise a child has left primary care, including transferring all or an
unused portion of the PPL period to their partner or another person

advise of a return to work or of work performed on a Flexible PPL day

advise resignation or termination of employment

manage Flexible PPL days, including claiming new days and updating
existing Flexible PPL

If a customer contacts to discuss an overlap of JobKeeper or COVID-19
Disaster Payment (paid by Services Australia on or after 3 June 2021)
and PPL see Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims.

Only Service Officers can update:

-   income estimate details for a PPL claim. This can only be updated
    when the customer's claim status is ASS (assessed) or PND (pending)
    and can only be updated within a PPL new claim
-   employer details provided in the customer claim
-   the customer's name if they are known by another name with their PPL
    employer
-   expected date of birth or entry into care (for pre birth/adoption
    claims)
-   work test information

If a retrospective change in circumstances is advised, Service Officers
must update the customer's record and reassess their entitlement. This
may result in an overpayment if the customer received PPL on a day that
they were not eligible for PPL.

Customers can advise resignation/termination of employment up to 30 days
in advance.

A customer who is not eligible for PPL due to a change in circumstances
may still be eligible for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront
Payment (NBU).

Online updates

[] For customers to update details online for PPL they must be:

-   registered online and logged on to their Centrelink online account,
    and
-   either PPL assessed or current

Online updates that do not auto-finalise will be allocated to a Service
Officer and completed using Customer First. The activity will contain
details of the update/s in the 'Note' section.

Interaction Activities

An Interaction record/activity can generate when:

-   a customer updates their circumstances online but the update is
    unsuccessful
-   a customer accesses the online service and no updates are made but
    it is submitted by the customer
-   a Service Officer starts a PPL Change of Circumstance and doesn’t
    complete the change

To check for any outstanding interaction records:

-   check the Customer Summary screen in Customer First
-   scroll to the Activities tab/Interaction history tab to make sure
    all incomplete/outstanding work is completed

If a PPL circumstance (Guided Procedure) is started and not complete,
the activity often updates to ‘in process’ to continue to action the
Change of Circumstances (CoC) interaction activity.

Staff must change the activity back to ‘in draft’ to enable updates, and
finalise the activity.

Limiting date

PPL claims will be automatically reassessed only if the child’s date of
birth or entry into care is less than 3 years from the system date. The
PPL Circumstance workflow cannot be used for reassessments of PPL claims
completed more than 2 years after the child’s date of birth or entry
into care.

These updates must be keyed on the PPL Claim Action (P1CA) screen.

Impact on the PPL period

The PPL period must be paid as an unbroken, continuous block. If a
change in circumstances results in a loss of PPL eligibility on a day in
the customer’s PPL period, the PPL period will end. The customer's PPL
period will cancel from the date of the change. In most cases they will
remain eligible for Flexible PPL.

In some cases, the customer can transfer the unused days in their PPL
period to another person who will have care of the child for the
remaining days after the change in circumstances. The other person must
claim PPL and be eligible as a secondary claimant.

If the customer has Flexible PPL days connected to their PPL period,
they will not be automatically rejected. These days will remain
scheduled on the days immediately following their original PPL period
end date. These must be checked and rejected if the customer advises
they are no longer eligible.

Exception: if the customer returns to work before the end of the PPL
period or connected Flexible PPL days, all connected Flexible PPL days
scheduled after the return to work date will be returned to the
customer's unclaimed balance of Flexible PPL days.

Managing and checking Flexible PPL days

When a PPL change in circumstances results in a loss of PPL eligibility:

on a day the customer has claimed Flexible PPL, the Flexible PPL day
will be rejected or withdrawn and returned to their balance of unclaimed
days

on a day during the PPL period and:

-   the customer has returned to work, any connected Flexible PPL days
    scheduled on dates after the return to work date will be withdrawn.
    They will be returned to the customer’s balance of unclaimed days
-   the change is for any other reason, any connected Flexible PPL days
    will not be automatically rejected. They will be converted to not
    connected days and maintained on the claimed dates. Services
    Australia will be responsible for delivering them

Any Flexible PPL days scheduled on dates after the change in
circumstances must be checked and rejected/withdrawn if the customer
advises they are no longer eligible. See Claiming and managing Flexible
Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Helping customers identify the most beneficial payment to claim for a
newborn or adopted child

Customer requests to change their claim choice for a newborn or adopted
child

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Restoration of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
