-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines information about how to determine a customer’s
PPL period start date.

PPL period start date

A customer’s PPL period start date cannot be determined until:

-   the primary claimant has made an effective claim for PPL, and
-   lodged proof of birth/entry into care for the PPL child

Primary claimants are required to meet all PPL eligibility requirements
each day between the child’s date of birth/entry into care and their PPL
period start date. For secondary and tertiary requirements, eligibility
requirements must be met from their PPL period start date.

As PPL is paid in arrears (either by the customer’s employer or Services
Australia), a customer’s PPL period start date is generally not the date
that their first PPL instalment is paid. However the first PPL
instalment will be backdated to their PPL period start date. See
Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

The PPL period is based on a standard Monday to Friday working week. The
customer is paid for each eligible weekday in the PPL period. Where the
PPL period commences on a weekend, the first paid PPL day will be on the
following Monday. See Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP).

PPL period start date for primary claimants

If a primary claimant makes an effective claim for PPL:

-   within 28 days of the birth/adoption and provides proof of
    birth/entry into care within 28 days of the birth/adoption, their
    PPL start date can be as early as the child’s date of birth/entry
    into care. The 28 day period commences the day after the date of
    birth/entry into care
-   within 28 days of the birth/adoption but provides proof of
    birth/entry into care more than 28 days after the birth/entry into
    care, their PPL period start date can be as early as the date that
    the proof of birth/entry into care was provided
-   more than 28 days after the child’s date of birth/entry into care,
    their PPL period start date can be as early as the date that the
    effective claim was made

Note: an exception to the usual backdating provisions apply to customers
who:

-   meet the extended work test provision due to coronavirus (COVID-19)
    or
-   received COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services Australia on or
    after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month qualifying period

See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

A primary claimant can nominate a PPL period start date on or after
their child’s date of birth/adoption if they:

-   meet the PPL extended work test, or
-   received COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services Australia on or
    after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month qualifying period

They can do this even if they lodge their claim more than 28 days after
the date of birth or adoption.

If the customer nominates a start date in the past and they or their
partner are receiving an income support payment or Family Tax Benefit,
they must be advised of potential overpayments to these payments.

PPL payments cannot be paid for the same period as COVID-19 Disaster
Payment. To receive a COVID-19 Disaster Payment the customer must have
stopped work or had their work hours reduced during the relevant period.
A customer in receipt of PPL during the relevant period would not be
deemed to have stopped work or had reduced hours as they did not intend
to work during the period.

Nominated start date

When claiming PPL as a primary claimant, customers are required to
provide a nominated start date. This is the date from which they want
their PPL period to begin.

Customers can nominate their child’s date of birth, the date their
post-birth claim was lodged or another future date.

This date must be:

-   between the child’s date of birth and their first birthday, or
-   in the case of adoptions, between the date that the child enters the
    customer’s care and the first anniversary of their entry into care

Note: to receive their full PPL period, a customer’s PPL period start
date must be at least:

-   18 weeks before the child’s first birthday or first anniversary of
    entry into care, for children born/adopted before 1 July 2020, or
-   12 weeks before the child’s first birthday or first anniversary of
    entry into care, for children born/adopted on or after 1 July 2020

A primary claimant’s PPL period start date can be on or after their
nominated start date, depending on when an effective claim and proof of
birth/entry into care is lodged.

PPL start date for secondary and tertiary claimants

Secondary and tertiary claimants cannot choose their PPL period start
date.

For partial transfers, the secondary claimant’s PPL period start date
will always be the day after the primary claimant’s PPL period end date.

For full PPL transfers, the secondary claimant’s PPL period start date
will always be primary claimant’s start date.

Effect of PPL on other payments

PPL is treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment
for Income Support Payments (ISP).

If the customer (and/or their partner) is receiving an ISP and they have
chosen a past date (such as the child's date of birth or entry to care)
as their nominated start date, they may incur an overpayment of their
ISP. Note: this ISP overpayment will be automatically offset against the
PPL arrears payment.

Impacted customers may request to change their nominated start date to a
future date to avoid, or limit the amount of, the ISP overpayment.

Customer wants to change their nominated start date

Primary claimants can change their nominated start date (subject to the
above rules) if their PPL payments have not yet commenced.

If a customer requests to change their PPL period start date, it can
only be changed to a date on or after the date the request is made,
except where the:

-   request is made within 28 days of the child’s birth and both an
    effective claim and proof of birth/entry into care have been
    provided
-   primary claimant meets the PPL extended work test
-   claimant received COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services
    Australia on or after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month qualifying
    period

If any of the above conditions apply, the nominated start date can be a
date on or after their child’s date of birth/adoption.

See Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL).

A separate process applies if Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim processed
with incorrect nominated start date.

Customer has not provided a nominated start date

Customers must provide a nominated start date when claiming PPL.

If a nominated a start date is not provided, and the child’s date of
birth/adoption is:

-   before 1 July 2020, their entire claim for PPL will be not
    effective.
-   on or after 1 July 2020, they will not be entitled to a PPL period.
    However they may still be entitled to Flexible PPL days

Claims awaiting PPL period start date

Where a claim has been granted and proof of birth/entry into care
provided prior to the PPL period start date, the claim status will be
assessed (PPL/ASS-ASD) until the PPL period commences.

The Resources page contains scenarios for determining a customer’s PPL
period start date.

Related links

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim processed with incorrect nominated start
date

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
