-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines the change of circumstances process that applies
to employers who have registered to provide Parental Leave Pay (PPL) to
an employee.

Employer advises of a change

Employers can advise up to 30 days in advance of an:

-   employee resignation/termination of employment
-   return to work - including for an allowable exception reason for PPL
    claims for children born or adopted before 1 July 2023
-   working on a PPL day - for children born or adopted on or after 1
    July 2023

Note: where:

-   PPL has been determined to be delivered by the employer, and the
    employer notifies an employee was working on a PPL day,
-   the employer determination will end and Services Australia will
    deliver any remaining PPL days

This will occur even when the customer notified they worked on a weekend
day within the employer paid period. The employer paid period is only
paid for weekdays (Monday to Friday). See Delivery of Parental Leave
Pay.

Once the assessment of the employees PPL claim is complete employers can
notify a change in circumstances via:

-   Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) or
-   Business Hub, or
-   If they are not registered, the Paid Parental Leave Employer
    Processing Team (PPLEPT)

If the employer notifies a change of circumstance, contact the employee
before taking any action.

The PPL circumstances option for registered employers

Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS)

The PPL circumstances option is available to CBOS registered employers
on the Services Australia website, and also allows the Paid Parental
Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) to process employer advised
change of circumstances.

Employers and the PPLEPT will be able to:

view and update current PPL employer details on the employer record,
such as:

-   bank details and
-   authorised users
-   manually update current employer details

add/update employer Australian Business Number (ABN) and business name

verify and validate newly entered employer ABN through Australian
Business Register (ABR) web service

record payment delivery changes (PPLEPT only)

view historical information

Business Hub

Business Hub allows employers to advise of an employee's change in
circumstances online.

An employer

-   selects the Providing Leave Pay for existing claimants tile
-   completes the required fields, and submits the information

The Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) will action
the work item.

The PPLEPT can undertake a revocation/transfer of the employer role in
circumstances that no longer require the employer to deliver PPL to an
employee.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Paid Parental Leave
Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT).

Related links

Employer registration for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Authenticating an employer

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
