-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can claim Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

On this Page:

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and (ACCS)

Families can claim CCS via:

-   [] an Online claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   a Verbal claim through the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   the non-digital paper Claim for Child Care Subsidy (including ACCS
    (Grandparent) (FA084)

Service Officers can also assist Indigenous customers living in remote
communities who have language or literacy barriers affecting their
capacity to use forms or online claims to claim CCS/ACCS. Follow the
same process as outlined in Assisting Indigenous customers to claim
family assistance and/or Paid Parental leave scheme payments.

In extremely limited circumstances customers may submit a paper claim
for CCS and ACCS. Paper claims should only be offered after digital and
staff assisted options have been offered. Circumstances in which it may
be appropriate to issue a paper claim are Remote Servicing Team has no
internet connectivity, lack of interpreter availability to assist with
verbal claim, etc. The Resources page has a link to the non-digital
claim forms for CCS.

Applying for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

[] Customers can apply for ACCS (Grandparent), (Temporary Financial
Hardship) or (Transition to Work) at the time of completing an online or
staff assisted claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS). Customers already on
CCS can apply at any time via a change of circumstances, using their
online account or contacting the agency.

In the limited circumstances when an offline (paper) claim is used, the
ACCS (Grandparent) question set is included in the CCS offline claim.

ACCS (Child Wellbeing) applications can only be made by an approved
child care services.

When a new claim may not be required - transitioning to CCS

Families who are eligible for Child Care Benefit (CCF) and Child Care
Rebate (CCR) between 1 April 2018 and 1 July 2018 may not be required to
lodge a new claim for CCS. These customers are deemed as having made a
claim for CCS, and this deemed claim is valid until 23 September 2018.
They will however be required to provide additional information for
their eligibility and entitlement to CCS to be determined. All customers
will be required to lodge a new application for ACCS payments. See
Transitional arrangements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for more information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Payment and Service finder
located on Services Australia website.

Contents

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Exemption from providing Tax File Numbers when claiming Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Related links

Add child claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Access to self service

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Using self service

Transitional arrangements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
