
Help for grandparents caring for children 007-02070000

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines the help available for grandparents who are
caring for grandchildren.

Help for Grandparents

Grandparents may take on the role of primary carers of children when the
parents are not able to fulfil their parental responsibilities. This can
be for a period of time or on a long term basis.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is not payable to grandparents and non-parent
carers who are caring for a child in a child care capacity.

This may include a child:

-   attending child care
-   in the care of a relative/friend
-   staying overnight with a grandparent, relative or friend

Determine if this is a change in care or child care while the parents
are working, studying or away.

The customer may need to supply evidence if there is not enough
information to make this decision.

Grandparents may be able to get:

-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

There are eligibility requirements for each payment. These include:

-   Income test
-   Australian residence and
-   Dependent child requirements

The Resources page contains links to the Grandparent Advisers intranet
page. It also has a link to the Services Australia website for
information for grandparents caring for children.

Contents

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

Extended Family Care Group (EFCG)

Related links

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Care Benefit (CCB) rate for care provided before 2 July 2018

Child Relationships page

Concession cards and information

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Principal carer of a dependent child

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Shared care for social security payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
