
Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation 007-11080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines manual intervention into family assistance
reconciliation. Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child
Care Benefit (CCB) is mainly an automatic process. However, FTB and CCB
manual intervention is necessary where there are circumstances on the
record that require manual checking before the reconciliation assessment
can complete.

Note: all CCB/CCR references relate to financial years prior to
2018/2019.

Types of manual intervention

-   FTB or CCB reconciliation calculation is left as started so that the
    outcome can be manually checked and the result amended if necessary.
    This is the most common type
-   FTB or CCB reconciliation calculation cannot complete automatically.
    The calculation needs to be done manually
-   To prevent FTB and CCB reconciliation activities from completing
    automatically, for example to prevent debts from being automatically
    raised during a pause on debt raising due to a declared major
    disaster or emergency

A manual intervention may also be required for CCR.

Since June 2008, user generated activities may also be subject to all
manual intervention checks.

All of these cases are monitored and processed centrally by the MIV
team.

MIV activities can usually be recognised by their region code 'MIV'. A
keyword is automatically allocated to the activity identifying the
nature of the assessment.

The Resources page contains a list of defined natural disasters and the
relevant keywords and periods.

Contents

Manual intervention where Australian Taxation Office (ATO) cancels
Notice of Assessment (NOA)

Manual intervention to process Child Care payments where a security
notice is issued to a customer receiving both Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and child care payments

Manual intervention (MIV) due to blended family rules or death impacting
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Manual intervention due to manual rates, adjustments and forced manual
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation

Related links

Manual Interventions screens

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Manual intervention for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation

Family Tax Benefit reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
