-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to check the assessment for FTB Part B for
customers who have lodged a lump sum claim for a year in which the
customer or their partner returned to work for the first time after
caring for a child.

FTB Part B for partnered customers

FTB Part B may be paid free of the income test for partnered customers
if the lower earner in the family has returned to work during the
relevant financial year for the first time since the birth of a child or
since a child entered their care.

FTB Part B is not payable for 2008-09 and following years if the primary
earner's adjusted taxable income exceeds the Part B primary earner
income limit, except for income support periods.

Return to work details

Customers should advise return to work details on the FTB lump sum claim
form. To benefit from this assistance, customers claiming FTB as a lump
sum for the financial year in which the return to work occurred may
notify or update return to work details up until 30 June of the
lodgement year or the FTB claim lodgement special circumstances
extension end date. For the 2011-12 financial year or earlier years, FTB
lump sum customers had until the end of the extended lodgement year to
notify or update return to work details.

If the return to work details are updated by the customer after this
time, for example to amend the date of the return to work, the rules
that apply for a request for a review of the lump sum claim decision
determine whether their FTB Part B entitlement is reassessed.

Eligibility for assistance

The customer's eligibility for this assistance will be assessed when the
lump sum claim is finalised, based on return to work details on the
customer's record. Where eligible, the customer's FTB Part B rate will
not be income tested for the Part B quarantine period, regardless of the
income of the lower earner.

Customers who advise a return to self-employment or who are nominating a
return to work of less than 10 hours per week when they lodge their FTB
lump sum claim are not required to provide separate verification. The
lump sum claim form is written verification.

Eligibility for the FTB Part B quarantine period is displayed on the
reconciliation/lump sum claim screens.

A letter is sent to the customer following the assessment of the lump
sum claim for the relevant financial year. The letter will advise:

-   whether or not the FTB Part B quarantine period has been applied
-   if the customer is not eligible, the reason

Related links

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and the reconciliation
process

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
