
Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07040070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process for staff to assess a customer's
entitlement to eligibility for FTB instalments, for a child who has come
into their care from another person or organisation and there is
disagreement over care arrangements.

Smart Centre and service centre Service Officers

For:

-   changes of care that occur from a date that has previously been
    keyed, see Review of care decisions
-   coding changes to shared care, such as increased or decreased levels
    of care, see Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements
    for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   current FTB customers who are adding an older child (not a newborn
    child), see Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current
    customer where an additional child enters care in the current or
    previous financial year
-   income support customers, see Child enters customer's care/custody
-   customers notifying a child has left care, see Child leaves
    customer's care/custody
-   customers notifying of a child entering their care or custody, see
    Child enters customer's care/custody

Unless the change of care has been advised by the person previously
caring for the child, an attempt must be made to contact the previous
carer to confirm the change of care. This applies, even if that person
is not receiving FTB for the child. This will ensure that FTB for the
child is paid to the correct person and reduce the need for future
reviews, as customers may claim FTB for a past period when the child was
in their care.

Note: if a customer is advising they are separated under one roof,
always ask the Family and Domestic Violence (FDV) Risk Identification
Question before issuing the Details of your child's care arrangements
(FA012) and Relationship details - Separated Under one roof (SS293):

Are you, or has anyone else been, concerned about your or your family's
safety?

If yes, explore further as per the FDV Risk Identification and Referral
Model (RIRM) to clarify the customer's circumstances. Consider if it is
appropriate to issue the FA012 and SS293 to the customer's ex-partner.
In some instances where there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the
customer's safety at risk

If no, advise the customer of the forms that will issue to their
ex-partner and ask the additional question: Is there any other reason we
should not send these forms to your ex-partner to confirm your
separation?

-   If yes, explore further as per the FDV RIRM to clarify the
    customer's circumstances. Consider if it is appropriate to issue the
    FA012 and SS293 to customer's ex-partner. In some instances where
    there is FDV, issuing the forms could put the customer's safety at
    risk.
-   If no, issue the forms

If the previous carer has not responded to any contact attempts, a care
determination can be made with evidence supplied by the gaining carer
providing there is enough evidence to support the decision.

Change of care

Permanent or long term changes of care (more than 4 weeks for FTB) can
be formal or informal:

-   Informal (where the parent/carer authorises the change of care) -
    this will affect eligibility and the customer will generally cease
    to be entitled to payment for the child. For example, a child may be
    residing with relatives for an extended period of time, that is
    longer than 4 weeks, and they are responsible for the day-to-day
    care responsibilities of the child during this period. In these
    cases, the child ceases to be an FTB child of the parent
-   Formal (legal/court order) - where the child has been legally
    removed from the customer and placed in alternative care, that is,
    Juvenile Justice Centre or State Department, it is not considered a
    temporary absence as legal responsibility now belongs to the
    relevant state department. FTB for the child is to be cancelled from
    the date the child has been removed from the customer

Temporary changes of care (up to 4 weeks for FTB) can be formal or
informal:

-   Informal (where the parent/carer authorises the change of care) -
    this will not affect eligibility and the customer may remain
    entitled to payment for the child. For example, a child may be away
    on holiday with relatives for less than 4 weeks. The child may be
    given money for expenses by their parent who remains responsible for
    the decision making regarding the child's welfare while the child is
    away. In these cases the child is still an FTB child of the parent
    as temporary care provisions can apply. Note: if temporary care
    provisions are applied and the change of care becomes permanent, or
    is extended to a period longer than 4 weeks, a change of care is
    taken to have occurred from date the care changed to a longer
    period, not the start of the temporary care period
-   Formal (legal/court order) - where the child has been legally
    removed from the customer and placed in alternative care (that is,
    Juvenile Justice Centre, State Department or foster care), this is
    not considered a temporary absence as legal responsibility now
    belongs to the relevant state legal authority. FTB for the child is
    to be cancelled from the date the child has been removed and
    temporary care provisions do not apply

The Resources page contains FTB examples of legal responsibility (both
formal and informal) and temporary care provisions identifying when
temporary care is not applicable.

Care arrangements

Where part of a pattern of care (care of the child is shared between 2
or more people over a certain period), a shared care assessment may be
needed

Disputed care, the assessment may be based on the care set out in the
written care arrangement for an interim period from when the written
care arrangement ceased to be complied with. The interim period may be
anywhere between 4 weeks to 52 weeks depending on:

-   the type of written care arrangement (interim periods will generally
    be longer for court orders than for parenting plans or written care
    agreements)
-   how long the written care arrangement has been in place
-   whether or not the person with increased care is taking reasonable
    action to participate in family dispute resolution

At the end of the interim period, the care assessment will be based on
the 'actual care'

Note: before 23 May 2018 the interim period was for 14 weeks, up to a
maximum of 26 weeks if special circumstances existed.

-   Skilled staff within the Child Support Smart Centre Division manage
    all disputed care cases. In disputed care situations, Service
    Support Officers (SSO) will make an 'interim period' decision and an
    'actual care' decision. See Notification and assessment of shared
    care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Where an abduction or the child's whereabouts is unknown, a customer
    may continue to receive FTB for the child for up to 14 weeks if the
    child has left their care without their consent. A referral to a
    social worker may be needed. If a child ceases to be in a person's
    care without their consent on or after 1 July 2012, the Secretary
    will have discretion to decide that the child immediately ceases to
    be an FTB child or regular care child of the person if there are
    special circumstances which support that decision
-   If the change of care is a result of family and domestic violence
    and there is concern that the customer or children will be placed at
    risk if the losing carer is contacted, evidence supplied by the
    gaining carer can be used to confirm the change of care. However,
    the delegate must be satisfied based on the available evidence that
    a change of care has occurred. The Resources page contains an
    example
-   FTB is not payable to grandparents and non-parent carers who are
    caring for a child in a child care capacity, for example, child
    attending child care (either child care centre/family day care or
    care by a relative/friend) or staying overnight with a grandparent,
    other relative or family friend. If the customer is the grandparent
    or non-parent carer of the child, a determination should be made
    whether the care is a change in care or child care while the parents
    are working, studying or away

Verification of care arrangements (including care arrangements for grandparents and third party carers)

If a grandparent or third party carer contacts to advise they have
gained care of a child and the following conditions are met:

-   the losing carer is the parent of the child, and
-   there are no Court Orders or Child Protection orders in place for
    the care of the child

further information, including the following questions, should be
requested to help make a change of care decision:

-   What is the reason for the change of care?
-   Is the child going into the care of a grandparent or third party? If
    so, do they live in the same residence as the parent?
-   What involvement will the parent continue to have with their
    child/ren whilst in the grandparent’s or third party's care?
-   Is the reason for the change of care due to work and/or study
    related reasons?
-   Who will be providing financially for the child whilst in the
    grandparent’s or third party's care?
-   Is the child listed on the grandparent's or third party's Medicare
    card?
-   Who will be making the major decisions for the child regarding
    health, education and discipline?

Any evidence relevant to the decision should be documented and scanned
to the record. For grandparent carers, see also Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent).

Note: if the Service Officer requires assistance in determining
eligibility where there has been a change of care of a child from the
parent to the grandparent or third party carer, seek assistance from
Technical Peer Support (TPS)/Access Support or a Service Support Officer
(SSO) using standard escalation protocols.

Mutual customers of Centrelink and Child Support

A mutual customer of Centrelink and Child Support can notify either
program of changes to their care arrangements. The program receiving the
information will make the care determination and the care information
will be transferred to the other program for the assessment of family
assistance, income support payments and child support entitlements.

For further information about alignment of care determinations between
Child Support and Centrelink mutual customers, see Transfer of
information between Centrelink and Child Support.

If the customer is a parent of the child and is not a mutual customer of
Centrelink and Child Support or does not have a current child support
case, they may need to apply for child support payments.

Disagreement over care arrangements

If there is disagreement over care arrangements, consider whether the
customer has legal responsibility for the child. The percentage of
actual care for each person will be based on available evidence to
support the actual care arrangements.

Integrated Care skilled staff manage all disagreed care cases.

Disputed care

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support, a dispute in relation to
the care of a child exists where:

-   a written care arrangement (for example, written agreement,
    parenting plan or court order) for the child is in place
-   there is a departure from the terms of the arrangement by one of the
    parties, and
-   the person with reduced care (compared to the amount in the written
    care arrangement) is taking reasonable action to have the care
    arrangement complied with

The dispute may relate to a departure from shared care arrangements
between 2 or more people, or to a departure from arrangements for the
sole care of a child, where care changes from one person to another in
breach of the arrangement. In these cases, there is no disagreement
about how much care is actually being provided for the child.

Integrated Care skilled staff manage all disputed care cases.

Confirming care arrangements

In most cases, a mandatory attempt to confirm the change of care with
the previous carer must be made to ensure that payments are made to the
correct person.

If the previous carer has not notified the change of care, or if the
change is contested, the customer must provide evidence to support the
actual care arrangements. If the losing carer does not have a Centrelink
record, a record needs to be created if the gaining carer is able to
provide enough information for this to occur. When a record is created,
the children will also need to be linked to the record.

If a change of care has occurred, because of a child being removed from
their parent's care by a state welfare authority, or family and domestic
violence situation, and there is concern that the customer or children
will be placed at risk if the losing carer is contacted, evidence
supplied by the gaining carer can be used to confirm the change of care.

Care assessment referral activities for income support payment, LIC, CSHC and FST claims

Customers may advise of a child entering care, or a change to an
existing care arrangement for a child in care within the following
claims:

-   income support payment
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)

If the claim is allocated for processing in:

-   Customer First, there is no change to the existing protocols for
    referral and assessment.
-   Process Direct (PD), an Assessment of Care Arrangements Referral
    work item (ZCRF_AOCA_REFERRAL) will be generated and the assessment
    must be completed before the claim can be finalised.

The Assessment of Care Arrangements work item will be allocated to a
suitably skilled Families Service Officer to complete the care
assessment in Customer First.

After the care assessment has been completed, income support payment,
LIC, CSHC and FST processing staff will proceed to claim assessment and
finalisation.

The Resources page has shared care calendars, examples of change of care
assessments for FTB, and links to the Q999 letter for Change in shared
care and losing carer not in receipt of FTB, and Q888 CCS ACCS. There
are also a list of codes and titles for relevant letters and form, a
link to information about a shared care system problem (P24845) that
occurs when a parent has transferred their FTB to their current partner
(step parent), and information about the letters produced with the
Child - Change in Care Arrangements script.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as lump
sum for a previous year

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Child enters customer's care/custody

Child out of care without consent

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) transfer of a child record

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
