
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines re-reconciliation of CCB for approved care. This
is the automatic recalculation of a customer's CCB entitlement for a
relevant financial year when information used to finalise reconciliation
is updated.

Top-ups, overpayments or nil adjustments

Re-reconciliation compares the customer's entitlement based on the new
information with the result of the previous reconciliation. It may
result in a top-up, overpayment or nil adjustment. Any top-up or
overpayment amount from the most recent reconciliation will be included
in the calculation. Re-reconciliation of CCB will also re-reconcile any
Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlements. A CCB or CCR top-up amount may be
used to offset an outstanding CCB reconciliation debt or CCR debt.

When-reconciliation occurs

Re-reconciliation will occur automatically if:

-   new actual income details are transferred by the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO)
-   a customer advises new information
-   child care attendance details are updated. Note: a three day delay
    will be applied before re-reconciliation is attempted if the
    attendance is cancelled after reconciliation is finalised. Any extra
    CCB entitlement calculated when CCB attendance is submitted after
    reconciliation has occurred is paid directly to the customer and not
    the service
-   the customer advises a change in circumstances (for example child
    commenced attending school, changes in the CCB and/or CCR work,
    training and study test) by the end of the lodgement year
-   Tax File Number (TFN) details are recorded for the customer, current
    partner or ex-partner
-   an income support payment is either retrospectively granted or
    cancelled for the customer, current partner or ex-partner
-   immunisation details are updated

A change in income details, TFN details or income support entitlement
will only trigger re-reconciliation if a customer has claimed more than
the zero rate.

Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlement will be recalculated whenever CCB
re-reconciliation occurs. This may result in extra CCR being paid or a
CCR debt.

Related links

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Child Care Benefit (CCB) overpayments arising from reconciliation and
lump sum claims

Establish a link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
