
Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment Single (PPS) 007-18041302

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before processing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to transfer a Parenting Payment Partnered
(PPP) customer to Parenting Payment Single (PPS). The objective of
Parenting Payment (PP) is to provide income support to principal carers
of young children and opportunities for financial independence.

PPP customer changes relationship status

When a current PPP customer separates from their partner they can be
transferred to PPS if eligible. To initiate this transfer process, or
Benefit Transfer (BTR), a customer should submit an [] online 'claim'
for Parenting Payment or an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) should be run
to collect information from the customer. If a customer has provided a
Separation Details (MOD S) form to advise they have separated, they
should not be told to claim PP online. This is because the information
is collected in the MOD S.

Do not update the Marital Status (MS) screen outside the BTR activity
(for example, upon receipt of a Separation details (MOD S) form
submitted by a PPP customer or their ex-partner) unless the customer is
no longer the principal carer of a child under 8. Unlinking records
outside a BTR activity will cancel PPP and prevent a benefit transfer to
single rate of PP.

The Resources page contains examples of date of effect determinations.

Immediate updates at customer contact

When a customer advises their separation, immediate updates are required
depending on their circumstances. Updates include:

-   coding a Temporary Qualifier code where the customer or partner is
    moving from their current shared address
-   updating Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE), and
-   cancelling the nominee arrangement if their partner was appointed as
    their nominee

Remote PPP customers

If a PPP customer contacts and advises a change in relationship status
but cannot lodge a PP claim online and the ACC workflow is not
available, they can complete a MOD S form. See Resources for a link to
the form.

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

When a current or suspended PP customer submits an online claim to
initiate a transfer to the single rate of PP, they will not be required
to provide documents before submitting their claim (as is required for
all new PP customer claims). This is because it is not a new claim
scenario but a change of circumstance and assessment of eligibility to
transfer to the single rate of PP. Customers can track their claim and
provide required documentation via their online account or the Express
Plus Centrelink mobile app. For more information, see Circumstance
Change Monitor (CCM).

Qualification

To qualify for transfer to the single rate of PP a person must:

-   be the principal carer of a Parenting Payment (PP) child aged under
    8
-   meet mutual obligation requirements if required

If a customer is receiving PPP they may be eligible to transfer to PPS
if they separate from their partner provided they remain the principal
carer of a child under eight.

Customers who are no longer eligible for PP will need to test their
eligibility for another income support payment such as JobSeeker Payment
(JSP).

Note: grandparents or non-parent carers of children living in the same
house as a parent are generally not eligible for PP. Unless exceptional
circumstances exist, a grandparent or non-parent carer will not be
considered the primary carer of a child if they reside in the same home
as the biological parent. A principal carer determination must be made.
See Help for grandparents caring for children and Resources for a link
to the Services Australia website for payments and services to help
non-parent carers.

Referee

In some circumstances a referee may be contacted to verify the
separation.

From 4 December 2021, PPP customers who advise of their separation
through an online claim for PPS, will be required to provide details of
one referee who can confirm their current relationship status. If they
start their claim for PPS prior to 4 December, and do not submit the
advice until 4 December or later, they will not be required to provide a
referee. For these customers, the process in place prior to 4 December
will apply.

A referee must meet all of the following criteria:

-   be 18 years of age or over
-   not be the customer’s parent, step parent, sibling or child
-   not be a correspondence nominee
-   not be the customer’s most recent ex-partner

Employment income nil rate period

When a PPP customer transfers to PPS and their income reduces their PP
to a zero rate, an employment income nil rate period can continue for 6
fortnights. This result can only be achieved where the PP transfer is
undertaken within a BTR activity. If basic qualification is still met
and the customer's income reduces during the 6 fortnights following the
zero payment, they may recommence receiving a more than zero payment
without having to reclaim. However, if the customer's income remains
over the income threshold for PPS after the 6 fortnights, their payment
will cancel.

Nominee arrangements

When a customer, who has their partner appointed as their nominee,
advises they have separated they must be asked at first point of contact
if they wish to cancel the nominee arrangement. A request for
cancellation of the arrangement must be actioned immediately. The
request does not have to be in writing.

Section 24

If it appears that a PP customer may be placed in unfair hardship by
being assessed as partnered, then payment under Section 24 can be
considered.

PPP customer's partner dies

If a PPP customer's partner dies - refer to Death of a partner of a
Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer.

Mutual obligation requirements

PPS customers with a child aged 6 or over will have part-time mutual
obligation requirements. These customers are required to enter into a
Job Plan and undertake suitable activities to receive PPS, unless an
exemption is appropriate for a certain period.

PPS customers with no mutual obligation requirements may volunteer to
look for work, access employment assistance and undertake activities
that will improve their chances of finding suitable work. They may also
be required to participate in the ParentsNext programme.

ParentsNext

Some PP customers will be required to participate in ParentsNext.
Parents participating in ParentsNext may be subject to certain
participation requirements to retain eligibility for PP. See ParentsNext
eligibility and servicing.

Targeted Compliance Framework and ParentsNext

A compulsory ParentsNext participant who does not attend an appointment
with their ParentsNext provider or comply with their participation
requirements may be subject to compliance action under the Targeted
Compliance Framework (TCF). If a current PPP customer transfers to PPS
during a penalty period imposed under the TCF the remaining penalty
period will generally apply at the single rate. Any enquiries relating
to TCF for ParentsNext customers should be directed to the Level 2
Compliance and Participation Helpdesk. The Resources page contains a
link to the Level 2 Compliance and Participation Helpdesk.

Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

Where a partnered customer separates but continues to live under the
same roof as their ex-partner or is sharing with another person,
undertake a MoC assessment before the claim is finalised.

A MoC (SS284)/SUOR (SS293) assessment may trigger if the customer:

advises in a new claim that they share accommodation and their answers
to the Living Arrangements (LA) question set trigger the:

-   Relationship Details (SS284) form, or
-   Relationship Details - Separated under One Roof (SS293) form

advises of separation via a MOD S and that they share accommodation with
their ex-partner which triggers the SS293 form

Issuing forms

For online claims, based on the customer's responses to the LA
questions, the system may generate an automated recommendation to send
to the customer and their sharer(s) either a:

-   SS284 form, or
-   SS293 form

The system will not issue an SS284 or SS293 to the sharer(s) if safety
concerns have been identified by the customer.

If processing a MOD S, check the form for safety concerns before
deciding if relationship details form (SS284 or SS293) is required to be
sent to the other person/ex-partner.

Under no circumstances should an SS284 or SS293 be issued manually to
the other person(s) or any contact be made with the other person(s) if
safety concerns have been identified by the customer.

Family assistance

Customers may also need to claim family assistance for children in their
care.

Customers caring for a child from a previous relationship may need to
take action to obtain child support to receive more than base rate
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for a child.

Customers may claim Child Care Subsidy (CCS) to help with the costs of
child care if they are eligible. Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
Transition to Work provides additional help with the cost of child care
while the customer is undertaking an approved activity.

If the customer is already in receipt of family assistance, they may
need to update their family income estimate and other details as a
result of the separation. For more information see Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer separates.

If a customer has advised of their separation via a claim for FTB and/or
CCS, service officers will need to make 2 genuine attempts to contact
the customer and inform them of the required process to transfer to
Parenting Payment Single.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
forms, contact details for Child Support and Level 2 Helpdesks, user
guides, workarounds, Date of Effect (DOE) determinations, and workflows
for PP.

Related links

Adding, changing or removing an email address

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Claiming Parenting Payment

Confirming a customer's identity

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Family and domestic violence

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer separates

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

ParentsNext eligibility and appointments

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Principal carer of a dependent child

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance

Rate of Parental leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Start day for Parenting Payment (PP)

Updating address details

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
