-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
savings provisions, which were implemented to ensure that families who
were receiving DOP when changes were made to eligibility criteria are
not disadvantaged by those changes.

New claimants for DOP

All new claimants for DOP are assessed under the family assistance
shared care rules. Customers must have at least 35% actual care of a
child to be eligible for DOP.

All DOP claims and reassessments are processed by the DOP Processing
Centre.

Retention of current rate (savings provisions)

Customers receiving DOP before 1 July 2008 who have 10-34% actual care
of the DOP child are paid DOP (base and additional) based on the rate
payable on 30 June 2008.

Customers receiving DOP before 1 July 2008 who have at least 35% actual
care of the DOP child are paid the lower of:

-   the DOP rate payable on 30 June 2008
-   if the DOP child is a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child on or after 1
    July 2008, the DOP rate payable on that date using the current DOP
    legislation (section 1010 of the Social Security Act as in force on
    30 June 2008) and 1 July 2008 (FTB legislation relevant for FTB Part
    A rate for the purposes of the additional rate of DOP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

FTB customers with a DOP child do not have their FTB payment saved as it
is subject to the change to family assistance shared care rules.

-   Customers with less than 35% actual care will lose FTB for the child
    but will keep their DOP under the savings provision. These customers
    can be assessed for eligibility to ancillary benefits
-   Customers with 65% actual care or less will have their FTB rate
    adjusted (upwards or downwards) but will retain DOP at the saved
    rate
-   Customers with more than 65% actual care are entitled to 100% FTB
    and 100% DOP for the child. The savings provision is not relevant to
    these customers

Any savings provision ceases when the carer's current DOP rate matches
or exceeds the saved rate, or when they lose eligibility. If their DOP
rate then reduces or they regain eligibility, the savings provision is
disregarded. If DOP is cancelled incorrectly and then restored, the
savings provision will still apply.

Where customers have care of children for more than 65% of the time they
will be entitled to 100% FTB for the DOP child and will also be entitled
to 100% DOP. The savings provision is not relevant to these customers.

DOP student savings provision

DOP is not payable for a child who is receiving any of the following
payments:

-   Social Security Act benefits or pensions
-   Labour Market Program payments
-   Double Orphan Pension paid by the Department of Veterans' Affairs
    (DVA)
-   All DOP claims and reassessments are processed by the DOP and
    Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team. Customers can call the DOP
    Helpdesk

The Resources page contains a link to the DOP Helpdesk free call
telephone number for customers and contact details for the DVA Clearance
Team.

Related links

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Student/Income Circumstances (CHSI) screen

Child Miscellaneous Circumstances (CHM) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
