
What to check when Child Care Subsidy (CCS) rate has changed 007-20090908

-   Background
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to check to identify why a customer's Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) rate has changed.

Self Service

The preferred way for customers to do business with Services Australia
is using Self Service. Staff should encourage customers to use self
service to check their CCS rates and make updates. For a list of what
CCS customers can use Self Service for, see Using Centrelink self
service.

Initial checks

When trying to work out why a customer's CCS percentage or hours of
entitlement have changed, check all details in the DOCs and Notes on the
record that may point to a rate-affecting change in the customer’s
circumstances.

Income

An income estimate is one of the main factors that determines a
customer’s CCS rate. All CCS customers must provide an income estimate,
which should reflect their circumstances for the year for themselves and
their partner.

The CCS percentage payable is on a sliding scale from 0% to 85%
depending on the estimate they provide. A recent income estimate update
could change the CCS % which, in turn, could alter the customer's out of
pocket expenses.

For more information on rates and thresholds, see Combined Family income
for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Note: changes to a families combined income to above the lower income
threshold can impact the number of subsidised hours of child care. See
Automatic Activity test results.

Higher CCS (Multiple Child Subsidy)

From 7 March 2022, a higher rate of CCS (Multiple Child Subsidy) was
introduced. Multiple Child Subsidy (MCS) increases the amount of CCS
families can receive for some of their children aged 5 or under.

Families with more than one child in care aged 5 or under may get a
higher subsidy for:

-   their second child, and
-   any younger children

The family’s standard CCS rate is determined using a family income
estimate. The Entitlement table in Customer Summary will:

-   identify any children attracting the higher rate of CCS, and
-   display any percentage increases

For more information see Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Cancellation due to no session of care for at least 26 weeks

From 11 July 2022, if a child has not used child care (including
allowable absences) at least once in the previous 26 week period, they
will not be eligible for CCS. This is known as the ’26 week rule’.

Where a child’s CCS is cancelled due to the 26 week rule, the
cancellation will apply from the CCS Monday following the 26th week. In
some circumstances, it may be more than 26 weeks. The cancellation
cannot be retrospectively applied and where a child is the last CCS
eligible child of a customer, the customers CCS will cancel.

If a family is entitled to Higher CCS for one or more of their children
and one of their children is cancelled because of the 26 week rule:

-   their CCS entitlement will be reassessed, and
-   any higher CCS rate changes will apply from the next CCS Monday

Customers will need to lodge a new claim for CCS if their child starts
attending child care again.

See the Resources page of Cancellation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for:

-   examples of the 26 week rule, and
-   how the 26 weeks are calculated

TFN requirements

When claiming CCS, customers must provide a TFN for:

-   themselves
-   their partner
-   former partner, or
-   deceased customer (as applicable)

When the customer/partner cannot be matched with the Australian Taxation
Office due to the initial link transaction, the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) screen will display a status of Mismatch.

Activity Test Details (ATD)

The Activity Test is also a main factor determining CCS entitlement. The
number of hours of subsidised care payable depends on the level of
recognised activities the customer and their partner if they have one,
engages in each fortnight. A change in the level of participation can
have an effect on the number of hours for which a customer must pay full
fees.

See Activity test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Automatic Activity test results/Activity Test exemptions

In certain circumstances, customers will receive an automatic Activity
Test result or be eligible for an Activity Test exemption.

If the customer and their partner (if they have one) begins to be, or is
no longer qualified for one of the above, their entitlement hours may
change. This will depend on their circumstances and what is recorded on
the ATD.

See Activity test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for details.

Portability

CCS entitlement can continue for up to 6 weeks while the customer is
overseas. At the end of this 6 week period the CCS% will drop to zero if
the customer has not returned to Australia.

See Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas.

Deadline, relevant year reconciliation status

If a customer has not confirmed their relevant CCS year income by 30
June of the following year:

-   1st deadline provisions will apply, and
-   the CCS and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (with the exception
    of ACCS CWB) rate will drop to 0%

This will take effect from the first CCS Monday in the new year. Staff
will be able to see in Customer Summary under Entitlement if the
customer’s CCS and ACCS rate is 0% because of the 1st deadline
provisions.

If a customer has not confirmed relevant year income by 30 June of the
extended lodgement year:

-   2nd deadline provisions will apply, and
-   CCS will cancel

See Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy.

Child age/school status

Children must be 13 years of age or under, and not in secondary school
for a customer to receive CCS (unless a school status or age/school
status exemption has been applied). A sudden cessation of CCS could mean
a child has had a fourteenth birthday or changed education status.

More information on age or school status exemptions and checking
education status can be found at Updating school status, and assessing
age exemptions for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Immunisation

Ongoing CCS for a child will cancel when the child misses certain
Immunisation deadlines. Immunisation status must remain up to date. This
can be checked as per the instructions in Immunisation requirements for
Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Additional Child Care Subsidy

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) provides extra fee assistance to
families and children who are genuinely disadvantaged and facing
barriers in accessing affordable child care.

A customer’s ACCS being granted or recently ceasing will have a
noticeable effect on the out of pocket expenses they will be charged by
their child care providers.

The Process tab contains steps on how to check ACCS status, rates and
relevant dates.

Absences

CCS can be paid for up to 42 approved absence days (or up to 62 days for
the 2019/20 year) for each child for any reason. The absence days per
financial year relates to each child, not to each individual claimant.
If the customer is reporting an increase in out of pocket child care
fees, check that the absences for the relevant child/children have not
been exhausted.

See Absences for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS).

Enrolments

When a child has not attended child care for a continuous period of 14
weeks, the enrolment will automatically be ceased.

The customer remains current on CCS, but no CCS payments can be made as
there is no current confirmed enrolment. Check the enrolments and Weekly
Subsidy tables to confirm if CCS is not paying for a Child Care service.

More information can be found in Enrolment requirements for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

Annual Cap

An annual subsidy cap applies to each child if the family’s income
estimate exceeds the lower income threshold plus $120,000. A sudden
change in child care fees could indicate CCS is no longer payable for
the child/children if the annual cap has been exceeded.

Check income estimates and the Entitlement Usage, Annual Cap table in
Process Direct to see if the cap applies.

2021/22 onwards

From 10 December 2021, the CCS annual cap for the 2021/22 financial year
(1 July 2021 - 30 June 2022) onwards has been removed. Families who
reach the annual cap prior to 10 December 2021 were paid any CCS
entitlement owed to them in December 2021.

Note: families may still be subject to the annual cap for financial
years prior to the 2021/22 financial year.

See Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Exceptional circumstances

If a customer is experiencing unusual hardship or extreme circumstances,
they can ask for increased CCS entitlement by way of an Exceptional
Circumstances determination.

For customers on both CCS and ACCS, an Exceptional Circumstances
determination can allow access to more subsidised hours.

For ACCS customers, a percentage increase can also be requested. Staff
should check whether EXC determination has come to an end.

See Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Commencement of debt withholding

20% of a CCS-only customer’s ongoing entitlement may be withheld to
recover child care debts (including Child Care Benefit, Child Care
Rebate and Child Care Subsidy).

This 20% is in addition to the standard 5% that is already withheld.

Staff should check the debt management application in Customer Summary
to see if a withholding arrangement has commenced. This may change the
amount the customer is expected to pay.

See Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts.

Child care fees

If the child care provider has made a change in their fee schedule the
amount the customer is expected to pay could vary without anything else
changing in the record. For example a change in child care fees could be
associated with a change in enrolment.

Type of child care service used

If the customer has changed the type of child care service used this
will determine the maximum hourly rate cap to which a customer's CCS
percentage will be applied.

Types of child care include:

-   centre based day care service
-   family day care service
-   outside school hours care service
-   in home care

See Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Display of new year assessment due to CPI and rate changes

CCS family income thresholds, annual cap and hourly rate cap changes are
expected to update automatically every July to match Consumer Price
Index (CPI) and rate changes.

Where indexation has not been paused, the CCS new year rates may impact
a customer’s CCS entitlement from July each year.

Related links

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

New Financial Year Assessments (NFYA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
