-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Approval to claim and share PPL
days for a customer claiming PPL for a child born or entering care on or
after 1 July 2023.

Approval to claim and share PPL days

For Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims for children born or adopted on or
after 1 July 2023, approval to claim and share PPL days will be required
from the Approval Giver for an Approval Seeker to make an effective
claim for PPL.

The Approval Giver is the:

-   birth mother
-   first adoptive parent or
-   PPL claimant in exceptional circumstances

The Approval Seeker is anyone other than the birth mother, first
adoptive parent or PPL claimant in exceptional circumstances who wishes
to claim PPL or access PPL days for a child.

In cases of adoption:

-   the first adoptive parent to claim will become the Approval Giver
-   the subsequent adoptive parent will then become the Approval Seeker

In these cases, the Approval Giver only needs to provide Approval to
share days. Approval to claim is not required.

Note: the first adoptive parent will remain the Approval Giver for
approval to claim and share PPL days for all other claimants.

Where a PPL claimant is in exceptional circumstances, they must provide
approval to claim for their partner to claim PPL.

Approval Giver - giving approval

Where an Approval Giver claims PPL they will be able to submit their
claim without the requirement for approval from another claimant. Note:
provided any supporting documentation requested in the claim is
provided.

Where an Approval Seeker claims PPL, approval will be required from the
Approval Giver for the Approval Seeker to lodge their PPL claim. The
Approval Giver will provide approval via an Approval Task.

Within the Approval Seeker’s PPL claim, information will be requested
about the Approval Giver. The system will attempt to locate the Approval
Giver’s record and trigger the approval task to the Approval Giver’s
Centrelink Online Services.

Where a match is found (using the information provided within the
Approval Seeker’s claim) then the Approval Task will generate on the
Approval Giver’s record for the Approval Giver to action.

-   A match will not be found where the: Approval Giver does not have a
    CRN, or
-   Approval Giver could not be uniquely matched

If a match is not found, the system will the trigger a Temporary Access
Code (TAC) to enable the Approval Giver to either:

-   create a Customer Record Number (CRN) and link to a Centrelink
    online account, or
-   authenticate themselves via their Centrelink online account

The TAC will be provided to the Approval Seeker at the Next Steps within
their online claim.

The Approval Seeker will need to provide the TAC as well as the Approval
Seeker’s PPL claim ID to the Approval Giver so the Approval Giver can
create a CRN or authenticate themselves. Once action has been taken, the
Approval Giver can then access and action the Approval task via
Centrelink Online Services.

Until the Approval task is completed, then the Approval Seeker will be
unable to submit their claim.

Temporary Access Code (TAC)

A Temporary Access Code (TAC) will be triggered when:

-   an Approval Giver does not have a CRN, or
-   a match cannot be completed based on the information provided by the
    Approval Seeker about the Approval Giver

At the end of the Approval Seeker’s PPL claim, if the TAC is required,
the Approval Seeker is provided with a:

-   TAC to give to the Approval Giver. This is an 11 alphanumeric unique
    identifier code, and
-   Claim ID

The TAC will allow the Approval Giver unauthenticated entry to confirm
their personal information and CRN.

The Approval Giver will be presented with several questions to confirm
their details. This will include confirming their existing CRN or
creating a CRN and online account.

The TAC remains valid until either:

-   the task is completed by the Approval Giver, or
-   the Approval Seeker’s online claim expires

Once the Approval Giver confirm their details, the process is complete,
and the TAC will expire. The Approval Giver can then use Centrelink
Online account as an authenticated customer.

If match is successful, the Approval Giver can now login their MyGov
account to complete the Approval task. It will display in their
Centrelink Online Service.

If the match is unsuccessful (all valid person information matches are
not confirmed), a Failed Online Change in Circumstance activity
(ZPPL_ZCOC) will be created in Process Direct. A Service Officer will
need to manually action and may need to contact the Approval Giver to
verify the information provided in the TAC service.

If the Approval Giver requires assistance with TAC, refer to Services
Australia website > Giving approval to share Parental Leave Pay. On this
webpage the Approval Giver must select the link for the ‘Parental Leave
Pay Verification’ task.

The Approval Giver:

-   must have a CRN linked to their myGov account before they can
    complete this task
-   can access this webpage via the short URL
    servicesaustralia.gov.au/ApprovalToSharePLP (do not use spaces) or
    they can enter the Quick Code > QC 65018 into the search field

Rejecting approval to claim PPL

Approval Givers can reject an Approval Seeker's request for approval to
claim.

If approval to claim is rejected:

-   the Approval Seeker's PPL claim will be made Not Effective (NEF) due
    to Approval not provided (ANP)
-   If the Approval Seeker's claim is made NEF, then the Approval Seeker
    could lodge another claim for the PPL child

Removing approval to claim PPL

An Approval Giver can only remove approval to claim in cases where no
PPL days have been paid e.g. the Approval Seeker's claim status is
Assessed (ASS).

If approval to claim is removed:

-   if the Approval Seeker's PPL claim is assessed and no days have been
    paid, the PPL claim will reject (REJ) Approval Withdrawn for claim
    (AWC)
-   the Approval Seeker will not be able to make another effective claim
    for the PPL child, until the Approval Giver updates the approval in
    their online services via the Parental Leave Pay Circumstances
    Dashboard
-   if the Approval Seeker's PPL claim has been paid at least one PPL
    day, their claim will be cancelled. Any PPL payments already
    received by the Approval Seeker for the PPL child will not be raised
    as an overpayment
-   any future unpaid PPL days will be returned to the Approval Giver's
    balance to manage and claim

Approval Giver - managing shared PPL days

The maximum entitlement for a child in most cases is 100 days.

Birth mothers or first adoptive parents who are partnered on the date of
claim lodgement, can:

-   receive up to 90 PPL days, with the remaining 10 PPL days being
    reserved for their partner, other parent or another person to claim
    on a ‘use it or lose it’ basis
-   share their PPL days with their partner, other parent or another
    eligible person, as long as no member of the couple receives more
    than 90 days

To get the full 100 entitlement of PPL days, both parents need to claim
and be eligible. If only one parent in the couple is eligible for
payment, the 90 PPL day limit applies. The reserved ‘use it or lose it’
provision also applies, even if the claimant and their partner separate
after the date of claim lodgement, unless an exemption applies. See
Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023.

Note: this is subject to the birth mother or first adoptive parent
providing approval to claim and share PPL days with the partner, other
parent or another person to claim.

For example: Birth mother has lodged a PPL claim and has advised they
are partnered. As the birth mother is partnered on the date of claim
lodgement, the partnered PPL day’s entitlement will be assessed. This
means, the birth mother can have access to a maximum of 90 PPL days and
their partner will have access to 10 PPL days.

If the partner, other parent or another person does not use the 10
reserved days before the child’s second birthday/anniversary of entry
into care, the 10 reserved PPL days will not be able to be claimed and
will be lost. I.e. ‘Use it or lose it’

Birth mothers or first adoptive parents do not need to claim PPL first,
or at all for an Approval Seeker to claim PPL.

Reducing or increasing approved PPL days

As the total amount of PPL days claimed for one child cannot exceed 100
, if the Approval Giver wishes to approve additional PPL days for an
Approval Seeker, these will need to be withdrawn from the Approval
Giver’s claimed days first.

See the Resources page for examples.

Additional support

The Training tab on the PPL entry hub includes simulations to assist
staff with Process Direct screens and processes for:

-   removing approval for Approval Seeker
-   TAC - PPL Approval Giver
-   removing PPL days for Approval Seeker

The Resources page contains links to the PPL entry hub and Services
Australia website. It also contains tables with information about:

-   Process Direct approval screens and workflows
-   Scenarios for providing approval to claim and share PPL days
-   Glossary of terms for PPL scheme changes from 1 July 2023

 

Related links

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children born
or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
