
Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as a lump sum for a previous year 007-01010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how families can claim FTB as a lump sum for a
previous financial year.

How to claim

[] Customers are encouraged to make an online claim. If making an online
claim for FTB only, authenticated customers can make a single claim for
the current and previous financial years. When the customer submits
their claim they are advised of any documentation required to finalise
their claim, for example, proof of a child's birth, if this has not
already been provided for the child.

This online claim option will only be available until the end of the
lodgement year. Access to the claim will be withdrawn once the claim
lodgement period has ended.

Customers unable to claim online can lodge a paper claim for the
relevant financial year, for example the Claim for an annual lump sum
payment of Family Tax Benefit form (FA048).

Timeframes for claiming and confirming income details

Families have until 30 June of the lodgement year to lodge a lump sum
claim and to confirm income for FTB, (for example by 30 June 2023 for
the 2021-22 financial year).

Claims can only be assessed once income details are received from the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if the customer (or their partner) is
required to lodge a tax return for the relevant financial year. If they
are not required to lodge a tax return, they will need to advise
non-lodgement, and provide a reasonable estimate of their income as part
of their claim.

A customer (and/or their partner) has until 30 June of the lodgement
year to confirm their income, by either lodging tax returns with the ATO
or advising they are not required to lodge a tax return.

Extension to timeframe due to special circumstances

Customers may be granted an extension to the timeframe where special
circumstances exist which prevented the customer and/or their partner
from meeting their lodgement requirements. Customers must lodge a lump
sum claim for the relevant financial year before a special circumstances
assessment can be undertaken. A paper claim must be lodged if it is
after the end of the lodgement year.

Customers who lodge an FTB lump sum claim after the end of the lodgement
year and who did not have special circumstances preventing them from
lodging their claim by the end of the lodgement year will have their
claim rejected.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
relevant forms and publications for FTB claims, and contact details for
the Forms Production team. It also contains links to a letter, email and
SMS sent between February 2014 and June 2014 to advise customers of the
change to timeframe for lodging lump sum claims.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave customer

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
