-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete the Claim for an annual lump sum
payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for the 2022-2023 financial year
(FA048).

Options of claiming lump sum payment of FTB

[] Customers may claim a lump sum payment of FTB for the 2022-2023
financial year in the lodgement year using Online Services.

To receive Rent Assistance (RA) for the previous financial year, the
customer will need to claim ongoing FTB instalments unless they are not
eligible to claim, for example, children no longer in care.

Completing the FA048

The FA048 should be issued to customers who are unable to lodge an
online claim. The claim must be lodged by 30 June of the lodgement year.

The Information booklet about your claim for Family Assistance (Ci011)
should be issued with the FA048 and should be read by the customer
before completing the claim.

Customers need to provide personal details for themselves, their current
partner if they were partnered to that person on 30 June 2023, and
previous partners if the person was their partner at some time during
2022-2023 but was not their partner on 30 June 2023.

Customers who had a child from a previous relationship in their care
from the 2011-2012 financial year onwards, will have all child support
details electronically transferred from Child Support.

Lodging the claim

FTB lump sum claims must be lodged before the end of the lodgement year.

Claims may be lodged [] online, by mail or in person. Online claiming
will only be available during the lodgement year.

Customers prevented from lodging their claim by the end of the lodgement
year may be granted a special circumstances extension to meet the
requirement. A decision about a special circumstances extension can only
be made after the end of the lodgement year and only after the customer
has lodged a paper lump sum claim for the relevant financial year.

In addition to meeting claim lodgement requirements, customers and their
partners are also required to confirm their income; either by lodging a
tax return with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), or advising that
they are not required to lodge a tax return by 30 June of the relevant
lodgement year. Customers prevented from confirming their income by the
end of the lodgement year may be granted a special circumstances
extension to meet the requirement. A decision about a special
circumstances extension can only be made after the customer has lodged a
lump sum claim for the relevant financial year.

Payment of FTB

FTB entitlement is paid as a lump sum to the customer's nominated
account. The claimant will be sent a letter advising the result.

Customers can request Centrepay deductions from their lump sum payment
of FTB.

The Resources page contains a link to the FA048.

Related links

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Extended Family Care Group (EFCG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
