
Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a period before separation 007-02020080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how separated couples may be eligible for FTB for
a period prior to separation. Separated couples may claim Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) for a child for the period they were living together prior
to separation. If a determination is made that both parents would have
been eligible for FTB for the child, the rate for the child can be
shared between them. The Process page contains information about
assessing eligibility to FTB for period prior to separation.

Separating Safely

If one or both parents advise they have separated, there are key tasks
they should consider in order to protect their personal information. See
Separating safely - protecting personal details.

Percentage of care for the period prior to separation

If parents agree on a percentage, payment is made using that percentage.
Otherwise, a shared care assessment needs to be undertaken based on
details of care arrangements and any other evidence provided by the
customers.

If both parents wish to claim, they will each need to lodge an FTB claim
and provide the relevant information for the past period.

If only 1 parent is applying for the past period during which they were
a member of a couple, the claimant will be required to provide their
ex-partner's tax file number and an estimate of their ex-partner's
income for the relevant financial year.

Disagreement over shared care arrangements

If 1 parent is paid 100% FTB for a period and their ex-partner lodges a
claim for FTB for the child for the same period, or if the total
percentage claimed is greater than 100%, an assessment of the actual
care arrangements should be undertaken. This may result in a
reassessment of the first claimant's FTB entitlement for the period.

Blended family assessments

In normal circumstances, blended family assessments cannot be
retrospectively applied. However, when a couple separates, section 29 of
the Family Assistance Act (1999) can also be applied to blended family
couples. Therefore, this can apply if the couple has not been assessed
correctly as a blended family when they became partnered.

Claim includes a claim for Rent Assistance (RA)

If the past period claim includes a claim for Rent Assistance (RA), the
customer must also claim ongoing FTB fortnightly payments.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator and scenarios for
paying a customer for a partnered period when the ex-partner has already
received partial or full entitlement, and letter text to use in these
cases.

Related links

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as lump
sum for a previous year

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family and domestic violence

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Access Support Centres (ASC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
