
Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-19022123

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for CCS reconciliation to determine a
customer’s correct CCS entitlement for the relevant financial year.

Reconciliation overview

CCS is generally paid to the child care provider and passed onto the
customer as a reduced fee entitlement. The rate of entitlement paid
during the year is based on an estimate of family income.

CCS reconciliation is an automatic balancing process that compares:

-   the amount of CCS a person received in a CCS year, based on an
    estimate of their family's income, to
-   the amount of CCS a person is entitled to, based on their family’s
    actual income and child care attendance for that CCS year

Reconciliation will result in one of three outcomes:

-   top up payment
-   nil adjustment
-   overpayment

Any changes to previously recorded activity test details may also affect
a customer’s reconciliation outcome.

Debt offsetting can automatically apply during reconciliation if the
customer has an outstanding CCS, Child Care Benefit (CCB) or Child Care
Rebate (CCR) debt.

CCS cannot be used to offset Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support
payment debts.

CCS year and reconciliation timing

The CCS year is not necessarily the same as a financial year. This is
because CCS is assessed in fortnightly periods which must start on a CCS
Monday and end on a Sunday.

The end of a CCS year is the Sunday of the fortnight containing 30 June.

CCS reconciliation can commence from the 29th day after the end of the
CCS year. This is due to:

-   the CCS fortnight assessment, and
-   to allow child care providers enough time to lodge session reports

Reconciliation will only occur for a customer once all the
reconciliation requirements are met.

Example:

The 2018-19 CCS year commenced on the 2 July 2018 and ended on Sunday 30
June 2019 with reconciliation commencing 29 July 2019. This was the 29th
day after the end of the CCS year.

The 2019-20 CCS year commenced on the 1 July 2019 and ended on the 12
July 2020. Reconciliation for 2019-20 CCS year commenced on 10 August
2020. This was the 29th day after the end of the CCS year.

See the Resources page for the CCS year dates.

Reconciliation requirements

All CCS customers must meet CCS reconciliation requirements by
confirming their taxable income for the CCS year. This includes
confirming income for any partners or ex-partners they may have had
during the relevant year.

Income can be confirmed in the following ways:

-   lodging an Income Tax Return with the Australian Tax Office (ATO),
    or
-   advising Services Australia they are not required to lodge an Income
    Tax Return and providing their actual income, or
-   submitting a non-lodgement advice to the ATO, and advising actual
    income to Services Australia even where the income is $0.

The income confirmation requirements apply to ALL CCS customers and
their partners/ex-partners. Even customers who have received an Income
Support Payment (ISP) for the full CCS year must still confirm their
income with Services Australia before reconciliation can occur.

Reconciliation cannot occur until:

-   income for all parties has been confirmed, or
-   an exception is applied for any ex-partners

Time limits apply to the CCS reconciliation process. Penalties apply to
customers who do not meet these conditions by the specific deadlines.

CCS cannot be claimed as a lump sum.

Customers who received CCS for at least 1 day in the relevant CCS year
will receive reminder letters in November and May of the lodgement year
(for example: prior to the 1st deadline) if income confirmation
requirements have not been met. Customers will also receive letters in
November and May in the extended lodgement year, for example: in the
year after the lodgement year, if income requirements remain outstanding
after the 1^(st) deadline but prior to the 2nd deadline.

Annual Cap

The amount of CCS payable per child per year was capped if the family’s
income estimate exceeded the lower income threshold plus $120,000 in
applicable CCS years. There was no cap limit applied if the Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) is below this amount.

The Annual Subsidy Cap only applied only to CCS payments. Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) payments were not subject to the Annual
Subsidy Cap.

There are two different annual cap calculations used at reconciliation
where a customer’s relationship status changed during the year:

-   One for the 2018-19 CCS reconciliation year, and
-   One for the 2019-20 and 2020-21 CCS reconciliation years

For the 2021-22 CCS year and ongoing, the annual cap was removed.

2018-19 only

If a CCS customer changed relationship status during the financial year,
the CCS entitlement was based on the circumstances relevant at the time.
That is, for the period of the time they were partnered, their combined
ATI and level of activity was used to determine the family’s CCS
entitlement. When separated, CCS (including any annual cap) was based on
the individual’s ATI and level of activity.

At reconciliation, where a customer was partnered for part of the
relevant year, an applicable portion of the
partner’s/ex-partner’s/deceased partner’s income was included in the
actual annual income used to assess the entire year's annual cap. This
was based on the number of CCS fortnights that the customer was
partnered in the CCS year. Note: a fortnight was counted as part of the
partnered period if the customer was partnered for at least 1 day in
that fortnight.

2019-20 and 2020-21

For the 2019-20 and 2020-21 CCS years , the way the annual cap was
applied during the year did not change, however reconciliation applied a
different assessment process.

At reconciliation, customers had different income assessments for
different periods, depending on the income and marital status changes
that occurred, instead of one income assessment across the whole CCS
year. This meant the annual cap may have applied only to certain periods
in 2019-20 and 2020-21. The annual cap did not apply to any fortnights
where the ATI was less than the annual cap threshold. If different
income assessments were used in separate periods such as during marital
status changes, the annual cap only applied where the combined ATI
exceeds the annual cap threshold for that specific period.

During periods where the income was above the annual threshold, there
will be no entitlement once the total amount of CCS received exceeded
the annual cap amount.

2021-22 and ongoing

From 10 December 2021, the CCS annual cap for the 2021/22 financial year
(1 July 2021 - 30 June 2022) onwards has been removed. Families who
reached the annual cap prior to 10 December 2021 were paid any CCS
entitlement owed to them in December 2021.

Note: Families may still be subject to the annual cap for financial
years prior to the 2021/22 financial year.

The Resources page contains annual cap examples.

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) and reconciliation

CCS reconciliation does not apply to any period where Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS) is paid for a child, unless the result is that the
customer is ineligible for CCS (meaning the customer is also ineligible
for ACCS).

ACCS customers are still required to meet CCS income requirements. Any
debts raised at reconciliation for a period where a customer was ACCS
current will be related to qualification not reconciliation.

Deadlines

1st Deadline

-   1 year after the end of the relevant income year (midnight 30 June
    or if this falls on a weekend, midnight of the first business day
    after), or
-   the agreed extension date (where a special circumstance extension
    has been granted)

Note: on 30 June 2020, the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment (DESE) announced that the 1st deadline date for 2018-19
financial year would be extended until 31 March 2021. This is to allow
customers who have not met their CCS reconciliation requirements for
2018-19 to retain their CCS entitlement until 5 April 2021.

This means that for the 2018-19 financial year, customers have until 31
March 2021 to meet their reconciliation requirements for CCS. This
extension only applies to CCS and does not apply to FTB or for ATO
lodgement requirements for the 2018-19 financial year.

If the reconciliation requirements are not met by the 1st deadline, (for
example either the customer, partner or ex-partner have not confirmed
their income for the relevant year), CCS and ACCS (with the exception of
ACCS (Child Wellbeing) will reduce to a zero percent (0%), but remain
current from the first CCS Monday after the 1st deadline review date.
This means the customer will lose all entitlements and will be liable to
pay full child care fees from that CCS Monday. ACCS (Child Wellbeing)
will continue to be paid.

In addition, all weeks with CCS only payments made during that relevant
year will be calculated as an undetermined debt. Recovery of the debt,
however will be temporarily paused until the 2nd deadline. ACCS periods
of payment per child are not included in this debt amount.

Customers will be notified of the calculated potential overpayment and
advised that if they do not meet the reconciliation requirements by the
2^(nd) deadline, they will be required to repay all CCS received for the
relevant year.

If a customer meets their relevant year reconciliation requirements
between the 1^(st) and 2^(nd) deadline dates, they will not be eligible
for any backdated payment for periods assessed as zero percent (0%). CCS
will only recommence from the first CCS Monday after the reconciliation
requirements were met. The calculated non-lodger debt will also be
reverted to zero and reconciliation will automatically occur for the
relevant year.

Note: when 30 June falls on a weekend, the deadline moves to midnight of
the next available working day.

2nd Deadline

-   2 years after the end of the relevant income year (midnight 30 June
    or if this falls on a weekend, midnight of the first business day
    after), or
-   the agreed extension end date, where an extension has been granted

For example, if CCS was paid during the 2018-19 financial year, the 2nd
deadline is midnight 30 June 2021.

If a customer fails to meet all the income requirements by the 2^(nd)
deadline, CCS and ACCS (including ACCS (Child Wellbeing)) will cancel
from the first CCS Monday after this date and all CCS paid during the
relevant year will be raised as a recoverable debt.

Confirming income after 2nd deadline

A customer can still confirm income after the 2nd deadline to meet
income requirements for the relevant year.

Once the income requirements for the relevant year have been met, CCS
will be reconciled. The status of the recoverable debt will be changed
to, Finalised No Debt (FND). If the customer or the partner / ex-partner
(where applicable) confirm their income after the 2nd deadline they will
be assessed as a late lodger.

For CCS late lodgers the reconciliation will result in:

-   Any CCS withholdings amounts for the relevant financial year not
    being paid. However, if the reconciliation results in a debt, the
    withholdings may be used to offset the debt amount
-   If the customer has a previous year CCS, CCB or CCR debt, top ups or
    withholdings will not be used to offset that debt
-   Any top ups not being paid where this is the overall reconciliation
    result
-   A debt where customers have been overpaid
-   Zero outcome if the customer received the correct entitlement during
    the year

If a customer has been granted an extension to the 2nd deadline and
meets income requirements before the end of the extended period, the
customer will be entitled to receive any top ups or withholdings for the
relevant financial year.

Reclaiming CCS after the 2nd deadline

A customer cannot reclaim CCS again until they meet all the CCS income
requirements for outstanding financial years.

The new CCS claim can only be backdated to the later of:

-   the date the customer met all the CCS income requirements, or
-   by using the 28 day backdating rules

The customer must also have either:

-   repaid the outstanding debt or
-   have an adequate debt repayment plan in place
    (noting the general debt hierarchy rules apply, where the customer
    may have to pay off an older debt for another payment before they
    commence repaying the CCS debt)

Note: the granting of the CCS new claim, as long as the customer is
entitled to more than 0%, will meet this requirement as the customer
will have automatic debt withholdings applied.

See Debt Recovery general information for more information.

The Resources page has deadline dates.

Ex/previous partners and reconciliation

CCS cannot be reconciled until all requirements are met for the customer
as well as any partners and/or ex/previous partners they have had in the
relevant year.

For ex/previous partners, income can be received when the:

-   ex/previous partner lodges an Income Tax Return with the ATO, or
-   customer advises us that the ex/previous partner is not required to
    lodge an Income Tax Return and provides income details

If a customer has separated within the year being reconciled:

the partner will be treated as an ex-partner for CCS reconciliation
purposes

the ex-partner is required to:

-   confirm their income by either lodging an income tax return, or
-   the customer can advise they are not required to lodge

customers can apply for an Ex-partner MRE Exception if applicable. See
Exceptional circumstance for CCS and ACCS for more information

If a customer separated within the lodgement year (year being
reconciled + 1):

the partner will be treated as a previous partner for CCS reconciliation
purposes

the previous partner is still required to:

-   confirm their income by either lodging an income tax return, or
-   if they are not required to lodge an income tax return, the customer
    can advise of this

customers can apply for an Ex-partner MRE Exception if applicable. See
Exceptional circumstance for CCS and ACCS for more information

If a customer has a partner who dies within any of the above timeframes:

-   the deceased partner income will still need to be confirmed. An
    income tax return can be completed by the estate or the Not Required
    to Lodge (NRTL) process can be completed if required.
-   customers can apply for an Ex-partner MRE Exception if applicable.
    See Exceptional circumstance for CCS and ACCS for more information
-   customers can also seek a 1st deadline extension if applicable

See Exceptional circumstance for CCS and ACCS for more information

Legislative changes have been introduced to the way income is
reconciled, where a customer was not partnered for the full CCS year.
Because of this change, there will be two different calculation types
used for the actual income in the reconciliation calculation. One for
the 2018-19 CCS reconciliation year and one for 2019-20 CCS
reconciliation year and ongoing. See below for the differences between
the two.2018-19 CCS year

If partnered for part of the 2018-19 year, an applicable proportion of
the partner’s/ex-partner’s/deceased partner’s income was included in the
actual income used to reconcile CCS for the full year. This was based on
the number of CCS fortnights in the CCS year that the customer was
partnered. A fortnight was counted as part of the partnered period if
the customer was partnered for at least one day of the fortnight.

Example: a customer who was partnered for 1 month of the relevant
financial year (this period covers 3 fortnights in the CCS year), would
have 11.54% (3/26x100 = 11.54%) of their ex-partners actual income
applied to the full CCS year at reconciliation.

If the customer's partner died during the relevant financial year, the
apportioning assessment also includes annualised actual income of the
deceased partner for the period they were a couple.

The Resources page contains scenarios and examples.

2019-20 CCS year and ongoing

If the CCS customer is not partnered for the full 2019-20 CCS year, the
treatment of income will be different for the 2019-20 reconciliation and
ongoing. The customer will have separate income assessment periods
according to whether they were single or partnered at the time. The
percentage applied to each of these periods at reconciliation will be
based on ATI for:

-   only the customer’s individual income during single periods
-   the combined family income during partnered periods

If the change in relationship status occurred in the middle of a CCS
fortnight, the new status will not be applied until the following CCS
Monday. For example, a customer advising of a separation which occurred
on October 10th 2019, would be treated as partnered until October 20th,
the last Sunday of the CCS fortnight.

If the CCS customer or their partner has died during the year, the
deceased individual’s ATI will be annualised but only applied to the
period the two were partnered. This also means the CCS customer will
have separate assessment periods instead of one percentage applied to
the whole year at reconciliation.

If a partner has died within the year and the income is annualised, a
comparison will be made between the annualised amount and the estimated
amount. Reconciliation will complete based on the most favourable
outcome of these two figures.

The Resources page contains examples.

Special circumstance lodgement extension

If the customer is prevented from meeting income requirements by the 1st
and/or 2nd deadlines due to exceptional and unforeseen circumstances, an
extension to confirm income can be requested.

Special circumstances are only to be granted in limited situations that
are:

-   exceptional and outside the customer's control, and
-   are assessed on a case-by-case basis

They are not to be granted if the individual forgot, ran out-of-time or
was unaware of the requirements.

Allowable extension timeframes:

-   The 1st deadline can be extended up to 12 months only. It cannot be
    extended past 30 June of the year after the end of the relevant
    income year, (where 30 June falls on a weekend or public holiday,
    the next available business day). If an extension is granted the
    customer will be paid their full entitlement during the extension
    period.
-   The 2nd deadline may be extended indefinitely, but only for a
    maximum of six months at each application. If an extension is
    applied the customer’s CCS will reduce to 0% but will not cancel
    until the extension end date is reached

For details on how to assess eligibility and code a 1st or 2nd deadline
extension see Exceptional Circumstances for CCS and ACCS.

The Resources page has an example of the application of a Special
circumstance lodgement extension.

Ex-partner debt exception (Exceptional Circumstances)

The customer may ask for a reassessment when the:

-   relevant year reconciliation has completed, and
-   they have incurred an overpayment because the ex-partner’s income
    was higher than estimated

The reassessment will be based on the ex-partner’s estimate of income
that was applied to the period of debt during the CCS year. This is an
Ex-partner debt exception (Exceptional Circumstances). The intent is
that this exception is only to be applied in circumstances where the
customer did not know, and had no reason to suspect the underestimation
of income by the ex-partner. See Exceptional Circumstances for CCS and
ACCS for more information on eligibility and coding.

Current partner domestic violence exception (Exceptional Circumstances)

From 1 July 2019, a customer experiencing domestic violence by their
current partner may have their reconciliation reassessed using their
partner’s Most Recent Estimate (MRE) if the partner’s income has
contributed to a reconciliation debt.

See Exceptional Circumstances for CCS and ACCS for more information on
eligibility and the hand off process.

Activity Test 24 hour low income assessments

Throughout the CCS year, customers with income estimates below the lower
income threshold are automatically entitled to 24 hours of CCS per
fortnight, without needing to meet the Activity Test. At reconciliation,
customers who estimated income below the lower income threshold but had
income above the lower income threshold will retain their entitlement of
up to 24 hours of CCS. They still may receive a debt based on income.

In the opposite scenario where the customer was not entitled to any CCS
during the year because their estimate was above the threshold and they
had no level of recognised activity, there will be no retrospective
reassessment on hours applied. There will be no entitlement to any CCS
for the relevant CCS year as the automatic 24 hour activity test rule
will not be retrospectively applied.

Manual intervention

Although CCS reconciliation is generally an automatic process, there are
instances when manual intervention is required for the reconciliation to
be finalised. See Manual intervention for CCS reconciliation for more
information.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details and links to the internet. It also contains CCS relevant
dates and deadlines.

Letters and Bereavement

If reconciliation occurs within 28 days of any CCS child (excluding the
last CCS child) becoming deceased the following will apply:

-   a new work item will be created to delay the completion of
    reconciliation/re-reconciliation/Second Deadline assessments
-   reconciliation letters will not be sent
-   any reconciliation debts will be parked, and any reconciliation
    arrears/top-ups/withholdings are to be held
-   after the 28 day bereavement period ends (28 days from the child’s
    date of death), the work item will automatically complete, the
    reconciliation outcome will finalise and the appropriate letter will
    be sent

First and Second Deadline reminder letters will continue to be sent
during the bereavement period.

Note: this does not apply to the last CCS child – see Manual
intervention for (CCS) reconciliation.

Differences between FTB and CCS reconciliation debts

There are some important differences between Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and CCS reconciliation debts.

CCS and FTB debts will be raised separately, even if reconciliation
occurs on the same day

Only CCS, CCB and CCR debts may be recovered from ongoing CCS
entitlement

Only CCS CCB and CCR debts can be recovered from CCS top up payments

If a customer has not met CCS income requirements by the 1st deadline
(normally 30 June following the relevant CCS year) because family income
is not confirmed:

-   an undetermined debt will be automatically calculated. (Note: for
    the 2018/19 year only, the 1st deadline was extended until 31 March
    2021)
-   the undetermined debt at the 1st deadline will not prevent the
    customer from applying for FTB or income support advances

The CCS non lodger debt will be for all weeks with CCS only payments
made during that relevant year and will be calculated as an undetermined
debt. For any week that has a component of ACCS, the whole amount for
that week will be not be included in the debt. Any ACCS payments will
appear as Entitled in the Non Lodger: Deadline 1 instance window in the
CCS Reconciliation Dashboard

Recovery of the CCS non lodger debt will only commence once the 2nd
deadline (30 June of the second year following the CCS relevant income
year) has been reached

Re-reconciliation

Re-reconciliation compares the customer's entitlement based on the new
information with the result of the previous reconciliation. It may
result in a top-up, overpayment or nil adjustment. Any top-up or
overpayment amount from the most recent reconciliation will be included
in the calculation.

Re-reconciliation will occur automatically if:

-   new actual income details are transferred by the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO)
-   updated attendance or session reports are received within 28 days of
    the end of the CCS year
-   Activity Test details are retrospectively updated, or
-   a customer advises new information, which could potentially affect
    their CCS eligibility. For example: child leaving care or
    retrospective change to marital status

Periods of ACCS in respect of the child are excluded from the
reconciliation process. This means both the CCS and ACCS components will
not be reconciled once actual income is received. If a customer loses
entitlement to ACCS in respect of a period, then the CCS component will
be re-reconcilable.

Note: top ups will not be paid for any re-reconciliation instance that
occurs for customers who did not meet the income requirements by the 2nd
deadline.

Privacy and confidentiality

There are restrictions with regard to disclosure and confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information for CCS customers, that is,
privacy, Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority.

Results of CCS reconciliations should not be discussed with the child
care service.

Related links

Manual intervention for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation outcome

Debt offsetting during family assistance reconciliation and lump sum
claim processing

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Returned payments and their effect on family assistance reconciliation

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) for family assistance

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Establish a link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
