
Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07040080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about claiming and receiving Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) for a blended family.

Blended families and percentage of FTB entitlement

A blended family is a family with 2 or more dependent children. This can
be a blend of children from a previous relationship or from the current
relationship. Of the dependent children:

one must be a child of one member of the couple from a previous
relationship, and

one must be a child of either:

-   the current relationship, or
-   the other member of the couple, from a previous relationship

Members of a blended family may choose for one person to claim FTB or
for each member of the couple to claim and receive a nominated
percentage of the family's FTB entitlement.

As a general rule, only one member of a couple can claim the FTB
entitlement for a child, even if both members of a couple share the
daily care of that child. However, a blended family can choose to share
the FTB payment if both members of the couple have an FTB child. If they
decide to share the payment, they must agree on the percentage each will
claim.

Blended family assessment

To be assessed as a blended family, both members of the couple must have
an FTB child in their actual care for at least 35% of the time. If one
parent has an FTB child and the other parent only has a Regular Care
Child, the family cannot be assessed as a blended family. They will need
to decide who will receive the FTB payment and ancillary benefits for
all children.

A separated couple may share FTB for a past period before they
separated.

Claiming FTB

A blended family assessment cannot be completed until both members of
the couple have claimed FTB or Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS).
Each member of a blended family must claim FTB the same way, fortnightly
instalments or as a lump sum after the end of the financial year.

Each member of the couple must lodge a claim for FTB for their child/ren
only and each must be entitled to FTB. Normal eligibility rules apply to
each person. Ideally, one member of the couple should claim for the
child from the previous relationship and the partner should claim for
the children from the current relationship.

If a child enters the care of a blended family receiving FTB, only one
member of the couple needs to claim FTB for the child. The primary carer
should claim for children of the current relationship.

SIFS grandfathering status

Both members of a couple in a blended family who split SIFS on 30 June
2017 will be grandfathered until the first day one or both do not meet
the SIFS eligibility requirements. Where only one member of the couple
is grandfathered for SIFS, that person, if eligible, will be paid 100%
of their SIFS entitlement for their child/ren only. See the SIFS
grandfathering provisions for general criteria.

Backdating limit for FTB claims

From the 2012-13 financial year onwards, lump sum claims must be lodged
by 30 June of the lodgement year. A person prevented from lodging their
lump sum claim by the end of the lodgement year due to special
circumstances may be granted a lodgement extension.

Note: for the 2011-12 and earlier years, customers had until the end of
the extended lodgement year to lodge a lump sum claim.

FTB payment choices

Blended families who receive FTB instalments can each choose any of the
FTB payment choices available. Each member of the blended family must
advise their choice separately. They do not need to make the same
choice.

Adequate income details are needed for FTB reconciliation and for a lump
sum claim to be finalised and the normal non-lodger process applies to
each member of the couple.

Start date of blended family assessment

The start date cannot be earlier than the relationship start date, or
the date they were both eligible for FTB. The assessment cannot include
a period for which either person has been paid FTB.

If one member of the blended family has already been paid FTB since the
start date of the current relationship, the couple will need to decide
who will receive FTB for that period. A claim is needed from that person
to receive FTB for their partner's children. If their partner has been
paid FTB for that period, a debt will then need to be raised for the
amount already paid.

Agreed percentage and rate of FTB

The couple should nominate the percentage of the family's total FTB rate
each will receive, between 1% and 99%. This does not need to reflect the
number of children each person claims for.

Rate calculation:

The FTB rate is calculated for the family, taking into account all the
family's circumstances

-   FTB Part B is not paid to a member of a couple when their youngest
    child turns 13 years of age, unless the person is a grandparent
    carer
-   FTB Part B is not paid during the 18 week Parental Leave Pay period

The FTB rate for the family is then multiplied by their nominated
percentages to obtain each person's rate. Individual circumstances can
affect each person's rate separately, for example if one person goes
overseas temporarily for more than 6 weeks, their payment will cancel

If either person has chosen an adjusted rate under the FTB payment
choices, their choice is then applied to calculate their individual
ongoing rate

The child's immunisation status is applied to both members of the couple
in relation to the child. If the child does not meet immunisation
requirements, the FTB payment for both members of the couple will be
affected. See Immunisation for Family Tax Benefit

Customers may change their nominated percentages at any time, although
their request to increase their percentage must first be confirmed with
their partner.

Prohibition of FTB Instalment Payments (PIP)

If a customer is subject to either PIP prohibition or cancellation
(under the application of the Sunset clause) of their fortnightly FTB
payments and is also in a blended family, their current partner will
also be subject to prohibition or cancellation of their fortnightly FTB
payments. This will occur if they remain a couple even if the partner is
receiving FTB for children from a previous relationship.

If a prohibited or cancelled FTB customer becomes partnered, the new
partner will also be prohibited from being paid FTB or may have their
FTB cancelled due to their partner's cancellation. This will apply
regardless of whether the new partner is also an FTB customer and
receiving instalment payments for children from a previous relationship.

The Resources page contains examples of start dates of blended family
assessments for FTB instalment customers and a link to mySupport.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Linking a child to a customer's record

Child Override/Claim (CHOC) screen

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Processing Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claims

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
