
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements 007-11010030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines FTB Part A and Part B supplements. These are
annual amounts included in FTB reconciliation and lump sum claim
calculations. They cannot be paid as fortnightly payments and do not
affect income limits for fortnightly FTB payments or Health Care Cards.

On this Page:

FTB Part A and Part B differences

There are important differences between the Part A and Part B
supplements:

-   The Part A supplement increases the maximum annual FTB Part A rate
    for each child, if eligible. From 1 July 2016, FTB Part A supplement
    is subject to an income limit
-   The Part B supplement increases the maximum annual rate of FTB Part
    B for a family

Payment of supplements

Supplements can only be paid after the end of the financial year.

For supplements to be included in the FTB reconciliation or lump sum
claim calculation:

-   Income lodgement requirements must be met by the end of the
    lodgement year (extended lodgement year for 2011-12 or earlier
    years) unless a special circumstances extension has been granted
-   The family's adjusted taxable income (ATI) must not be more than the
    FTB Part A supplement income limit

Families not entitled to FTB fortnightly payments due to the income test
may be eligible for FTB as a lump sum after the financial year, when
their adjusted taxable income (ATI) is known. From 1 July 2016, families
whose adjusted taxable income (ATI) is more than the Part A supplement
income limit will not be eligible for FTB Part A supplement. This
includes customers on income support payments.

FTB lump sum claims must be lodged by the end of the lodgement year
(extended lodgement year for 2011-12 and earlier years). From the
2012-13 financial year, if there are special circumstances that prevent
a family from meeting lodgement requirements by the end of the lodgement
year, an extension of time may be allowed.

The FTB supplements are a component of the person's reconciliation
top-up or lump sum claim payment and may be used for automatic debt
offsetting regardless of whether the person has a repayment arrangement
in place.

Reconciliation letters will advise customers whether or not the
supplements have been included, the amount included, and any amounts
used for offsetting or to recover overpayments.

Supplement entitlement variations

Factors affecting supplement entitlement and payability:

-   In shared care and blended family situations, the supplement amount
    is based on the share care percentages that apply for the child
    and/or the blended family percentage for the customer during the
    relevant financial year
-   The supplements are calculated based on a daily entitlement during
    the financial year. If the person is only eligible for FTB for part
    of the year, the supplements will only be calculated for the number
    of days the person is entitled to FTB
-   The relevant income test may reduce the person's Part A or Part B
    supplement entitlement. Customers not eligible for FTB Part A or
    Part B will not be eligible for the relevant supplement. From 1 July
    2016, families whose adjusted taxable income (ATI) is more than the
    Part A supplement income limit will not be eligible for FTB Part A
    supplement. This includes customers on an income support payment
-   For financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18, FTB Part A supplement child
    immunisation requirements were linked to payment of the FTB Part A
    supplement.
-   For financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18 Healthy Start for School
    requirements (if applicable) must be met for a child who turned 4 in
    the relevant financial year for Part A supplement to be included for
    the child.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
FTB reconciliation timeline, and calculation examples.

Related links

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement

Healthy Start for School and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part A supplement

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer enquires about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump
sum claim

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Previous partners and the family assistance reconciliation

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Payment rates and thresholds

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
