
Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the restoration of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) without the customer having to lodge a new claim.

Blended families and FTB

If the customer and partner are a blended family and wish to be paid as
a blended family then a different process applies see Blended families
and Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Restoring FTB instalments

FTB instalments may be restored without the need for the customer to
reclaim in some instances:

-   it is established that the customer's FTB should not have been
    cancelled, or
-   the event that resulted in cancellation has been resolved, and
-   the customer remains eligible for FTB for the entire period since
    cancellation

FTB may have been cancelled at the customer's request or because of:

-   changes in the customer's circumstances
-   a review of a decision
-   specified events that temporarily made them ineligible for payment
-   the customer not providing information as requested

Generally, FTB may be restored from the date it was cancelled within the
current financial year if the customer remained eligible from that date.
If there have been changes in the customer circumstances, these must be
recorded before restoration to avoid incorrect arrears being paid.

Restorations can only be done if FTB was cancelled in the current or
previous financial year. If FTB was cancelled before 1 July of the
previous financial year, a new claim is required.

If FTB cancels because of Centrelink income support payments stopping,
FTB should be restored before the income support payment, particularly
where the customer is eligible for Rent Assistance (RA).

If the customer is subject to non-payment of FTB instalments to zero
entitlement a warning will appear. A determination is required to see if
a preclusion or exemption should now be applied when FTB is restored.

Customers released from prison

For customers who have been released from prison, before restoring their
payment the Service Officer must first confirm the date the customer was
released with the appropriate state authority. Contacts for confirming
release are included in the Resources page in Confirming prison
admission and release dates.

Income estimates

When restoring FTB, the customer's current income estimate must be
checked to make sure it is reasonable, as the family's financial
circumstances may have changed. A new or revised estimate can apply no
earlier than the date it is advised, unless:

-   FTB is being restored after Centrelink income support payments have
    stopped (CAN-OIS)
-   FTB is being restored after a reasonable income estimate has been
    provided following CAN-ENA/CAN-ENR, or
-   there is another related change in circumstances, for example,
    becoming partnered

For more information, see Date of event (DOV) for family assistance
income estimates.

Cancelled Income (CAN-INC)

FTB will be cancelled income (CAN-INC) when:

-   an uplifted estimate results in a legislative rate of nil
-   the relevant FTB income threshold decreases below the existing
    estimate due to a change in the customer's circumstances resulting
    in a legislative rate of nil or
-   a change in legislation resulting in a legislative rate of nil

Whilst in most circumstances the system will cancel FTB automatically,
there are certain scenarios where a manual cancellation must be coded.

FTB may be restored following CAN-INC where a customer is providing a
reasonable income estimate. When FTB CAN-INC is being restored, the date
of event (DOV) of the estimate = the date of receipt (DOR) of the
estimate. This includes cases where the customer has been claiming Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) and there are earlier estimates in the CAN-INC
non-payment period that are below the FTB income threshold.

The period of CAN-INC may only be assessed based on actual income after
the end of the financial year. The customer must submit a lump sum claim
for this to occur.

Note: FTB Part A and Part B will continue at a zero rate where a
customer has provided a revised family income estimate that reduces the
legislative rate of payment to nil (FTB CZR-ITH or CZR-IEU).

Rather than cancelling, the payment will remain current at a zero rate
for automatic assessment of entitlement at reconciliation. FTB
instalments will re-start automatically if a customer provides an
estimate below the relevant FTB income threshold.

Payment Choices

If the customer is present when restoring FTB, Service Officers should
advise the customer:

[] To review their payment choice. The customer should also be advised
that they can view or update their payment choice via self service:

-   Centrlink online account via myGov, and
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. See Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    claim options and payment choices

If receiving CCS, to review their withholdings where they have advised
of an increase in their income estimate. See Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
withholdings

Debt Offsetting

FTB instalment arrears, reconciliation top-ups and lump sum payments can
be automatically used to repay Family Assistance, Social Security,
Student Assistance and Paid Parental Level Scheme payment debts. This is
regardless of whether the customer has a repayment arrangement in place.
Temporary exclusions from debt offsetting may be considered. See Debt
offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation and
claim process for further information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Families and Child Care Level
2 Policy Help Desk Online Query Form, examples of restoration and
restoration criteria for FTB CAN-INC.

Related links

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Date of event (DOV) for family assistance income estimates

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for children aged 16-19 years

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) results for family assistance
customer mismatches

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
