
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the Double Orphan Pension
(DOP).

Government intent

Double Orphan Pension helps customers care for children who are Orphans.
Customers may also be eligible if:

-   one parent has died and the other parent cannot care for the child
    due to special circumstances, or
-   the child is a refugee who cannot be cared for by their parent

Payment information

DOP is a non-means tested payment which can be paid to a customer or an
Approved Care Organisation (ACO) caring for a child who is orphaned or
unable to be cared for by their parents in certain circumstances. The
child must be assessed as a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of the
customer. DOP is paid in addition to FTB.

Some customers may be eligible to continue to receive DOP or to receive
an additional component of DOP due to savings provisions.

DOP is a payment made under the Social Security Act 1991. DOP payments
are only available through Services Australia.

Customers receiving DOP are also eligible to apply for a foster child
Health Care Card for the child.

Note: children 15 years of age or older may be better off being assessed
as independent for Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY.

All claims and reassessments for DOP are processed by the DOP and
Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team. Customers can contact the DOP
Helpdesk on a freecall number.

The Resources page contains links to information about DOP on the
Services Australia website and details for customers to contact the DOP
Helpdesk.

Contents

Claiming Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Cancellations, restorations and rejection codes for Double Orphan
Pension (DOP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Death of a Double Orphan Pension (DOP) child

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) reassessments and reviews

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming a Double Orphan Pension

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
