-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines how customers can change their claim choice for a
newborn or adopted child.

Claim choice

Customers can choose to apply for:

-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Family Tax Benefit (FTB), or
-   FTB only, and receive Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront
    Payment (NBU) for the child. NBS is part of a customer's FTB Part A

Customers cannot receive PPL and NBS for the same child. For multiple
birth/multiple adoption, PPL can be payable for 1 child and the higher
rate of NBS can be claimed for other children.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, where a customer’s
partner received PPL for at least one day, these customers cannot
receive NBS for that child.

PPL is generally the best choice, as the rate of payment is higher.

[] Customers can use the online estimator options to work out their
potential FTB rate. This does not include NBS/NBU.

The Resources page contains the NBS rate map and maximum rate matrix.
This shows the maximum rate payable based on whether the child is a
first or subsequent child.

Income support payments (ISP)

PPL counts as income for calculating rates of ISP. Customers should
consider the impact PPL will have on their ISP.

If the ISP reduces to a zero rate:

-   the ISP and any linked concession cards will cancel

If the customer or their partner:

-   lose eligibility for their ISP, or
-   it reduces to zero due to an employment income nil rate period, this
    also impacts their FTB

For more information, see Effect of income support entitlement on Family
Tax Benefit (FTB).

Related links

Online estimator options

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Effect of income support entitlements on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
