
Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-17103109

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the child immunisation requirements for CCS and
how they are verified.

Meeting immunisation requirements

A child meets the immunisation requirements for CCS if they:

-   are up to date with immunisations as listed on the National
    Immunisation Program Schedule childhood vaccinations
-   are up to date with a suitable catch up schedule administered by a
    recognised vaccination provider, or
-   have a medical exemption from immunisation for all outstanding
    vaccinations recorded on the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
    by an eligible doctor

Note: unlinked children 3 months of age and under, meet immunisation
requirements.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Immunisation Program
childhood vaccination schedule on the Department of Health and Aged Care
and Aged Care website.

If a child has missed vaccinations on the childhood vaccination
schedule, they will meet the immunisation requirements once they start
and remain up to date on a suitable catch up schedule according to the
current Australian Immunisation Handbook. The child's vaccination
provider will update the AIR with the appropriate information, including
when the next vaccination is due. The child will meet the immunisation
requirements as long as they remain up to date according to this
schedule.

School age and adolescent vaccinations on the school programs schedule
(such as the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine) are not included on the
childhood schedule. Customers should consult their child’s vaccination
provider if they have further questions or concerns about vaccinations.

Note: if customer is also claiming or getting Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
see Immunisation requirements for FTB Part A from 1 July 2018.

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

The AIR is responsible for maintaining records of a child’s immunisation
status only and staff should not refer the customer to the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) to create a link or update immunisation
information. If a customer wants to change the immunisation details held
on the AIR for their child they need to take evidence to their
vaccination provider who will update the AIR if appropriate. This
includes updates where a child has received immunisations overseas or
where their immunisation history is incomplete.

When a child receives vaccinations in Australia, the vaccination
provider will update AIR.

Customers do not need to give documentary evidence of a child’s
immunisation history to Centrelink for CCS assessments. In limited
cases, customers may provide other evidence for an assessment not
handled by the AIR, for example a Secretary determination exemption. For
information on the management of immunisation evidence, including when
and how to escalate an enquiry to the Centrelink AIR Liaison Team, see
Management of immunisation evidence.

Service Officers must not discuss specific vaccinations or vaccination
schedules with customers. Refer the customer to their vaccination
provider. For children under 14, a customer can check which vaccines are
not up to date by accessing their child’s Immunisation History using
Medicare Online Services. Persons aged 14 years and over can access
their own immunisation information using a myGov account. Providers can
also access the Immunisation History for an individual.

Do not refer the customer to the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Obtaining immunisation data from AIR

A child’s CCS immunisation status is obtained by linking the child’s
Centrelink CCS record with the AIR, using a combination of the child's
details including their Medicare number and Individual Reference Number
(IRN). The process of collecting Medicare information and setting up a
link with the AIR is automatically completed as part of a CCS new claim
or using online services. Once the link is established the AIR will
provide the child’s immunisation status.

If a child over 3 months of age has not been previously linked with the
AIR for CCS, the customer will be required to provide the child’s
Medicare details as part of the CCS new claim.

All children 3 months of age and under meet the immunisation
requirements. Once the child reaches 3 months + 1 day and the child's
record has:

-   already linked with the AIR, their immunisation status will be
    checked with the AIR and updated in Process Direct
-   not linked with the AIR, they will be placed in a 63 day
    immunisation grace period (IGP) giving the customer time to provide
    the child’s Medicare details and ensure immunisation requirements
    are met

Name only matching

A child not enrolled in Medicare may still have an immunisation record
with the AIR if their immunisation provider has lodged details of their
immunisation history. In such cases, a link to the AIR can established
without a Medicare number by using the child’s name, date of birth and
postcode.

Note: if the child has ever had a Medicare record, the name-only match
will not link the child.

Provision of Medicare Number

If the customer is claiming CCS and the child is either:

-   eligible for Medicare enrolment but not yet enrolled, the customer
    must enrol the child and provide the Medicare details to Centrelink
-   eligible for Medicare enrolment but the customer cannot provide the
    child's Medicare card details (such as where the child has entered
    the customer's care as part of an informal care agreement and/or the
    customer does not have legal authority to get a Medicare card for
    the child), the Service Officer can escalate to the Centrelink AIR
    Liaison team to get the Medicare card details
-   not eligible for Medicare enrolment, a name-only matching process is
    used to establish the link.
    The name-only matching process will not link a child who has had a
    Medicare number at any point in time

If the customer does not provide Medicare details for a child who is
enrolled in Medicare, a link between Centrelink and the AIR can be
established using a Medicare number obtained from the Centrelink AIR
Liaison team. Customer consent to establish a link is not needed after 1
January 2016.

Note: if a child has multiple Medicare card numbers, any of the card
numbers can be used to establish an AIR link, provided the child is
listed on the card and the correct individual reference number is used.
This is because the multiple numbers should be associated with only one
Personal Identification Number (PIN) in the Medicare system and
therefore only linked to one AIR record.

New claim requirements

Children must meet the immunisation requirements at the time the new
claim for CCS is determined. This is the date the claim is manually
processed, or automatically finalised via straight through processing.

CCS will reject for children who do not meet the immunisation
requirements at the time of claim determination, unless an immunisation
exemption is approved or the child is under 3 months. Claims should not
be rejected where the immunisation status is unknown because a link with
AIR has not been established.

Where a 'W' (wait) response is received from AIR, place the claim on
hold while the link is established regardless of the age of the child.

Immunisation grace period (IGP) for CCS current customers

The AIR monitors the immunisation status of a child based on the
National Immunisation Schedule.

If a child’s immunisation status changes from Yes to No AIR will advise
CCS and a 63 day immunisation grace period is automatically applied.
Where the child does not meet immunisation requirements on or before day
63, the child will cease to be eligible for CCS on day 64.

Details of grace periods can be found under the Child Grace Period
Details twisty in the CCS entitlement summary by selecting the Child
Care icon in Process Direct.

The customer will get a letter telling them when a child enters an IGP.
A second reminder letter is sent at day 35 of the IGP.

CCS has cancelled or rejected IMM

If CCS is rejected or cancelled for a child who did not meet
immunisation requirements, the customer will not be eligible for CCS for
that child until they meet requirements and reclaim. Once the child
meets immunisation requirements, the customer must lodge a new CCS
claim. The system will determine the start date (the first CCS Monday in
the 28 days before the claim submission date).

If CCS is rejected or cancelled incorrectly and the child met the
immunisation requirements at the time of the decision (this includes
where the link with the AIR was not established), CCS may be granted or
reinstated without the need for the customer to reclaim or apply for a
formal review of the decision. The Service Officer must be satisfied
that the child met immunisation requirements on or before the decision
date when re-granting.

If CCS is rejected or cancelled correctly and the customer wants the
decision reviewed, refer to Request for an explanation, quality check or
review.

CCS entitlement and multiple children

CCS immunisation requirements are assessed at child level.

If the customer receives CCS for multiple children, payments will remain
current for eligible children.

If the customer’s only CCS child does not meet immunisation
requirements, CCS for the customer will cancel and the benefit status
will display as CCS/CAN-IMM.

Exemptions

Medical exemption

All immunisation medical exemptions are recorded and managed by the AIR.

CCS immunisation requirements are met if one of the following exemptions
are recorded on the AIR:

-   the child has a medical exemption due to medical contraindication or
    natural immunity for all overdue vaccines. These are assessed by a
    vaccination provider and recorded on the AIR
-   a vaccine is temporarily unavailable

If a customer believes there is a medical reason why their child cannot
be fully immunised, they must be referred to their child’s general
practitioner. A medical exemption will only start from the date the
general practitioner records it on the AIR.

Secretary determination

In extremely limited cases, a child may also meet the immunisation
requirements if the Secretary determines an exemption from immunisation
applies.

These exemptions are assessed on a case-by-case basis by the Level 2
Policy Helpdesk.

The Process and Resources pages also contain more information about
exemptions from immunisation.

Immunisation information for families

[] To view the information held on the AIR for a child aged under 14
years, customers can view an AIR immunisation history statement using:

-   the Express Plus Medicare app
-   their Medicare online account

Individuals aged 14 years and over are able to access their immunisation
information using their own online services account through myGov. The
parent/guardian will not be able to view a child's immunisation
status/history in their own account, or contact AIR where the child is
14 years or older.

Last Immunisation Update Event (LIUE) date

The Last Immunisation Update Event (LIUE) is a date transmitted by the
AIR based on information provided by the child’s vaccination provider.
The LIUE may not be the earliest date that the child met requirements.
The AIR will transmit a LIUE date where an immunisation status of 'Yes'
is provided.

If a customer states the date provided by the AIR is later than the date
they took action to have the child meet requirements, and CCS has been
affected escalate to Centrelink AIR Liaison to confirm whether or not
requirements were met on the decision date.

What the LIUE date means for CCS

The LIUE date will not impact the CCS start date because, when a claim
is processed and a 'Yes' immunisation status is provided, the system
should automatically apply the backdating provisions, ignoring the LIUE
date.

How to view a LIUE date when processing a CCS claim

View CCS immunisation details and the LIUE date via the Child
Immunisation Details (CID) able in Process Direct. The LIUE date is
displayed under Last Immunisation Update Event Date.

LIUE date for CCS assessments

Usually, the LIUE date does not apply to CCS assessments. However, it
may be considered for a SME explanation or ARO review of a decision to
cancel or reject CCS because a child is not meeting immunisation
requirements. See the Resources page for examples.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
how customers can get an immunisation history statement, and links to
more information about immunisation requirements. It has a link to the
Process Direct - Current issues page, and also contains contact
information for the AIR.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims processing

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink
and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Management of immunisation evidence

Child enrolments in Medicare

Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
