-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when cancelling DOP.

Cancelling DOP

DOP payments can be cancelled automatically or manually, depending on
the circumstances of the reassessment. Recording changes that lead to a
loss of qualification should cancel the customer's DOP if they are also
receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Parenting Payment (PP) for the
child. In some cases, extra coding is required if the customer is
receiving DOP only, or the child claims Youth Allowance (YAL) or
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Service Officers need to consider the changes in the customer's
circumstances and decide whether the customer is still eligible for DOP
or not, and discuss this with the customer in order to determine if they
qualify for another social security payment.

For an automatic or manual cancellation, a letter will be sent to the
customer advising the cancellation of payments, the reason for the
cancellation and the customer's review and appeal rights.

Automatic cancellations

For customers who are receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parenting
Payment (PP) in addition to DOP, cancellation should occur automatically
following reassessments where no continuing entitlement exists, e.g.
when a child leaves care.

DOP is not automatically cancelled when a DOP child claims Youth
Allowance (YA).

Where a Disability Support Pension (DSP) claim is lodged by a child aged
16-19 attracting DOP, auto cancellation will generally occur. If auto
cancellation has not occurred, an open work item will be generated and
sent to DOP for action.

Manual cancellations

Manual cancellations are only needed if DOP is not automatically
cancelled as a result of the circumstance change. If DOP is the only
payment the customer is receiving for the child, recording the
circumstance change does not automatically cancel DOP. The DOP team will
need to do further coding.

DOP processing

All DOP processing is done by the DOP Processing Centre. Service
Officers send a Fast Note to DOP whenever:

-   DOP is automatically cancelled as a result of recording changes on
    the customer record. Notify the cancellation and any related
    overpayments so these can be actioned by the DOP Processing Centre
-   DOP is not cancelled automatically as expected or the customer is
    only receiving DOP

Related links

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Cancellation and rejection codes for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
