-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for approved care can be paid for a child when
a family is charged for care that their child does attend.

Types of absences

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) can be
used for allowable or approved additional absences.

CCS and ACCS cannot be used for unapproved or disregarded absences. When
calculating child care subsidy, these absences will be deducted from the
total fee for the child, for that week and the customer will be assessed
as ineligible for CCS for these absences.

The Process page contains further information on viewing absences on a
customer’s record.

Allowable absences

CCS and/or ACCS can be paid for up to 42 absence days without evidence
for each child for any reason each financial year. This applies across
all services the child attends, not for each service.

Public holidays are counted as an absence and are not considered as an
additional absence over the 42 day limit if:

-   the child would normally have attended the service on that day (if
    it were not a public holiday), and
-   fees have been charged for that day

The family's CCS hours entitlement limit still applies to allowable
absence days.

In all circumstances, including shared care arrangements, the 42 absence
days per financial year relates to each child, not to each individual
claimant.

Additional absences

Evidence may be required for CCS and ACCS for absence days above the
limit. Customers need to provide supporting documentation to the child
care service to demonstrate an additional absence is required. The child
care service will decide whether the absence is approved or not. The
child must have used all of their 42 absence days before they can access
additional absence days.

There is no limit to the number of approved additional absence days a
child care service can approve, providing the absence is supported by
evidence.

Reasons for additional absences can include:

illness (with a medical certificate), or another absence due to sickness
of the child, a carer, carer's partner or sibling, supported by medical
certificates

temporary closure of a school or pupil-free days

up to 28 days following a period of local emergency where:

-   the service is closed, or
-   the child is unable to travel to the service due to the emergency

shared care arrangements due to a court order, parenting plan or
parenting order, where a copy has been provided to the approved child
care service

the child is not immunised, and

-   the absence occurs during immunisation grace period, and
-   a medical practitioner certifies exposure to the infectious disease
    would pose a health risk to the child

attendance at preschool

The Resources page contains examples of approved absences.

Special purpose absences

The government can decide to increase the number of allowable absences
that CCS and/or ACCS can be paid for in an emergency event:

-   in a particular location, and
-   for a particular period

These extra allowable absences are displayed as special purpose absences
in Process Direct and event absences via online services/Express Plus
app.

The government makes the rules for when and how special purpose absences
apply. Depending on the emergency event circumstances, special purpose
absences may only be available when a child attends a particular
service, or is in the care of a particular customer.

If a child has both annual allowable absences and special purposes
absences available, special purpose absences will be used first.

Unapproved/disregarded absences and the non-attendance rule

When a customer has exceeded their eligible 42 allowable absence day
limit and no further evidence is provided, the absence is deemed an
'unapproved absence'.

Where an absence is recorded before the child's first physical
attendance, or after the child's last physical attendance and does not
meet the requirements of a prescribed or additional absence. The absence
is deemed a 'disregarded absence'.

Absences before first or after last physical attendance

CCS may be payable if a child is absent in the first 7 days before or
after the child physically attended the service (including the
first/last day of care), for any of the following reasons that will be
determined by the service:

-   any of the additional absence reasons
-   the child, the customer, the customer’s partner or another person
    who the child lives is ill (where evidence has been provided to the
    service)
-   the service has changed ownership
-   the usual service is closed, and the child attends a different
    service under the same provider
-   a family tragedy (a major event including the death of an immediate
    family member) has occurred
-   the enrolment ceased incorrectly
-   local emergencies declared and approved by the Department of
    Education

Customers will be liable for full fees where the absence is an
unapproved absence or a disregarded absence.

See Resources for an example.

Note: where an approved absence is recorded before care, CCS will not be
paid until after the child has actually attended the service.

Changes to absences for the 2019-20 year

The government introduced changes to absences in response to coronavirus
(COVID-19) for the 2019-20 year.

Customers were entitled to an extra 20 absences days for any reason up
until 5 April 2020. This allowed customers to access 62 paid absence
days without evidence being required. Child care services were not
required to submit session reports from 6 April 2020 to 12 July 2020.

Note: a $0 session fee was recorded on every current CCS enrolment on 6
April 2020 and 12 July 2020. This ensured families could get the full
benefit of the increase to allowable absences.

Changes to absences for the 2020-21 year for Victorian customers

The government introduced changes to absences in response to coronavirus
(COVID-19) for the 2020-21 year.

Children attending a Victorian child care service are entitled to 45
special purpose absences for the 2020-2021 financial year. This allows
these children to access a total of 87 paid absence days for the 2020-21
year without evidence being required. The child only gets the benefit of
the special purpose absences while attending a Victorian child care
service.

Notes:

-   A $0 session fee was recorded on many current CCS enrolment for
    children in Victoria on 12 October 2020 with reason ‘COVID-19 system
    update’ to ensure enrolments did not cease
-   Some services are varying or withdrawing the $0 session of care
    submitted on 12 October 2020. This is causing the system to reassess
    and cease enrolments. A debt is being raised on the ceased enrolment
    for the absences between the child’s last physical attendance and
    the enrolment cease date. If the provider has incorrectly varied or
    withdrawn the $0 session of care for 12 October 2020, they must
    resubmit it. This will cause a reassessment of the customer's CCS
    entitlement
-   Families/customers may have had their enrolment ceased prior to the
    $0 session of care submitted on 12 October. Any absences between the
    child’s last physical attendance and the enrolment cease date is
    raised as a debt against the service. The service has a right to
    recover this debt from the customer although the decision to do so
    remains at the discretion of the service
-   Some services may also submit $0 sessions of care for other dates in
    October/November 2020 to prevent customers being charged for
    absences. These will have been already approved by Department of
    Education

Changes to absences for the 2021-22 and 2022-23 years

The government introduced changes to absences in response to coronavirus
(COVID-19) for the 2021-22 year and extended these until 30 June 2023.

Allowable absences

For the 2021-22 year only, if a state or territory restricted access to
child care in a region for more than 7 days, more special purpose
absences were provided to the impacted families.

For both the 2021-22 and 2022-23 financial years, all Australian
families can access 10 extra allowable absences per child.

This is on top of the standard 42 allowable absences provided to
families per child each year.

This brings the total number of allowable absences available to 52.

Note: for the 2022-23 year, the system will display as 42 allowable
absences and the remaining 10 extra absences will present as Special
Purpose Absences.

Additional absences due to COVID-19

In certain circumstances, families can access additional absences if
they have used their annual allowable absence limit. This includes if a
child is ill, and a medical certificate is provided.

From 1 March 2022 until 30 June 2023, if a child or a member of their
immediate household has COVID-19, the family may provide evidence of a
positive COVID-19 test result from a government agency in place of a
medical certificate.

Additional support for families between June and November 2021

Special purpose absences

Families living in or attending a child care service in a Commonwealth
declared COVID-19 hotspot, are able to access special purpose absences.

To be eligible to access the special purpose absences, the COVID-19
hotspot must be:

-   subject to a state or territory lockdown, and
-   declared as a Commonwealth COVID-19 hotspot by the Commonwealth
    Chief Medical Officer for more than 7 successive days

Families can also access special purpose absences when a state or
territory government order has limited access to child care.

During these periods, families will not have to use their regular 42
allowable absences.

Special purpose absences will be available from the date the area was
declared a COVID-19 hotspot until the state or territory:

-   lifts restrictions around access to child care (for Centre Based Day
    Care, Family Day Care and In Home Care services), or
-   allows all primary school-aged children to return to face-to-face
    learning (Outside School Hours Care services)

If eligible, special purpose absences are applied to the impacted
families, they do not need to do anything.

Absences before the first day of care

Normally, CCS absences before the child’s first physical attendance at
their child care service are not payable.

An exception now applies for enrolments that started during COVID 19
lockdown. If a customer commences their child’s enrolment with their
child care service after 12 July 2021 CCS may be payable for absences
before the first day the child attended care.

Customers may be eligible if the following apply:

-   they lived in, or their child’s service was in a declared COVID-19
    hotspot for more than 7 days, and
-   absences before the first physical attendance are within the within
    28 days of the lockdown ending, and
-   absences were recorded at the start of the child’s enrolment

If the customer is eligible and meets the above criteria, Services
should record:

-   a $0 session with the start time of 6.00am and end time of 6:15am,
    with
-   session description of ‘COVID-19 first day of care’ on the first day
    of the enrolment

This ensures CCS absences before the first physical attendance are paid.

Tell families to speak to their child care service to see if this
applies to them. Child care services have been given instructions by
Department of Education on how to record this exception.

The Resources page has a link.

Absences after last day of care

Normally, CCS absences after the child’s last physical attendance at
their child care service are not payable. However, changes have been
made to pay for CCS absences after a child’s last physical attendance to
families affected by COVID 19 lockdown period.

If a customer wants to end their child’s enrolment with their child care
service after 12 July 2021 CCS may be paid for absences after the last
day the child attended care.

Customers may be eligible if the following apply:

-   they have recorded a first attendance, and
-   they lived in, or their child’s service was in a declared COVID-19
    hotspot for more than 7 days, and
-   they ended their enrolment within 28 days of the lockdown ending

If the customer is eligible and meets the above criteria, services
should record:

-   a $0 session with the start time of 10:00pm and end time of 10:15pm,
    with
-   session description of ‘COVID-19 last day of care’ on the last day
    of the enrolment

This ensures CCS absences after last day of care are paid.

Families will need to speak to their child care service to see if this
applies to them. Child care services have been given instructions by
Department of Education on how to record this exception.

The Resources page has a link.

Additional support for families from December 2021

Special purpose absences

For January and February 2022, families with children in child care
services outside Western Australia, can get unlimited special purpose
absences. These absences will be automatically applied.

For March and April 2022, families with children in child care services
in Western Australia, can get unlimited special purpose absences. These
absences will be automatically applied.

This means families will not have to use their 52 allowable absences for
the 2021-22 financial year during this time.

Families may get back paid absences if their child has already exceeded
their 52 allowable absences.

Absences before commencing or ending an enrolment

Absences due to COVID-19 isolation requirements between 1 December 2021
and 30 June 2023

Families will get paid for absences taken in the 7 days before the
child’s first day of attendance, or after their last day of attendance,
if the child or a member of their immediate household is required to
isolate due to COVID-19.

This applies in all states and territories from 1 December 2021 to 30
June 2023.

Child care services should record these absences using the reason code
‘Child ill’.

Families are not required to provide evidence for these absences. Unless
the child is ill and the family provides a medical certificate, child
care services are not required to maintain records of these absences.

Absences between 1 January 2022 and 28 February 2022

Families in all states and territories, with the exception of Western
Australia, can get paid for absences that occur before the child’s first
day or after the last day of care between 1 January and 28 February
2022.

Absences before the first day of care:

If the customer is eligible, services should record:

-   a $0 session with a start time of 6.00am and end time of 6:15am,
    with
-   the session description ‘COVID-19 first day of care’ on the first
    day of the enrolment

This ensures absences before the first physical attendance are paid

Absences after last day of care:

If the customer is eligible services should record:

-   a $0 session with the start time of 10:00pm and end time of 10:15pm,
    with
-   the session description ‘COVID-19 last day of care’ on the last day
    of the enrolment

This ensures absences after last day of care are paid

Child care services have been given instructions by Department of
Education on how to record this exception.

Absences between 3 March 2022 and 30 April 2022 for Western Australia

Families in Western Australia can get paid for absences that occur
before the child’s first day or after the last day of care between 3
March and 30 April 2022.

Absences before the first day of care:

If the customer is eligible, services should record:

-   a $0 session with a start time of 6.00am and end time of 6:15am,
    with
-   the session description ‘COVID-19 first day of care’ on the first
    day of the enrolment

This ensures absences before the first physical attendance are paid

Absences after last day of care:

If the customer is eligible services should record:

-   a $0 session with the start time of 10:00pm and end time of 10:15pm,
    with
-   the session description ‘COVID-19 last day of care’ on the last day
    of the enrolment

This ensures absences after last day of care are paid

Child care services have been given instructions by Department of
Education on how to record this exception.

Gap fee waiver when child is unable to attend child care due to COVID-19

For the 2021-22 year

Child care services can waive the gap fee for families if a child is
unable to attend care for any one of the below reasons:

-   From the first day the restrictions are in force, if the state or
    territory has restricted access to child care in a region due to
    COVID-19, or
-   From 1 October 2021, if a Family Day Care or In-Home Care educator
    can’t provide their usual service because they, or a member of their
    immediate household must isolate due to COVID-19, or
-   From 1 October 2021, if an Outside School Hours Care service
    operating on a school campus closed as part of a direction to the
    school to close, or
-   From 9 November 2021, if the child, or a member of their immediate
    household, must isolate due to COVID-19, or
-   From 27 January 2022, if the child is at a higher risk of severe
    disease from COVID-19, or
-   From 27 January 2022, if the child care service, or a part of the
    service closed based on general guidance from a state or territory
    government agency, such as a health, education, or regulatory
    agency, due to a COVID-19 case, or
-   From 27 January 2022, if the child care service, or a part of the
    service, closed because educator to child ratios cannot be safely
    met due to the educator/s isolating

For the 2022-23 year

Child care services can waive the gap fee for families and continue to
receive CCS if a child is unable to attend care for one of the following
reasons:

-   the child, or a member of their immediate household, must isolate
    due to COVID-19, or
-   the child is at a higher risk of developing severe disease as a
    result of COVID-19. This includes Aboriginal and Torres Strait
    Islander children, or
-   the child care service, or a room at the service is closed due to
    COVID-19 because educator-to-child ratios cannot be safely met while
    educators are isolating. This includes Family Day care and In Home
    Care that cannot provide their usual service while they, or a member
    of the immediate household, are isolating

If one of the above reasons apply, families should talk to their child
care service about getting the gap fee waived. In some circumstances,
families will need to provide evidence to show their eligibility.

Where a child care service is approved to waive a gap fee, they can
decide whether they will waive the gap fee or not. If they choose to
waive the gap fee, it can be waived partially or in full.

Families may also want to change payment arrangements (for example,
Centrepay deductions) if the service has decided to waive the gap fee
for any period.

Note: families who get CCS must ordinarily make a co-contribution to
their child care fees under Family Assistance Law. They do this by
paying the difference between the provider’s fee and the CCS amount.
This is known as the gap fee. The Department of Education are
responsible for child care policy, including policy relating to waiver
of gap fees. Services Australia does not have any role in applying or
monitoring gap fee waivers.

Legislative changes have been made to update the terminology used when
referencing gap free waivers. Within legislation 'gap fee waiver' will
be referred to as 'prescribed circumstances discounts'. These updates
will not be made in Services Australia reference material.

Support measures during a period of emergency

A period of emergency applies for an event which:

-   affects a widespread area
-   has a severe impact on the lives of a significant number of people
    in that area, and
-   prevents children from attending a service or may make attending
    dangerous

The Department of Education will announce when a period of emergency is
declared. Families can find out regions the period of emergency covers
and the dates that it applies on the Department of Education website.

Families who reside or attend child care in declared regions, can now
access extra allowable absences during a period of emergency, for
example, bushfires, floods or a COVID-19 lockdown. More information is
available on the Department of Education website.

Families:

do not need to use their regular 52 allowable absences during a period
of emergency

do not need to do anything to get these extra allowable absences. They
will be automatically applied if they are eligible for them.

can view available extra allowable in their Centrelink Online account
through:

-   myGov, and
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

These extra allowable absences are displayed as special purpose absences
in Process Direct and event absences via online services/Express Plus
app.

Following the period of emergency, families may access additional
absences if they have exhausted their annual allocation of allowable
absences:

-   for 28 days after the emergency, if a child is unable to attend
-   for 7 days after an emergency, if a family decides the child should
    not attend

Gap fee waiver

Child care services can choose to waive the gap fees for families
residing or attending child care in a declared region for the duration
of the period of emergency.

This applies where the child is unable to attend the child care or the
service is closed as a direct result of the emergency.

If the above applies, families should talk to their child care service
about getting the gap fee waived. In some circumstances, families will
need to provide evidence to show their eligibility.

Where a child care service is approved to waive a gap fee, they can
decide whether they will waive the gap fee or not. If they choose to
waive the gap fee, it can be waived partially or in full.

Families may also want to change payment arrangements (for example,
Centrepay deductions) if the service has decided to waive the gap fee
for any period.

Note: families who get CCS must ordinarily make a co-contribution to
their child care fees under Family Assistance Law. They do this by
paying the difference between the provider’s fee and the CCS amount.
This is known as the gap fee. The Department of Education is responsible
for child care policy, including policy relating to waiver of gap fees.
Services Australia does not have any role in applying or monitoring gap
fee waivers.

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Education website.

Viewing child care attendance online

[] Customers can view details of their Child Care Subsidy information
including any reported absences in their online services.

Staff can view details in Process Direct via the Child Care Subsidy
icon.

See the Process page for more information.

The Resources page contains examples of approved and unapproved absences
and a table that outlines requirements for each type of absence above
the limit. It also links to the Department of Education website.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
