-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to record details when a claim for Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP) is made not effective (NEF), rejected or withdrawn by
the customer. Notification will be provided to the customer for all NEF
and rejected claims, explaining the reason for the decision and the
action they need to take.

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

General requirements for an effective early claim

Note: DAP is not payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July
2023. Fathers and partners will need to claim PPL.

Requirements for an effective claim:

-   the claim has been lodged within the family assistance, PPL and DAP
    allowable early claim period
-   the claim is lodged via the Claim for Dad and Partner Pay (FA080) or
    the [] online claim
-   information and evidence (if required) on whether the claimant meets
    the Australian residence requirements
-   the claimant's Tax File Number (TFN)
-   the claimant's bank account details
-   the expected date of birth or adoption date
-   the claimant's DAP period nominated start date
-   information and evidence (if required) about how the claimant meets
    the DAP work test, and
-   information and evidence (if required) about how the claimant meets
    the DAP income test

NEF claims

If the claim is NEF, a decision cannot be made about the customer's
entitlement. The customer must be advised why the claim is NEF and, in
most cases, they will need to lodge a new claim and/or the outstanding
requested information to be assessed for payment.

The customer can ask for a review of the decision that made the claim
NEF. If the claim is still found to be NEF, a new claim will need to be
lodged. If the claim was NEF because it was lodged too late, a new claim
would still be too late and would be NEF.

Rejected claims

Customers must meet the eligibility requirements to avoid claim
rejection. Claims will either be:

-   rejected automatically according to details recorded on the
    claimant's record, or
-   manually rejected when assessing the claim

A claim for DAP will be rejected if:

-   DAP has already been paid for the child (to the customer, partner or
    another person)
-   the DAP income test is not met
-   the DAP work test is not met
-   the customer does not satisfy residence requirements
-   the child's birth is not registered
-   DAP has already been paid for another child in the multiple birth
-   Paid Parental Leave (PPL) is payable on the first day of the DAP
    period
-   maximum amount of PPL has already been paid to the claimant
-   the child is not in care of the customer on the first day of the DAP
    period
-   the customer is working or on paid leave on the first day of the DAP
    period
-   the child was born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

Early claims can be rejected by a discretionary decision, for example,
if the income is clearly above the allowable limit.

Withdrawal of claim

Customers, or their correspondence nominees, may withdraw an effective
claim for DAP at any time before a payability determination is made. The
customer or their nominee can withdraw the claim either in writing,
verbally, or [] online.

When a customer withdraws a claim, the claim is taken never to have been
made. The claim is indexed and then cancelled.

Duplicate claim

A duplicate claim is where the customer has lodged an effective claim in
the first instance and then lodges a subsequent claim with the same
information for the same child.

Some customers may, in error submit a claim more than once for the same
payment and child. These duplicate claims should be assessed as not
effective. The online claim assists to prevent this duplication of
claims.

The Resources page contains links to a DAP claim status and Act
reference table, Q999 letter text, Self Service Conditions of Use and
payment information for families on the Services Australia website,
Office Locator link and the Intertwined referral form.

Related links

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Reviews and appeals for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Change in circumstance for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Payability and delivery of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
