
Assessment for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers going overseas under the no future work capacity provisions 008-03120040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to determine if a DSP customer
travelling overseas satisfies the 'no future work capacity' portability
provisions for continuing payment.

Role of Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Customers who want to test their eligibility under the ‘No future work
capacity' portability provisions, must be referred to CIS. CIS will
issue medical forms (if required) and refer the customer for a long-term
overseas travel assessment.

CIS Service Officers determine if a DSP customer should be transferred
to International Disability Officers (IDOs) for a long-term overseas
travel assessment.

No future work capacity provisions

DSP is generally paid for up to 4 weeks in a rolling 12 month period if
a customer is travelling overseas temporarily. Generally if a customer
is leaving Australia to live in another country, DSP will cease
immediately on departure. If they are subject to former resident
provisions, DSP will cease on departure unless they meet the rules for,
and can be paid under, an international social security agreement.

However if a customer satisfies the ‘No future work capacity'
portability provisions, their DSP may continue indefinitely, even if
they leave to live in another country. This provision does not apply to
former residents until they have been in Australia for 2 years from the
date of resumed residence. The NWC assessment will usually require
completion of a medical review, which will include a medical report by
the customer's treating doctor and a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) that
must be conducted before the customer departs Australia.

As the assessment must be made before the customer leaves Australia, it
is necessary to arrange both the issuing of the medical report forms and
booking of a JCA appointment quickly. Tell the customer that the
assessment must be conducted before their departure overseas if they
want DSP to be payable under the NWC portability provisions.

The customer must also be made aware that as a result of the medical
assessment they may no longer be considered to satisfy the medical
qualifications for DSP, which will result in the cancellation of their
DSP. For this reason, the customer may decline to have the medical
assessment. In this case their portability options will be limited. When
the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is run, a warning about
possible DSP cancellation is generated. An assessment under the NWC
provisions is entirely voluntary.

New medical report may be required

For a NWC assessment, a new medical report is required even if the
customer has an existing current and valid assessment of their work
capacity report, unless that report was specifically for portability
purposes.

The Medical Report Disability Support Pension Review for portability
(AUS222) form:

-   contains extra portability questions
-   must be completed by the customer's treating doctor in Australia,
    and
-   returned before the customer attends their Job Capacity Assessment
    (JCA)

CIS will issue the AUS222 when a request is received.

JCA referral may be required

Only CIS staff can make a JCA referral for a customer under the NWC
provisions. Do not request a JCA for these customers using another
referral reason. The portability specific referrals have different
questions to a medical review JCA which address the customer’s long term
prognosis of impairments and work capacity. If the report is completed
for the incorrect reason, it cannot be used for portability and
customers can be disadvantaged.

For a NWC assessment, a JCA referral is still required, even if the
customer has an existing current and valid assessment of their work
capacity, unless the assessment was specifically for portability
purposes.

Do not refer the customer for a NWC JCA if they previously had a
portability NWC assessment and met the requirements for indefinite
portability.

If there is a current and valid assessment of the customer's work
capacity and the customer has previously had a portability NWC
assessment and has not met the requirements for indefinite portability,
a new referral for a JCA is not required unless the customer has had a
substantial change in circumstances. For example, the customer had a NWC
assessment and did not meet NWC JCA requirements, their mental health
condition deteriorated to the point of hospitalisation. The treating
doctor reports shows the customer is now severely incapacitated and
cannot perform daily functions without substantial assistance. The
customer may choose to assess their eligibility again under the NWC
provisions, but must be made aware of the possibility of cancellation of
their DSP.

Pre-referral information gathering and checking

As the customer needs to have a JCA appointment before leaving
Australia, skilled CIS staff must book an appointment as soon as
possible. Scan and attach any additional documentation received from the
customer to their record. Any other medical information that becomes
available after the JCA referral has been started, needs to be scanned
and attached to the customer's record as soon as possible.

Historical information may also need to be scanned by the Records
Management Unit (RMU). Requests for scanning historical
medical/sensitive information can be done through the Records Management
service request webform. The RMU will notify the Service Officer when
the historical Medical Information File Envelope (eMIFE) has been
scanned.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, the Records Management
service request form, taking and sending PBS medicines overseas and DSP
Portability specific assessment guidelines.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Actioning automatic activities of a current Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) referral

Cancelling an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) referral

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Former resident provisions

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
