
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to record payment cancellation, suspension or
rejection information on a customer's record in regards to Disability
Support Pension (DSP).

Use of codes in the Centrelink system

The Centrelink system uses codes when a decision is recorded to cancel
or suspend payment or to reject a claim. A description of the code is
used in correspondence with customers.

Some of these actions occur automatically due to an update made to the
customer's circumstances on the computer system (for example, income or
asset details). Others are manually coded.

Suspending a customer's payment manually

Where it is necessary to suspend a customer's payment manually, staff
must make sure they follow the appropriate process/es. This includes
issuing the correct request or notice to customers. For example, a
request for information must clearly detail:

the payment type that the request relates to

what information the customer needs to provide

the type of action the customer must take

when the information should be provided or when action should be taken
(noting that the timeframe for this must be reasonable)

what happens if the information is not provided or the required action
is not taken in the specified timeframe, and

the section of the relevant Act under which the request has been made

only code manual suspension/s once the specified response time of
request or notice has lapsed. The customer must be contacted to tell
them that an unfavourable decision is about to be made. The following
steps must be completed immediately following a manual process:

-   Issue a manual advice if an advice has not automatically issued. The
    advice must clearly state the payment type, the date of effect, the
    relevant section of the Act and the reason their payment was
    suspended. The advice must also include the customer's review and
    appeal rights
-   Record a DOC or note on the customer's record, making sure that it
    meets GIR DOC Minimum Standards for significant decisions and
    including what action the customer must take before the payment can
    be restored

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced.
The new Tables are used to assess a customer's medical eligibility for
all DSP claims lodged on or after this date. See The Impairment Tables.

Resources has a summary list of Return to Work codes for DSP and a
summary list of codes for DSP Participation Requirements.

Related links

Cancellation of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Customer ceases work or reduces hours of employment within the two year
suspension period for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Recording reasons for decisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
