-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess a customer’s eligibility to
transfer from DSP to DSP (Blind).

Transfer to DSP (Blind)

Customers not getting DSP, who want to be assessed for DSP (Blind), need
to lodge a DSP claim. The usual eligibility rules apply, except
customers eligible for DSP (Blind) do not need to meet continuing
inability to work (CITW).

Customers getting DSP, who want DSP (Blind), can be transferred without
a claim if they meet the rules for permanent blindness.

The customer must meet one of the following:

-   Visual acuity on the Snellen Scale, after correction by suitable
    lenses must be less than 6/60 in both eyes
-   Constriction to within 10 degrees of fixation in the better eye
    irrespective of corrected visual acuity, or
-   A combination of visual defects resulting in the same degree of
    visual impairment as that occurring in the above points

The customer needs to provide a report from their treating
ophthalmologist. The preferred form is the Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013). A report with the same
information is also acceptable.

Customers with an existing Identity Confirmation Indicator (ICI) of
'Confirmed' do not need to provide identity documents. If the ICI is
'Not Confirmed', the customer may be required to confirm their identity.

Customers can choose to get their letters from Centrelink in an
alternative format.

Only APS4 and above can make a determination on permanent blindness.

The Resources page has a link to the SA013 form. This page also includes
letter text to use if a customer is not eligible for DSP (Blind), but is
still eligible for DSP.

Related links

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Pensions income and assets tests

Assessing permanent blindness

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
