
This document outlines information about Work Assist assistance
available from Disability Employment Services (DES).

On this Page:

Assistance available under Work Assist

Work Assist provides support to eligible employees who have difficulty
fulfilling the essential requirements of their role due to their injury,
disability or health condition. The DES provider will work with the Work
Assist participant and their employer to provide supports to maximise
the chance of the Participant maintaining their employment.

For an employee to be eligible for Work Assist their employer must be of
the view that their employee is having difficulties fulfilling the
essential requirements of their job, due to the impact of their injury,
disability or health condition, and the employee must:

-   be currently employed
-   have been working in that job for at least 8 hours per week on
    average over a consecutive 13 week period
-   likely to require Ongoing Support

Work Assist assistance is not normally provided to assist with finding
new employment.

Determining eligibility for Work Assist

A customer does not require an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or
Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) to access Work Assist. The DES provider
can determine if a customer meets the relevant criteria for Work Assist.
The DES provider then makes the referral and commences the customer in
the programme.

Services Australia has no role in making a formal assessment of a
customer’s eligibility for Work Assist through DES. However, where the
customer first approaches Services Australia seeking support though Work
Assist, staff may need to contact a DES provider for guidance about
whether their assistance is likely to be suitable for the customer.

Connecting a customer with a DES provider for Work Assist

Customers can access Work Assist either by directly approaching a DES
provider, or through Services Australia.

If the customer directly approaches the DES provider and their
eligibility for Work Assist is confirmed, Services Australia normally
has no role. If the customer approaches Services Australia seeking
support through Work Assist, Services Australia's main role is to
immediately refer the customer to a DES provider. In this situation, the
referral is not made in the normal way via the Online Diary, but rather
by:

-   (wherever possible) contacting the customer's chosen DES provider by
    phone and arranging for the customer to meet the provider; or
-   giving the customer details of available local DES providers so that
    the customer can directly register with a provider of their choice

Once the customer commences with DES, the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations will notify Services Australia about the referral
status, which will be automatically updated on the individual customer
record.

When Services Australia may suggest Work Assist for a customer

Eligible customers include JobSeeker and Parenting Payment customers who
have an injury, disability or health condition which means they are:

-   at risk of losing their jobs, or
-   having trouble coping at work

A referral should be offered to a customer if it is possible they would
benefit from Work Assist.

Work Assist requirements for DES

Normal assessment and referral procedures for DES are streamlined to
ensure that eligible customers can start receiving assistance as soon as
possible.

If a customer is seeking to be referred to a DES provider, Services
Australia should also check whether the customer already has a Customer
Reference Number (from a 'person' record, not a 'child' record).

Staff should ensure that the customer (or the DES provider) has this
reference number, to assist the provider with the direct registration
process. If the customer does not already have a 'person' record, staff
should create a 'shell' record for the customer while they are present.

Related links

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Disability wage subsidies

Employment Assistance Fund

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Disability Support Pension (DSP) letters and advices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
