
Reviews of Disability Employment Services (DES) participation 008-04030100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the review process for the Disability Employment
Services (DES) services provided to a customer, provider reports on the
customer's progress, and requests the provider may submit to Services
Australia.

DES overview

DES provides specialist employment assistance to help people with a
disability, injury or health condition find and retain sustainable
employment in the open labour market.

DES gives customers access to:

-   support while training for a particular job, where the training may
    be provided by the service or subcontracted to another agency
-   help in finding a job and starting employment in the open labour
    market
-   continuing support once they have commenced employment

When a job seeker lives in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations remote area, they are referred to a Community Development
Program (CDP) provider. The CDP provider will provide services similar
to DES for remote job seekers.

Duration and review of DES service (program review)

DES programs give job seekers an initial 18 months of individual
tailored assistance. A Program Review is conducted for each participant
(excluding Work Assist participants) once they have received
approximately 18 months of Employment Assistance.

In most cases the review is done by referring the customer for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). The DES Provider will complete a
Program Summary Report prior to the ESAt being conducted.

However, if the job seeker is participating in employment or significant
education or training the review may be conducted by the DES provider.

The purpose of the review is to determine whether the job seeker would
benefit from a further six months of assistance in DES (known as
'Extended Employment Assistance') or whether the job seeker should be
referred to another service; or be exited from DES.

If a job seeker is exited from DES they will require an ESAt to
determine if a new referral is appropriate. From 1 July 2021,
eligibility changes may mean a previously eligible job seeker is no
longer eligible for a new referral.

If a job seeker with mutual obligation requirements does not attend the
review appointment, and does not have a reasonable excuse, their income
support payments may be suspended.

Job seekers who have been in employment for 52 weeks will have an
assessment of ongoing support requirements.

Program Summary Report

The Program Summary provides information on the job seeker's progress in
DES including both achievements and barriers to achieving and/or
maintaining sustainable employment.

A Program Summary Report is prepared by the DES provider:

-   prior to a Program Review to inform the ESAt
-   once a customer has completed the DES program and is being exited

The job seeker's most recent DES Program Summary Report can be viewed by
Services Australia staff in the Referrals Summary menu.

Post Approved Activity (PAA) Review

A PAA is generated for 28 days after a customer has been exited from a
DES program. The contact will involve job seekers attending an interview
with a Service Officer to review their current situation and, if
necessary, to re-engage them with an Employment Services Provider using
the Online Diary.

A PAA review is only applicable for a Centrelink managed job seeker. For
further information on the PAA review, see Post Approved Activity (PAA)
Review Job Plan Contact.

DES providers requesting updates to interpreter information

A request to update the job seeker's interpreter information on their
record can be made to Services Australia by a DES provider on behalf of
the customer. If a DES provider identifies that a customer's interpreter
information is inaccurate, they can ask the job seeker to complete the
'Authority for Centrelink to update Interpreter information' form which
they can fax to the agency to action. The form includes the customer's
consent to update their record and the type of interpreter they wish to
have coded.

Intelligence Quotient (IQ) medical information requests

Since 1 July 2010, where a DES provider is assisting a job seeker with
moderate intellectual disability, the provider may be eligible for
additional funding to provide services to the job seeker. DES providers
are only eligible for this additional funding if the customer's
Intelligence Quotient is less than 60.

DES providers should only contact the agency for information to
determine the customer's IQ in circumstances where they are unable to
obtain it from alternative sources such as:

-   an existing copy of an IQ assessment report
-   a signed statement from a registered psychologist
-   an education authority (for example, a special school report) in the
    customer or nominee's possession which states the assessed IQ score

When a provider requests a customer's IQ information from the agency
they will fax an 'Authority to obtain information from Centrelink' form
signed by the customer to the local service centre. In some cases the
Assessment report and the other information at the agency's disposal
will not be sufficient to determine the customer's IQ. The agency is
only expected to provide IQ information at their disposal based on the
medical information in the Medical Information File Envelope (MIFE).

The Resources page contains links to the DES forms, Authority for
Centrelink to update Interpreter information and Authority to Obtain
Information from Centrelink.

Related links

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Disability wage subsidies

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Supported Wage System (SWS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
