
Assessing Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims 008-03030000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes for assessing DSP claims.

On this Page:

Claim lodgement

At the point of lodgement, register the DSP claim and scan all
documentation. Medical and non-medical eligibility for DSP is then
assessed. See Claiming DSP.

Customers identified with a potential terminal illness

At the lodgement of a DSP new claim Service Officers may identify the
customer has a potential terminal illness (life expectancy is less than
2 years). If so, the claim must be prioritised to the Medical Assessment
Team (MAT). To escalate, see Prioritising Disability Support Pension
(DSP) claims for terminally ill customers.

Medical evidence

The medical evidence required to support a DSP claim depends on the
customer's circumstances. New claimants are required to supply medical
records such as clinical notes, test results and specialist reports to
support their claim. The Medical Evidence Requirements (SA473) form is
available to assist customers to determine suitable medical evidence.

If the customer does not submit any medical evidence their claim may be
rejected. See Streaming a new claim for DSP.

When accepting medical evidence from customers or when discussing with
them details of their medical condition, check if the medical evidence
or the customer's statements suggest they may be terminally ill or
require nursing home level care. These customers may be manifestly
medically eligible for DSP.

Scanning of medical documentation can occur at a Service Centre,
Services Australia's scanning provider or as part of an Assessment
Services appointment.

The paper version of a medical/sensitive document is placed into the
daily scanning batch and destroyed after 10 weeks (70 calendar days).
See Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD.

See What is medical evidence for DSP?

Streaming

Once lodged and indexed, DSP claims are assessed through a streaming
process.

The streaming process determines if the claim can be manifestly granted,
manifestly rejected, or requires a referral for a Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA). It also identifies if there is any outstanding
information required to process the claim. See Streaming a new claim for
DSP.

Potential terminal illness

Where identification of a potential terminal illness (life expectancy is
less than 2 years) occurs, Service Officers must prioritise the claim.
This ensures the claim presents to the next available Service Officer
for immediate action. For full details of the escalation process, see
Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers.

A JCA is an important step in the medical assessment process. It is
generally not required when it is clear from available evidence the
customer is manifestly eligible or ineligible for DSP.

A claim may be manifestly:

-   rejected on non-medical grounds, such as where the customer does not
    meet age, residence or income/assets criteria
-   rejected on medical grounds, such as where medical evidence shows
    the customer's condition is clearly temporary
-   granted where the customer meets the non-medical eligibility
    criteria and the medical evidence shows the customer meets specific
    manifest medical eligibility criteria, such as having a terminal
    illness, or requiring nursing home level care

In these cases, determine the claim without a JCA or Disability Medical
Assessment (DMA).

In all other cases a JCA is required to assess the claimant's medical
conditions under the Impairment Tables, and to determine if they have a
Continuing Inability to Work (CITW).

If a JCA report recommends likely medical eligibility for DSP, and the
customer has met the non-medical eligibility criteria, the customer will
be referred to a Government-contracted doctor (GCD) for a DMA before
their claim is determined. See DMA referrals.

If it is determined a JCA is required, a referral request is sent to the
Assessment Services Branch (ASB). The ASB Triage team will undertake an
initial assessment to ensure a JCA is required and sufficient medical
evidence has been provided. ASB are then responsible for contacting the
customer and advising of the JCA details including appointment time,
venue and format.

Assessing the claim after a JCA

How the claim is assessed once the Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report
is submitted, depends on whether the JCA report indicates:

-   medical ineligibility
-   manifest grant or reject recommendation
-   potential medical eligibility

If medical ineligibility is determined, the claim is finalised and DSP
is rejected.

If manifest grant/rejection recommendation is determined, the claim is
finalised as DSP is manifestly granted or rejected.

If potential eligibility is indicated, and the customer has met the
non-medical eligibility criteria, they are referred to a GCD for a DMA
to confirm medical eligibility.

Assessing the claim after a DMA

There are 5 possible outcomes from a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)
report:

-   medical eligibility for DSP, but some minor adjustments to the
    medical condition/s and impairment rating/s are recommended
-   medical eligibility for DSP, but there are major changes to the
    medical condition/s and the impairment rating/s resulting in the
    requirement to now assess active participation in a Program of
    Support (POS) and/or reassess work capacity
-   the customer is manifestly eligible for DSP
-   the customer is not medically eligible for DSP
-   the customer failed to attend the assessment

For more information see Assessing a new claim for DSP after a DMA.

When the DSP claim is finalised the customer is contacted by phone
and/or letter and advised of the claim outcome.

Contents

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

Streaming a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)?

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest)

Rejecting a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Selective Application of Data (SAD)

Assessing permanent blindness

Assessing Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Calculating the start day for an incapacitated customer

The Impairment Tables

Incorrect claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Digital images of medical reports electronically lodged by Treating
Health Professionals (THP)

Locating and actioning Disability Management Assessment (DMA) work items
in the Workload Management System (WMS)

Program of Support (POS) requirements for Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Disability Cluster screens

Related links

Initial contact and identification of services for people with a
disability

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
