-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document helps Service Officers with reading and interpreting Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports that have been completed and submitted
for acceptance. There is also a summary of what actions (if any) are
needed by the referring teams for each status. The information in a JCA
report is grouped into different sections.

Information contained in the JCA report

The information contained in the JCA report is used to make an informed
decision regarding:

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Assessments for Special Disability Trust and the Supported Wage System

Eligibility for employment assistance

Participation or mutual obligation requirements, including:

-   whether the customer has a Partial Capacity to Work or a Temporary
    Reduced Work Capacity
-   the impact of vulnerabilities and barriers on capacity to comply
    with Participation or mutual obligation requirements as part of
    potential participation failure decision making

The report includes recommendations about:

-   whether the customer is manifestly eligible for DSP, if applicable
-   the details and nature of a customer's medical conditions, including
    whether the condition is verified by evidence, likely to persist for
    less than 2 years or likely to persist for more than 2 years, and
    diagnosed, reasonably treated and stabilised (DTS)
-   impairment ratings for medical conditions likely to persist for more
    than 2 years, if required
-   whether the customer has actively participated in a Program of
    Support (POS), if required
-   work capacity in bandwidth hours
-   a referral to suitable employment services
-   whether a customer is unable to use public transport without
    substantial assistance (to identify possible eligibility for
    Mobility Allowance)
-   a customer's vulnerabilities or barriers in relation to employment
-   determining whether a Vulnerability Indicator should be recorded on
    a customer's record
-   suitable interventions to assist them to overcome those barriers

Where a JCA indicates potential eligibility for DSP, a referral to a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) with a Government-contracted Doctor
(GCD) is required to verify medical eligibility unless the person is
assessed as manifestly eligible.

Assessors use Impairment Tables when completing assessments for
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced,
which include changes to terminology. The new Tables are used to assess
a customer's medical eligibility for all DSP claims lodged on or after
this date. See The Impairment Tables. The date of a DSP claim determines
which version of the Impairment Tables, and associated terminology is
used in the JCA report.

Report status

The status of the JCA report is displayed on the customer's record to
enable tracking of report progress. The types of status displayed are:

-   New
-   In Progress
-   On Hold
-   Submitted
-   Reopened
-   Returned
-   Unable To Complete
-   Finalised

Submitted reports

The JCA report is completed by the Assessor and is electronically
submitted for acceptance.

When the report is submitted by the Assessor, it needs to be checked and
actioned to determine if it is to be accepted or returned.

For more information about manual checking of JCA reports, see Checking
and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report.

The Resources page contains Frequently Asked Questions relating to the
status of JCA reports.

Related links

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Using a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) to determine payment type

What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)?

The Impairment Tables

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Assessing a job seeker's mutual obligation requirements based on
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Pre-screening and booking participation interviews for Disability
Support Pension (DSP) customers

Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) referrals

Overriding Medical Conditions and Work Capacity recommendations in a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
