
Customer ceases or reduces work in the 2 year suspension period for Disability Support Pension (DSP) 008-03100020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when a customer has ceased work or
reduced their hours of work and their DSP is suspended, or cancelled
deemed suspended, because they had returned to work. It also helps to
identify if DSP can be restored or the customer needs to reclaim.

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Check eligibility for MOB when a customer contacts in relation to
reporting employment income, changing jobs or starting work.

See Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers.

Eligibility if working up to 30 hours per week

DSP customers may work up to 30 hours per week and stay on DSP as long
as they remain eligible, including meeting the income test.

There may be some exceptions to this rule for people paid under an
international agreement, or for people outside Australia.

Before 1 July 2012, DSP was suspended or cancelled if the customer was
working 15 hours a week or more, and:

-   they were granted DSP on or after 1 July 2006, or
-   a transitional DSP customer had their DSP reviewed between 1 July
    2006 and 30 June 2012

Restoring payment

When DSP is suspended, or cancelled deemed suspended, due to returning
to work, the customer's payment may be restored within 2 years of the
date of effect (DOE) of the suspension or cancellation if:

-   they cease work
-   they reduce their hours below 30 hours per week, or
-   their employment income no longer precludes them from payment

All other eligibility requirements for DSP must be met to restore
payment. For example, the income and assets tests.

DSP is restored under the eligibility criteria that applied to the
person at the time of suspension. For example, granted under the 30 hour
or 15 hour rule.

Customer must have notified starting work

To be eligible for restoration of payment within 2 years, the customer
must have notified Services Australia they have started work. When the
customer notifies of their return to work, DSP is suspended/cancelled
with one of the valid return to work reason codes.

If the agency was made aware the customer had returned to work without
the customer advising, or before they advised (and outside 14 days), DSP
is cancelled using a different reason code. If the customer does not
have a valid return to work code, DSP cannot be reinstated.

If a DSP customer did not notify their return to work and then ceases
work, they need to lodge a new claim if they wish to retest their
eligibility for DSP.

Alternative payment while DSP suspended/cancelled

During the suspension or deemed suspended period, customers can receive
an alternative income support payment if:

-   they are not qualified for DSP due to the number of hours they are
    working, and
-   their income does not preclude them from another payment

This payment must be cancelled when DSP is reinstated.

Customer has employment income with reduced hours

When the customer has employment income and still qualifies for DSP:

-   If under Age Pension age, Working Credit may enable the customer to
    keep some of their income support payment while they are working
-   If over Age Pension age and getting a pension (excluding PPS), they
    may be eligible to the Work Bonus

Related links

Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Initial contact and identification of services for people with a
disability

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Commencing or returning to work Disability Support Pension (DSP)

General 14 day notification provisions

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years with no dependent children

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
