
Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) 008-01040010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how customers can claim the Essential Medical
Equipment Payment (EMEP). It explains what information required for
their claim, and what to do when a customer lodges a claim.

On this page:

EMEP claims

The EMEP is paid to customers to cover the additional energy costs of
running essential medical equipment or medically required
heating/cooling.

The EMEP is paid at 12 month intervals based on the customer’s initial
grant date. Customers will not have to lodge a new claim each year to
continue to receive the payment.

Customers can claim EMEP to receive payment for:

-   one or more items of qualifying essential medical equipment being
    used in their current residence, and/or
-   medically required heating/cooling at their current residence

Once EMEP is granted, the customer will not need to claim again for the
same equipment or heating/cooling at the same residence. For the payment
amount, see  Rates and thresholds > Essential Medical Equipment Payment
(EMEP).

Note: a change in circumstances will cancel EMEP.

Customers with medical needs who use the equipment (or their carers who
live at the same residence) must lodge a new claim for:

-   another qualifying item of essential medical equipment and/or
    heating/cooling they are not receiving an EMEP for
-   a change of circumstances that results in ineligibility, or
-   ceasing to qualify for EMEP. For example, they changed their
    residential address

If the customer lives in different residences during the year, separate
claims are needed for each residence. EMEP can be paid for the same
item(s) of equipment at up to 2 residences every 12 months.

Claiming EMEP

EMEP applies to the customer’s current residential address. Customers
only need to claim once for EMEP for their current residence and
qualifying medical equipment item(s).

Once granted:

EMEP remains current

Current EMEP customers will:

-   be automatically paid
-   receive EMEP on the anniversary of the initial grant date at 12
    monthly intervals, and
-   continue being paid until they lose qualification

If there is a change in circumstances (such as a change in residence):

-   the customer loses qualification
-   the customer must lodge a new EMEP claim
-   a new anniversary date is set (based on the grant date of the new
    claim)

Note: medical information provided for the initial EMEP claim cannot be
more than 2 years old.

Once EMEP eligibility is established, proof of medical needs is not
required again if:

-   the customer changes address but the new claim is for the same
    person with the same medical equipment/requirements, or
-   a new carer claims, with no other changes to medical requirements

Claims from carers

A carer can claim if they provide care and attention on a regular and
ongoing basis for a person with medical needs (equipment user). They
must live together at the same address. They do not need to be a formal
carer or be receiving Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance to qualify
for EMEP. A parent, or other person responsible for a dependent child
can be a carer, including a foster carer. The carer of a non-dependent
adult may also qualify for EMEP.

[] Encourage customers to claim online. After submitting the claim, the
What you must do page tells customers what documents are required to
support their claim.

If the customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
they can lodge a paper claim. See the Resources page for relevant claim
forms.

As EMEP is an online claim currently available via Centrelink online
account on the legacy platform, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) cannot be
used for EMEP.

Customers with nominees

Customers may require an individual or organisation to act on their
behalf as a nominee when conducting Centrelink business with Services
Australia.

Correspondence nominees can only apply for an EMEP on behalf a customer
via paper claim. Issue a paper claim to the correspondence nominee as
they cannot apply online.

The nominee arrangement can be short term or ongoing.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
relevant forms.

Related links

Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Change of circumstances for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Proof of energy reviews for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
