
Streaming a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) 008-03010100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to stream a DSP new claim lodged via online
claim, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or paper claim form. Paper claims
include a Claim for DSP (SA466) or DSP Claim at age 16 (SA439).

Assessment of medical evidence by the Medical Assessment Team (MAT)

When a DSP online or ACC is submitted, or a paper claim is lodged and
scanned, a Work Item is created and allocated to the Medical Assessment
Team (MAT) for assessment of medical evidence.

The DSP new claim activity will automatically be placed On Hold awaiting
assessment of medical evidence and completion of the MAT recommendation.

The MAT is responsible for checking and assessing all medical evidence
and providing a recommendation to Disability Processing staff. When a
claim is submitted without medical evidence, the MAT assessor will
exercise judgement and attempt to obtain medical evidence if the
customer is likely manifestly medically eligible or vulnerable. A
Contributing Assessor may be used to provide discipline specific input
to the assessment.

The MAT assesses medical evidence and recommends if:

-   the customer satisfies manifest medical eligibility criteria
-   the customer is manifestly medically ineligible
-   there is insufficient medical evidence to assess the functional
    impact of the customer's medical condition/s
-   there is a current and valid Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) that can
    be used to determine the claim, or
-   a JCA is required to assess medical eligibility

MAT will complete an assessment of Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)
in an initial referral if manifest eligibility is recommended.

Streaming

When the DSP new claim, including SA494 Claims for Terminal Illness, is
allocated, the Service Officer must:

-   check if the MAT has completed an assessment of medical evidence
-   create a MAT referral if an assessment of medical evidence has not
    been completed
-   check the MAT recommendation to see if the claim can be finalised
    without further assessment. For example, an assessment of
    non-medical eligibility may not be required if the customer is
    assessed as manifestly medically ineligible and they, or their
    partner (if relevant), are not receiving another income support
    payment
-   review the customer's personal circumstances, claim and associated
    documents to ensure all appropriate information is available to
    progress the claim

When streaming the claim, contact is only required when:

-   there are complex issues
-   the customer is vulnerable or at risk and requires support to manage
    the claim process more information is required
-   a SA495 (Verification of Terminal Illness) only is received and
    indicates the average life expectancy of a person with the condition
    is more than 3 months (or it is not clear)
-   the customer has indicated in their claim they, and/or their
    partner, have ceased work, are yet to receive their final pay and
    confirmation of details is required

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

Immediately process claims that can be finalised at streaming.

If the customer has not provided all required information, run the
Request for Information guided procedure for paper claims to issue them
with a Request for Information (RFI) letter.

For online claims, use the Request and Manage Customer Tasks guided
procedure to request documents, see Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM).

If a customer has lodged a claim and there are outstanding tasks to
complete, or requested documents are not provided within the required
timeframe, reject the claim.

Hold to User

Refer to the Hold to User new claim criteria if the DSP customer is
vulnerable, identified as manifestly eligible or has complex
circumstances.

Smart Centre Critical Response

If significant changes occur during the streaming or processing of the
claim, such as admission to psychiatric confinement or gaol, or death of
the customer, refer the case to the Smart Centre Critical Response Team
for management. Referrals must be made in consultation with a Team
Leader. To make referrals to the Smart Centre Critical Response Team,
see the Resources page.

Terminal illness

At any stage before finalisation of the DSP claim, a customer or nominee
or the customer's Treating Health Professional (THP) may advise in
writing or over the phone their condition is terminal and their life
expectancy is less than 2 years. Staff who receive a Priority-Poss TRM
NCL in Prog work item or a MAT recommendation indicating a terminal
illness, must follow the required actions on the Process page.

Cancellation of FTB and DOP - DSP claim lodged by young person

Staff must ensure Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Double Orphan Pension
(DOP) is cancelled for a child who is 16 to 19 years following the
lodgement of a claim for DSP if it is not granted or rejected
immediately.

On lodgement of a DSP claim, the system will auto cancel the FTB portion
for the child. If the FTB recipient is only receiving FTB for the child
claiming DSP, it will cause the FTB to cancel Dependant Receiving
Precluding Payment (DPP). If the FTB recipient is receiving FTB for
multiple children, the FTB part A portion for the child claiming payment
will cancel.

Services Australia has a responsibility under section 28B of the FA
(Admin) Act, to check that FTB is cancelled for a child who makes a
claim for a social security payment or pension. If FTB is not cancelled,
and DSP is subsequently granted at a later stage, an overpayment of FTB
and/or DOP may occur.

When auto-cancellation does not occur, a Change of Circumstance (CoC)
work item is allocated in Process Direct for finalisation by a Families
and Child Care skilled tagged Service Officer.

If the DSP customer is receiving Double Orphan Pension (DOP), FTB
cancellation will also cancel DOP. On cancellation of the DOP, an auto
ACTDOC is created and sent to region code DOP with keyword 'ACTDOP' to
notify of DOP cancellation. If auto cancellation does not occur, an auto
ACTDOC is created and sent to DOP to notify of DOP cancellation and any
resulting overpayments.

Start dates

Customers who are qualified and payable are generally granted from the
date they submit a complete claim with all relevant supporting
documentation, see Calculating the start day general rule.

Intent to claim provisions may apply to customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers. After
determining the date a claim was made, staff can assess if backdating
provisions apply.

Customers can lodge an early claim for DSP up to 13 weeks before the
first day of eligibility. Early claim provisions may apply to customers
who are turning 16, see Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP). If an
early claim lodgement is accepted, the start date is the first day the
customer becomes qualified for the payment. See Early claims.

From 7 December 2020, employment income paid after the start date must
be assessed for the same period for which it is paid by the employer.
Where the income is too high for the customer to be payable, but the
customer will become payable within 13 weeks of the date they lodged the
claim, move the start date to the earliest Entitlement Period Start Date
from which the customer is payable.

Duplicate claims

A customer can lodge a claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) at any
time. If a customer lodges a DSP claim within the qualification period
(for example, 13 weeks) of a previously submitted DSP claim, Service
Officers need to determine how each claim should be progressed. Service
Officers must attempt to contact the customer or nominee to establish
their reason or intent in lodging a second claim. Customer can choose to
pursue all submitted claims, but they can also choose to withdraw the
claim. See Cancel or Withdraw online claim and Withdrawal of claims. If
required, Service Officers can refer to Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for
appropriate policy clarification.

The Resources page contains a table of MAT Referral Reasons and the
associated text, a table of start date scenarios, links to relevant
forms, Office Locator for Referral to Service Support Officer in the
Smart Centre Critical Response Team (SCCRT) and Intranet links to
Quality and Technical Support and the Level 2 Helpdesk.

Related links

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Confirming a customer's identity

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Pensions income and assets tests

Residence assessment for customers claiming Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Selective Application of Data (SAD)

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest) claims

Rejecting a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Waiting periods for income support payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for children aged 16-19 years

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
