
Medical Assessment Team (MAT) 008-20102224

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of the Medical Assessment Team (MAT).

Role of MAT

MAT:

-   checks and assesses all scanned medical evidence
-   actions a Medical Assessment Recommendation Fast Note
-   completes a Medical Assessment Recommendation form (SA479) where
    appropriate, and
-   uploads this to the customer's scanned documents to support the
    Disability Support Pension (DSP) Service Officer's decision

If required, the MAT will contact the customer, their Treating Health
Professional/s (THP) and/or the Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)
to obtain more information.

MAT assess the medical evidence to determine if:

-   manifest medical eligibility criteria is met
-   the customer is manifestly medically ineligible
-   insufficient medical evidence prevents assessment of the customer's
    medical condition/s and functional impacts
-   there are doubts about the medical evidence authenticity. Note: MAT
    or HPAU must investigate further by contacting health professionals
    listed in the evidence to confirm the diagnosis and prognosis
-   a current and valid assessment can be used for the claim
    determination, or
-   a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral is required to determine
    medical eligibility

A report titled 'DSP Medical Assessment Recommendation' may be completed
by an Assessor and uploaded to the customer's record (UNSSPOC/SA479)
clearly documenting:

-   the recommendation
-   evidence taken into account, and
-   if applicable, supporting evidence from the customer, their THP/s
    and/or HPAU

A work item is allocated to a DSP Officer to assess non-medical
eligibility.

Manifestly medically eligible

A Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral is not required where it is
clear from available medical evidence the customer is manifestly
medically eligible for DSP.

Manifest grants can be made if medical evidence confirms 1 of the
following applies where the customer:

is permanently blind

is terminally ill, and the:

-   condition is terminal with life expectancy less than 2 years, or
-   average life expectancy for a person with the same condition is less
    than 2 years

has a diagnosed intellectual disability with a valid Full Scale IQ below
70

requires nursing home level care. Note: the customer does not have to be
in a nursing home to be manifestly granted DSP. It is sufficient that
they require the same level of care (usually provided by a carer/s)

has Category 4 HIV/AIDS. Refer all potential manifest cases to the HPAU
for consideration

is receiving a Department of Veterans' Affairs Disability Compensation
Payment at Special Rate (Totally and Permanently Incapacitated), paid
under the Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986

List 1 and 2 conditions include medical conditions that may meet the
criteria above.

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) required

Claims that cannot be manifestly granted or rejected, as recommended by
a MAT assessment, need a JCA to assess medical eligibility for DSP,
including:

-   if the customer's conditions are fully diagnosed, treated and
    stabilised (FDTS)
-   if applicable, the impairment rating for FDTS conditions, and
-   if the customer has Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Manifestly medically ineligible

A customer is manifestly ineligible where medical evidence shows:

-   the customer's medical condition/s are clearly temporary and the
    functional impacts are expected to resolve within the next 2 years
-   the medical evidence provided does not support assessment against
    the Impairment Tables (the condition/s are not fully diagnosed,
    treated and stabilised), or
-   there is clear evidence the customer can work at least 15 hours a
    week in open employment that is sustained and not in jeopardy

Where a MAT recommendation is rejected on medical grounds, finalise the
claim without further assessment of non-medical eligibility.

Insufficient medical evidence

As part of the MAT assessment, the Assessor may determine that
insufficient medical evidence has been provided to assess medical
eligibility. This assessment will consider all available evidence,
including relevant information previously provided by the customer, such
as older medical evidence and indications that they may be manifestly
eligible. The Assessor will also consider the impact of barriers to
obtaining medical evidence before recommending that insufficient medical
evidence has been provided with the claim.

If limited or no evidence has been provided, the MAT Assessor may try to
gather additional information. This may include contacting the customer
or their THP.

If applicable, the Assessor will complete a recommendation report
indicating that insufficient evidence was provided to assess medical
eligibility. If no medical evidence has been lodged and there is no
evidence available on the record, the MAT Assessor will complete a
Medical Assessment Recommendation Fast Note only. A recommendation
report will not be completed.

Related links

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

The Impairment Tables

Assessing permanent blindness

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
