
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the action to be taken when a DSP
customer fails to attend an interview. It does not cover non-attendance
at Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) interviews.

Interview non-attendance

When a customer does not attend an interview, make 2 attempts to phone
the customer over 2 days. If the customer does not have a phone, send a
letter asking them to respond within 7 days.

The reason for non-attendance needs to be considered. If it is caused by
the customer's medical condition or other exceptional circumstances, it
may be more appropriate to conduct the interview over the telephone.

The customer should be advised that DSP may be suspended as a
consequence of not attending an interview. The reason for this is that
the interview is required to verify their continuing eligibility and
therefore payment cannot continue until they are interviewed and their
eligibility is established.

If a new appointment is booked, payment can continue. If the customer
does not attend this new appointment, DSP is suspended immediately
without any further contact with the customer.

In addition to the requirement to contact the customer, suspension can
only occur where:

-   the written request to attend an appointment has been issued prior
    to any suspension action being considered;
-   the written request to attend an appointment includes details as to
    the action required, a reasonable timeframe for response, the
    consequences of non-compliance, and a reference to the relevant Act
    that the request has been made under, and
-   a suspension letter is issued which clearly outlines the reason for
    the suspension, its date of effect, the impacted payment, the
    relevant section of legislation and review and appeal rights

If DSP is suspended for failing to attend an interview, and no action is
taken to restore DSP within 13 weeks of the suspension, it will be
cancelled automatically at the end of that period.

Different procedures apply for non-attendance at DSP participation
interviews and for JCA and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments.

Related links

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Disability Support Pension (DSP) participation requirements compliance
model

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
