
Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) 008-01040000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines EMEP.

EMEP

The EMEP is paid to eligible customers with medical needs (or their
carers who live at the same residence) for:

-   each item of essential medical equipment, and/or
-   medically required heating/cooling

The EMEP covers the additional running costs of essential medical
equipment or medically required heating/cooling being used at the
residence.

EMEP claims can be made:

-   online via MyGov > Payment and Claims > Claims > Make a claim >
    Disabled, ill or injured > Essential Medical Equipment Payment
-   by phone via the Disability, sickness and carers line, or
-   in person at a service centre

Customers only need to claim EMEP once for their current residence and
qualifying medical equipment. The EMEP is then paid at 12 month
intervals based on the customer’s initial grant date. For the payment
amount, see Rates and thresholds > EMEP.

Customers will not have to lodge a new claim every 12 months to continue
to receive the payment.

Note: if further qualifying medical equipment is obtained after the
initial grant, the customer will be required to lodge another claim for
the new equipment.

EMEP is:

-   automatically paid every 12 months on the grant date anniversary
-   subject to the Consumer Price Index (CPI). On 1 July each year, EMEP
    rates increase in line with the CPI. All claims made on or after
    this date will receive the applicable rate of EMEP
-   paid until the customer loses qualification or there is a change in
    circumstances
-   paid via direct credit through the Payment Utility system, except
    where a payment nominee has a payment method of 'cheque' (customers
    will receive the payment 2 working days after the payment is
    generated)

Change in circumstances

When a change in circumstances occurs, for example a change in
residential address:

-   the care receiver (or their carer) loses qualification
-   a new claim must be lodged
-   a new anniversary date is set according to the date of grant for the
    new claim

Claim processing

All EMEP online and paper claims are processed using the Staff Process
Claim workflow. After completing the workflow, the customer's
eligibility for payment is assessed. Any further processing is completed
manually to finalise the claim.

Viewing EMEP details

To access the EMEP system and view details in Customer First:

-   in the customer’s record, key SVMEP in the Next field
-   view EMEP assessment details via Payments & Services > Energy
    Payments > Medical equipment task selector
-   for EMEP system service reason, key MEP

Effect on income and debt repayment

EMEP is:

non-taxable

exempt income under social security, family assistance and veterans' law

payable to payment nominees

not an eligible payment for:

-   an urgent payment
-   Centrepay deductions

not subject to income management, including Voluntary Income Management

not automatically used to offset or recover any debt, but customers can
elect to use their EMEP to repay an outstanding debt

not a recoverable debt unless activity is found that relates to serious
non-compliant behaviour

Review and appeals

Customers can request an explanation or apply for a formal review of the
decision to reject or cancel EMEP.

EMEP is paid under social security law.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
intranet links about EMEP.

Contents

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Handling claims for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) received
at Medicare service centre

Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Change of circumstances for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Proof of energy reviews for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Essential Medical Equipment Payment
(EMEP)

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
