
Disability Support Pension (DSP) 008-03000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about DSP.

Eligibility

DSP is an income support payment for people of working age who:

-   have a physical, intellectual or psychiatric impairment that
    prevents them from working, or undertaking training, for 15 hours or
    more per week for at least 2 years, or
-   are permanently blind

Both medical and non-medical eligibility criteria (age, residency for
example) must be met before DSP can be granted.

See Eligibility for DSP.

Participation and work capacity

The focus is on:

-   assessing what people are able to do, rather than what they are not
    able to do
-   identifying early interventions

This builds capacity and encourages active participation in economic and
community life.

Some people have minimal or no capacity to work, such as people with
significant disabilities. DSP provides a safety net to support these
customers.

Claiming

When a person with an illness, injury or disability contacts to claim
DSP:

Offer an online claim first. Explain the benefits of claiming online

If they do not want to claim online, offer to run Assisted Customer
Claim (ACC) with them

If an online claim or ACC are not suitable options, and the customer
indicates:

-   they have a terminal illness with a life expectancy of less than 2
    years, issue the Claim for Disability Support Pension for a Terminal
    Illness (SA494) via the Mail Forms guided procedure in Customer
    First
-   otherwise, issue a DSP claim via the First Contact Service Offer
    (FCSO) workflow

Claims are assessed from the date the customer submits a completed claim
and all required documents. There are exceptions for vulnerable
customers.

See Claiming DSP and Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP)
claims for terminally ill customers.

Streaming DSP claims

Once a customer submits a claim, it is allocated to a Service Officer
for streaming.

The intent of the streaming process is to make early decisions about
whether the claim can be manifestly granted, rejected or referred for a
Job Capacity Assessment (JCA).

Claims for customers who have a terminal illness are prioritised.

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)

A claim that cannot be manifestly granted or rejected as recommended by
the Medical Assessment Team (MAT) must have a JCA to further assess
medical eligibility for DSP.

The JCA is a comprehensive evaluation of a person's level of functional
impairment and work capacity. Assessors have access to relevant
information about the person, including current and past medical
details, and their participation and employment history.

This assessment includes whether the:

-   customer's conditions are fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised
    (FDTS)
-   impairment rating for any FDTS conditions
-   Program of Support requirements have been met (if applicable), and
-   customer has a Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

Customers who have been assessed as potentially eligible for DSP via a
JCA will be referred to a Government-contracted Doctor (GCD) for a DMA.

The purpose of a DMA is to verify the customer's medical eligibility for
DSP.

Referrals to a DMA will occur after the Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) is
completed, unless the customer meets manifest eligibility criteria for
DSP.

Contents

Assessing Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) overview

Disability payments and services which may no longer be granted

Disability Support Pension (DSP) cancellations, suspensions and
restorations

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) letters and advices

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Reviews and appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or
cancellation decisions

Medical conditions, codes and terminology

Medical Risk Based reviews of current Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers

Medical reviews for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers under 35
years of age

Nominees

Notification and attendance requirements for Disability Support Pension
(DSP) customers

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

Progress of claim - Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Rates of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Resources on illnesses, injuries and disabilities

Storage and access to information for carers and disability claimants
and recipients

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Related links

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Streaming a new claim for Disability Support Pension

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral overview

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Using an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine
payment type

Using a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report to determine payment type

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Customer ceases or reduces work in the 2 year suspension period for
Disability Support Pension (DSP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
