-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the medical evidence required to support new
claims or a review of medical eligibility for DSP.

Requirement for medical evidence

Customer’s claiming DSP must provide Services Australia with medical
evidence for the disability or medical condition(s) affecting their
ability to function. Insufficient medical evidence will generally result
in a DSP claim being rejected.

The medical evidence required depends on each customer's circumstances.
Most customers must provide comprehensive evidence, however some may
only need to provide certain information, or may not need to provide any
new evidence.

Do not ask customers to provide extra medical evidence if it is clear
their claim can be manifestly rejected on non-medical grounds. This
includes when their income clearly exceeds the relevant limits.

Medical evidence

Medical evidence includes documents written by a medical practitioner
(such as the customer's treating doctor) and other registered health or
allied health professionals. This evidence should support the
information provided in the medical details section of the DSP claim.

Statements from the customer or their nominee are not considered medical
evidence. This also applies to letters/information from a non-health
professional, such as a teacher. However, this information may be taken
into account as part of the assessment.

Medical evidence for DSP online claims

Customers must provide medical evidence when they lodge their online
claim. This presents as a required task at the Next Steps section of the
DSP online claim. If no medical evidence is uploaded, the claim cannot
be submitted.

There are some exceptions to this rule.

Customers who claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP) (Provisional) within the
online claim for DSP can submit both claims without providing medical
evidence. This allows processing of the JSP (P) online claim while the
customer gathers medical evidence for DSP. Generally, a DSP claim will
be rejected if medical evidence is insufficient.

Customers who meet the exceptional circumstance criteria can submit
their DSP online claim without uploading all required documents. These
claims will be referred to the Medical Assessment Team (MAT), using a
separate work item. The MAT assessor may contact the customer or health
professional to discuss medical evidence before making a recommendation.
See the Process page for exception criteria.

Medical evidence for DSP new claims

Customers must supply current evidence detailing the impact of their
medical condition(s) or the claim may be rejected. They do not need to
provide specific forms completed by their treating health
professional(s).

The Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist (SA473) lists
the medical evidence that can be provided to support a DSP claim and is
included in the:

-   online claim, and
-   Claim for Disability Support Pension (SA466) paper form

Customers with a terminal illness can submit a Verification of terminal
illness (SA495) form as medical evidence as part of their Claim for
Disability Support Pension for a Terminal Illness (SA494).

The agency can provide support to vulnerable or at risk customers for
whom it is difficult to obtain basic medical evidence. For example,
people who disengaged from health services due to being homeless, living
in a remote community or having an undiagnosed mental health condition.

For each condition that significantly affects the customer's functional
capacity and ability to work, information is generally required about
the:

-   diagnosis of the condition, including whether the diagnosis is
    confirmed, when the condition was diagnosed, and the details of the
    health professional who made the diagnosis
-   symptoms and functional impact, including current symptoms of the
    customer's condition (persisting despite treatment, aids, equipment
    or assistive technology), when the symptoms started (date of onset),
    the severity, frequency and duration of symptoms, and how the
    conditions and treatment impact on the customer's ability to
    function in day-to-day life including at work
-   prognosis, including how long the condition is expected to affect
    the customer's functional capacity, and whether the condition is
    likely to improve, remain the same or get worse, and
-   treatment and care, including the type of treatment undertaken in
    the past, current treatment, planned treatment (including if on a
    waiting list), expected impact of current and future treatment and
    any requirement for nursing home or palliative care

This does not mean the customer is required to provide documentary
evidence covering all of these points. However, the customer should
provide as much medical evidence as they can so the agency can complete
a thorough assessment of the DSP claim.

In certain cases, verification of the diagnosis may be enough to
establish medical eligibility for DSP without the need for a
comprehensive Job Capacity Assessment. For example, if a customer
provides evidence from their treating doctor confirming diagnosis of a
'List 1' manifest condition, the MAT may determine this is sufficient
evidence.

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced.
The new Tables are used to assess a customer's medical eligibility for
all DSP claims lodged on or after this date. See The Impairment Tables.

Forms and checklists for providing medical evidence

When talking to customers about providing medical evidence for a DSP new
claim, depending on the customer’s circumstances:

refer to the Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist
(SA473)

issue the Disability Support Pension Medical evidence requirements
Information for treating health professionals (SA478) form. Explain this
form:

-   is not a medical report, customers claiming DSP still need to
    provide existing medical evidence
-   is optional. Customers claiming DSP are not required to return this
    form, however the information provided may assist in better
    understanding the customer's circumstances for assessment and review
    purposes
-   can be used by treating health professionals to provide information
    about a customer’s relevant medical evidence requirements and the
    assessment process
-   the form is available on the Services Australia website
-   can be given to the customer (to submit with their DSP claim), or
    posted directly to the agency (the address is printed on the form)
-   when the form is scanned, it forms part of the medical evidence
    record for DSP

issue the Verification of a terminal illness (SA495) form. Explain this
form:

-   can be completed by the customer’s treating doctor if the customer
    has no medical evidence showing the diagnosis and prognosis of their
    condition
-   is included at the end of the Claim for Disability Support Pension
    for a Terminal Illness (SA494), or
-   can be accessed by treating doctors via the Services Australia
    website

issue the Consent to disclose medical information (SA472) form. Explain
this form:

-   can be completed by the customer to confirm they consent to their
    treating health providers providing relevant information about their
    medical condition to the agency

Do not:

-   issue agency forms to collect medical evidence from the treating
    doctor (this includes the SA012RM and SU684), or
-   direct the customer to go to their doctor, specialist or other
    treating health professional to obtain medical evidence

Diagnosis requirements

Diagnosis of the customer's disability or medical condition is usually
provided by a medical practitioner. Specialist evidence or specialist
confirmation of the treating doctor's diagnosis is required for some
medical conditions including:

-   an intellectual impairment. An assessment of intellectual function
    and assessment of adaptive behaviour from a registered psychologist
    is required, or a report from a special school which includes
    details of these assessments. Any evidence provided must include
    information supported by a psychologist about the person's IQ score,
    or their ability to undergo IQ testing
-   a mental health condition such as depression, anxiety or
    schizophrenia. The diagnosis must be made by a psychiatrist, or by
    another medical practitioner with supporting evidence from a
    registered psychologist
-   an ear condition affecting hearing or balance. Diagnosis must be
    made by a medical practitioner, with supporting evidence from an
    audiologist or an ear, nose and throat specialist
-   an eye condition affecting vision. Diagnosis must be made by a
    medical practitioner, with supporting report from an ophthalmologist
    or ophthalmic surgeon (a report completed by an optometrist is not
    sufficient)

In limited cases, a diagnosis of a medical condition can be provided by
an Assessment Services Psychologist Specialist Assessment report.

New medical evidence not required in some circumstances

In some cases, new medical evidence is not required for a DSP new claim.
For example:

a customer has previously lodged medical evidence and this evidence is
still current and relevant to the customer's circumstances, such as a
previous assessment of intellectual function and adaptive behaviour, or

there is a current and valid Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) on the
customer's record, such as when the customer:

-   is invited to claim DSP as a result of a recently completed
    assessment
-   has claimed DSP previously (and was rejected on non-medical grounds
    where medical eligibility was recommended) and there has been no
    significant change in their medical conditions since the assessment

If there is a current and valid JCA, the customer will still need to
undergo a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) with a
Government-contracted Doctor, excluding if the customer is manifestly
eligible for DSP.

If a Service Officer determines there is a current and valid assessment
or current medical evidence for a customer claiming via an online or
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), the required task can be marked as Not
required or as Provided via the Request and Manage Customer Tasks (RMCT)
guided procedure.

No medical evidence provided

If no medical evidence has been provided with a DSP new claim within the
required timeframe (usually 14 days), the claim will likely be rejected
without further notice unless:

-   the medical details section of the claim indicates a likely manifest
    medical condition or other serious health condition(s) which may
    impact the customer's ability to provide evidence (for example, in
    intensive care)
-   the customer has recently turned 16 years of age and was previously
    assessed as a profoundly disabled child or as having a very severe
    disability or medical condition for the purposes of Carer Payment
-   the claim or the customer's record indicates a vulnerability issue
    (for example, homeless, living in a remote community)
-   the customer was invited to make a further claim by the agency or
    the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) as part of a review of a
    decision
-   the customer recently lodged medical evidence prior to the claim,
    and it is clear the evidence was lodged to support the claim

If the customer subsequently provides the required medical evidence (and
any other information), within 13 weeks of the rejection decision, the
claim may be re-opened and reassessed. This does not need an application
for a formal review of the decision order for the customer's claim to be
reconsidered.

The Resources page contains links to current forms relating to medical
evidence required to support decisions on assessing or reviewing DSP.

Related links

Age/Disability Support Pension on the basis of blindness: Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Diagnosis of a medical condition provided by an Assessment Services
Psychologist for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
