
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to restore Mobility Allowance (MOB) after it
has been suspended. It also explains the shortened reclaim process when
a customer requalifies for MOB after an exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements for JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment
(PP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) expires.

Restoration of MOB

Restoration of MOB without a new claim may be appropriate when a
customer’s payment is suspended, in a Period of Grace (POG) or
cancelled.

A new claim is required if the payment is cancelled for the reason
whereabouts unknown, or if it is cancelled for specific portability
reason codes - that is, Extension Period Overseas Ended (EPE), Customer
Gone Overseas Without Notifying (GWN/GWR), or Customer Overseas for 6
weeks (O6W). In contrast, if the payment is suspended for one of the
previous codes, and the date of suspension is within 13 weeks and no
other circumstances have changed, the payment can be restored.

When a suspension action is followed by a cancellation, the customer is
cancelled from the date of suspension. Any restoration action will
proceed as a restoration from cancellation.

If MOB has been suspended, the payment can be restored once the reason
for the suspension has been resolved (for example, the forms have been
lodged or new address details given). The restoration takes effect from
the payday following suspension.

Note: for customers receiving the higher rate of MOB and their
Disability Support Pension (DSP), Parenting Payment (PP), JSP or YA (job
seeker) is cancelled (or suspended for DSP) because of their employment
income or increase in hours, MOB can continue at the higher rate, as
long as they continue to work 15 hours per week or more, continue to
satisfy the basic eligibility criteria for MOB and do not receive any
income support.

If in a POG and the customer has recommenced or changed their qualifying
activity, they must provide evidence of the current activity before
payment can be restored. This can be a letter from the employer with the
relevant details:

-   Mobility Allowance: Verification of work (including voluntary work),
    and
-   looking for work activities (MA005E), or
-   Mobility Allowance: Verification of training (MA005T)

For more information about the POG, see Cancellation and Period of Grace
for Mobility Allowance (MOB).

Whereabouts unknown

If the customer’s payment has been suspended or cancelled whereabouts
unknown (WUK), as long as the customer has continued to be qualified and
retained payability for their payment during the period of
suspension/cancellation, their payment may be restored with full
arrears.

This may be the case even when the customer recontacts more than 13
weeks after the decision to suspend or cancel. This is because the
customer would be taken not to have received advice of the decision to
suspend/cancel, if they were not at their known address and/or advice of
the decision was returned to Services Australia.

This means that the date of effect of the favourable determination
(restoration) resulting from review of the decision to suspend/cancel is
the date of the original decision (date of suspension/cancellation), see
the References page.

Each customer’s circumstances must be considered to determine whether
they could be taken not to have received advice of the decision to
suspend/cancel, and whether they retained qualification and payability
during the period, and therefore receive arrears upon restoration.

Related links

Cancellation and Period of Grace for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Suspension of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Mobility Allowance
(MOB) including Period of Grace reasons

Mobility Allowance (MOB) Employment/Training Reviews

Verification of Mobility Allowance (MOB) activities

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Qualification for Mobility Allowance (MOB) and rates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
