
Disability Support Pension (DSP) Service Offer Interview (SOI) 008-20013032

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to conduct the Service Offer Interview (SOI)
for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers in Process Direct and
Customer First.

Service Offer Interview (SOI)

The SOI is an integral part of the DSP assessment and is an opportunity
to discuss the claim outcome and offer support options.

When a DSP claim is rejected it is vital the SOI is attempted in every
instance to ensure the customer understands the reason their claim was
rejected. The SOI must outline why the customer did not qualify for DSP.
In some circumstances, an SOI is also required when DSP is granted.

When an SOI is required

SOIs should be attempted in every circumstance when the customer's:

-   DSP claim has been rejected
-   DSP claim has been granted and customer or their partner has
    earnings, unless they meet either the Pension Monthly Exception Rule
    or the 1WE or 2WE exception. See Recording and correcting employment
    income details
-   DSP claim will be granted and an update to their Family Tax Benefit
    is required
-   Nominee has requested contact about the claim

When an SOI may not be required

In limited circumstances where DSP is rejected, an SOI is not required.
However, if a correspondence nominee or executor arrangement exists, an
SOI attempt should occur.

An SOI is not required where the customer:

-   is deceased
-   is in prison
-   is in psychiatric confinement
-   has no contact number on record
-   SOI is not appropriate. For example, the customer is overseas
-   is subject to restricted servicing and contact is deemed
    inappropriate

Note: if a customer has a Managed Service Plan, contact should first be
made with the One Main Contact (OMC), Back up Contact or Personalised
Services Service Officer (PSSO) if assigned, to discuss how to best
approach the SOI.

Conducting an SOI

All SOIs must:

tell the customer of the outcome of their claim

clearly explain the reason for the decision

discuss the customer's current circumstances and how Services Australia
can help including:

-   alternative income support payments, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   appropriate employment services referrals, such as Disability
    Employment Services (DES)
-   reduced/temporary work capacity (if applicable), and
-   how participation in employment services and any periods of
    exemption may affect any future assessment of active participation
    in a Program of Support

offer a copy of the relevant medical assessments to help the customer
understand the decision

tell the customer of their review and appeal rights

SOI for DSP claims selected for QMA in Process Direct only

Quality Management Officers (QMO) must complete Service Offer Interviews
(SOI) for Disability Support Payment (DSP) claims selected for Quality
Management Application (QMA).

QMA aims to improve efficiencies by finalising work items and customer
outcomes in a single process.

The QMO finds and fixes errors (if required) in real time and do not
refer the work back to the submitting Service Officer to fix.

As the QMO completes the DSP claim activity, they also deliver the SOI.

Exceptions to this include where the DSP claim is finalised by:

-   Service Officer who is undertaking consolidation training for
    Disability claim processing, or
-   Customer Critical Response Team (CCRT) or
-   MAT Assessor recommends DSP rejection Insufficient Medical Evidence
    (IME)

QMO must not action SOIs for claims finalised under consolidation
training or finalised by CCRT or IME rejection.

Staff undertaking consolidation training will:

-   conduct SOI after the QMA has been completed
-   check QMA feedback tile in Process Direct

Staff from CCRT will:

-   conduct the SOI before finalising the claim, and
-   run the SOI Workflow after the QMA check is finalised

Where the outcome is to reject DSP due to IME, the MAT Assessor will:

-   attempt to contact the customer to deliver the SOI
-   record the SOI outcome using one of the relevant SOI Fast Notes

SOI for DSP claims selected for QOL in Customer First only

The Service Officer assessing the DSP claim in Customer First must
complete the SOI.

If the DSP claim has been submitted for QOL (Quality On Line) the claim
must be successfully passed before the Service Officer completes the
SOI.

QOL is a quality assurance program. It uses sampling to select
activities for checking based on the system, service reason, activity
type and proficiency levels of staff.

The QOL program contains a number of components including QOL tools, QOL
checkers, a quality-sampling regime, feedback mechanisms and QOL
Standards.

Assessment Services attempt SOI before DSP claim is rejected for Insufficient Medical Evidence (IME)

Where a customer has supplied insufficient medical information for a DSP
claim, Health and Allied Health Professionals from the Assessment
Services Medical Assessment Team (MAT) will attempt the SOI before
finalising a recommendation to reject a claim for reason IME.

MAT Assessors attempt the SOI and, if appropriate, give the customer
extra time (usually 5 days) to provide medical evidence for their claim.
Contact is recorded via the AssessServ Contact Completed Fast Note.

Where the MAT Assessor submits a recommendation to reject IME,
Disability Processing staff do not attempt a further SOI, even if the
MAT Assessor's attempt was unsuccessful.

The Resources page contains a link to the Escalation Coordination Policy
and the Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Rejecting a new claim Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Rejecting a new claim Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Assessing eligibility to Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Recording and correcting employment income details

Customer service delivered through a One Main Contact (OMC) as part of a
Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Calling a customer or returning a customer’s call

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
