[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the rates of Disability Support
Pension (DSP).

On this Page:

DSP rates

There are different rates of DSP depending on:

-   the customer’s age, for example: under 21 years or 21 years and over
-   their marital status
-   whether they have dependent children
-   whether they are considered independent

The rate of DSP is adjusted annually in line with Consumer Price Index
(CPI) increases:

-   for customers under 21 years on 1 January
-   for customers 21 years or over (or under 21 with dependent children)
    in March and September

Independence

DSP for customers aged under 21 may be paid at a dependent or
independent rate.

Independence status may affect the:

-   maximum basic rate of DSP
-   income and assets limits
-   payment of rent assistance

Note: customers aged under 21 years of age who have a dependent child in
their care are eligible for the 21 and over (common) DSP pension rate
from the date the child entered their care. This is different from the
independent rate.

See Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support
Pension customers under 21 years.

Parental income

DSP customers under 21 years of age are not subject to the Parental
Income Test (PIT).

For more information, see Assessing payment rates and independence for
Disability Support Pension customers under 21 years.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

YDS is added to the basic payment rate for customers under 21 years of
age who are not eligible for a dependent child rate.

The rate of YDS is adjusted annually on 1 January in line with Consumer
Price Index (CPI) increases.

For more information about the current rate of payment, see Rates and
Thresholds.

The Resources page contains links to payment and rate information on the
Services Australia Website.

Contents

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Related links

Online estimator options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
