-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help a customer when they contact Services
Australia and advise they are ill, injured, or have a disability.

Government intent

The government's support of people with disabilities, illnesses or
injuries is reflected in programs and policies. The intention of the
policy is to ensure people with a disability receive an appropriate
income support payment that best reflects their capacity to actively
participate in the workforce and the community.

When assessing the most appropriate payment for customers, Service
Officers should consider the customer's capabilities and encourage
participation.

Pathways to employment are flexible and help customers increase their
capacity to participate in suitable activities. Customers with a
capacity for work or study may be referred to programs and services to
help them reach their potential.

Manifest eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Always check if the customer may meet one of the categories for manifest
eligibility for DSP when:

-   accepting medical evidence from customers, or
-   discussing with them details of their medical condition

If appropriate, see Claiming DSP and Prioritising Disability Support
Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill customers.

Medical evidence checklists to help customers

The Claim for Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist
(SA473) form gives customers information on the medical evidence they
need to support their claim for DSP.

The form is on the Services Australia website. Customers can lodge the
SA473 along with their supporting medical documents online. If the
customer is having difficulty lodging the documents online, they can
lodge in person.

The Disability Support Pension Medical evidence requirements Information
for treating health professionals (SA478) form helps treating health
professionals provide relevant medical evidence to support the
customer's claim for DSP or medical review. The form gives relevant
information about medical eligibility and the assessment process.

The form is on the Services Australia website. Service Officers can
issue the form on request. Customers claiming DSP do not need to return
this form. However, the information may help in understanding the
customer's circumstances.

Customers with a partial capacity to work

Unemployed customers able to work 15 or more hours per week but less
than 30 hours per week because of a permanent medical condition will
have mutual obligation requirements and income support that reflects
their partial capacity to work.

The following customers are not eligible for Disability Support Pension
(DSP). Advise the customer to claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) if appropriate:

customers with a work capacity of 15 hours or more per week

customers unable to work 15 hours per week within 2 years, but

-   their Impairment Rating does not qualify them for DSP or
-   they are assessed as not having a severe impairment and not having
    participated in a program of support

If JSP or YA is granted, customers have modified provisions with mutual
obligation requirements to suit them. These include reduced job search
requirements if appropriate. The Assessor will also determine and make
referrals to an appropriate employment service provider.

Assessing a customer's capacity to work

The customer's capacity to work is assessed during a Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) or Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) depending on
the pathway.

The following are considered:

-   when they will be able to do any work or study
-   the likely duration of the incapacity, for example whether temporary
    or permanent
-   the nature of the medical condition that causes incapacity, and its
    impact on the customer's capacity to work

The Assessor will consider the customer's capacity for work when
assessing the most suitable type of assistance to offer the customer.

Temporary or short-term incapacity for work

If the customer's incapacity is temporary or short-term (less than 2
years), JobSeeker Payment (JSP) (Incapacitated) or YA (Incapacitated)
may be appropriate payment depending on age and other criteria.

JSP or YA may also be appropriate for someone whose incapacity to work
is not short term, but who is not eligible for DSP, as they have not
participated in a program of support.

If the customer is incapacitated for all work, ask them to supply a
medical certificate with details of their medical conditions when they
lodge their claim.

Permanent or long-term incapacity for work

When identifying that a customer will be unable to work or study for
more than 2 years, invite the customer to claim DSP.

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

MOB provides financial support for people with disability, illness or
injury who:

-   are unable to use public transport without substantial assistance,
    and
-   participate in approved activities like employment, vocational
    training, voluntary work or looking for work

Customers do not need to be getting an income support payment. However,
they must meet MOB qualification and payability criteria.

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

The following customers may be eligible for YDS:

-   job seekers, full-time students and apprentices receiving Youth
    Allowance (YA)
-   ABSTUDY customers 21 years of age and under

Customers must attend an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). They
will need to be assessed as having a partial capacity to work of less
than 30 hours per week.

Incentives to work force participation

When a customer claims DSP or JSP/YA (with a partial capacity to work or
temporary reduced work capacity), they are given information about:

-   Working Credit
-   Employment income nil rate period

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website.

Contents

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Related links

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

Payment and Service Finder

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
