-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist a Service Officer to
decide if a customer satisfies the terminally ill provisions and whether
DSP is payable indefinitely when they leave Australia.

Portability Script - Departures and Returns

If a customer is considered to be terminally ill and is intending on
departing Australia to live in another country to be with or near
family, or to go to their country of origin, their DSP may be payable
indefinitely.

Whether a customer is terminally ill is one part of the complex
portability rules for DSP. The Portability Script - Departures and
Returns must still be used with this procedure to decide whether any
other factors impact on a customer's entitlement while outside
Australia.

DSP paid to a customer who is not terminally ill ceases to be payable
when the autonomous entitlement ceases after leaving Australia, unless
the customer is travelling to an Agreement country that covers DSP.

Extended portability due to terminal illness

The decision about extended portability due to terminal illness is made
by a Service Officer (International Disabilities) or International
Services (CIS) Service Officer based on information, which must be
provided by the customer's treating doctor. The information must be
provided on the Centrelink form supplied by CIS. Unless the pension is a
recent grant, previous decisions are unlikely to still be valid and the
customer will be required to provide current medical evidence. However,
a Service Officer can accept previous evidence if the customer:

-   has been assessed as terminally ill within the last 2 years. For
    example: customer has manifest eligibility for DSP as they are
    terminally ill, or
-   had a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) within the previous 4 months and
    medical evidence indicates the customer has a terminal illness that
    has not been recorded

If a customer's DSP is portable indefinitely because they are terminally
ill and the customer ceases to satisfy those provisions, payment of DSP
will cease 6 weeks after the relevant decision.

Home exempt from assets test

A customer assessed as terminally ill, and who leaves Australia to live
in another country and vacates their principal home to enter a care
situation, may have the home exempted from the assets test for a 2 year
period. Once the 2 year period is up, the customer will be assessed as a
non-homeowner and the house will be assessed as an asset. For more
information, see Vacation of principal home due to illness. If the
customer is not entering a care situation, the house is considered an
asset on departure.

The Resources page contains examples of assessing payability of DSP for
a terminally ill customer who leaves Australia, links to the Services
Australia website for information about payments while outside Australia
and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
medicine.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Customer is going overseas long term – entitlement check and record
transfer

Discretion to extend portability period

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Assessment for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers going overseas
under the no future work capacity provisions

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
