
Verification of Mobility Allowance (MOB) activities 008-09050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the completion of Mobility
Allowance Verification of Work (including voluntary work) and looking
for work activities (MA005(E)M), and Mobility Allowance Verification of
Training (MA005(T)M) forms.

Requirements for MOB verification

For a customer to be eligible for Mobility Allowance (MOB), they must
meet the basic criteria for eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB).

Obtaining evidence

When a customer claims MOB, they must provide documents to support their
claim, such as:

-   an enrolment record, or a letter from the training organisation,
    showing the number of hours the person is undertaking training
-   details of employment, voluntary work or self-employment including
    payslips or a letter from the employer, or accountant if
    self-employed, to confirm the number of hours worked over a 2 or 4
    week period
-   evidence of job search activities if they do not have a Job Plan.
    For example, for volunteer job seekers not receiving an income
    support payment, accessing Workforce Australia Online

If the customer has claimed online, supporting documentation is
requested upon claim submission, within the Forms and Documents Required
section. Supporting documentation is uploaded via the Upload documents
link on the same screen.

If the customer is unable to verify they are:

-   working or undertaking looking for work activities, an MA005(E)M is
    issued as part of the claim process. It requests employment details
    to be verified by the customer, employer, or job search activities
    verified by the provider
-   undertaking vocational training, an MA005(T)M is issued as part of
    the claim process and requests training details to be verified by
    the customer or training organisation

Claims for MOB cannot be granted until verification is provided. Once
completed, the customer can lodge the form by post, [] Upload documents
online or at a service centre.

Rates of payment

MOB may be payable to customers at one of two rates, the standard rate
or the higher rate. For a customer to be eligible, they must meet the
qualification for MOB.

Payment at the higher rate is not available for study and training
unless the study or training is under a Job Plan with an Employment
Services Provider.

The Resources page contains a link to MA005(E)M - Mobility Allowance
Verification of Work (including voluntary work) and looking for work
activities, and MA005(T)M - Mobility Allowance Verification of Training
forms.

Related links

Online Claim for Mobility Allowance

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
