[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about wage subsidies for job seekers
with disabilities. The objective of the Department of Social Services
(DSS) Wage Subsidy Scheme is to encourage employers to employ, under
open employment conditions, eligible workers with a disability. Under
the scheme, money is paid by the Disability Employment Services (DES)
providers to employers to subsidise wages for people with disabilities.

Referrals for Disability Employment Services (DES)

In most cases, a job seeker with an illness, injury or disability has to
be receiving an income support payment to be eligible for DES.

As a general rule, a referral cannot take place unless DES is
recommended in the customer's most recent, valid Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) or Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). Following the ESAt,
Assessors will generally refer customers directly to appropriate
services such as DES and will note these details on their report.

If the job seeker is not in receipt of an income support payment, and
wishes to access DES, they can only do so through a direct registration
process if they are:

-   an Eligible School Leaver (ESL)
-   Special Class Client (SCC) or
-   participating in Work Assist

See Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES) for details about ESL, SCC and Work Assist.

An ESAt is not generally required for these job seekers.

It is up to the individual DES provider to determine whether a wage
subsidy is appropriate or not.

Eligibility for wage subsidy

To be eligible for payment under the Wage Subsidy Scheme, a worker must:

-   be assisted by a DES provider
-   be of legal working age, and
-   be an Australian citizen or a permanent resident

In addition, the job seeker must not:

-   have an outstanding workers' compensation claims against the current
    employer
-   be in receipt of other government funding or other wage support
    programmes
-   have already worked for the employer
-   be receiving Work Assist assistance, and
-   be receiving wage subsidy funding from another service outlet for
    the same position

Note: a worker can be in receipt of assistance from some Department of
Industry Australian Apprenticeship Incentive Payments, and be paid a
wage subsidy.

A self-employed person may not be paid a wage subsidy as the person must
be employed under a normal employer/employee relationship, under a legal
industrial agreement that complies with minimum standards established
under Commonwealth, state or territory law.

To be eligible for a wage subsidy, the job must be:

-   reasonably expected to continue beyond the end of the subsidy period
    (special conditions apply for seasonal jobs)
-   working for at least eight hours per week, or an average of eight
    hours per week over the subsidy period

Payment of wage subsidy

The subsidy can be paid for up to 13 weeks. The amount of the wage
subsidy is agreed between the employer and the DES. It cannot be more
than what the job seeker actually earns. Payment of the wage subsidy
will be made directly to the employer.

Customers who want more information on this subject should be advised to
contact a JobAccess Adviser directly on 1800 464 800 or through the
JobAccess website.

The Resources page contains a link to the JobAccess website.

Related links

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Employment Assistance Fund

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Work Assist

Supported Wage System (SWS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
