[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the procedures related to
actioning Disability Support Pension (DSP) cancellations, suspension and
restorations.

On this Page:

Suspension of DSP

DSP may be suspended if a customer is not eligible for payment. Before
suspending payment, care should be taken to establish that the customer
is not eligible for payment, that there is a legislative basis to
suspend the payment, and that all appropriate action has been taken. For
example, if a customer fails to attend an interview, attempts to contact
the customer must be made first.

If the decision is made to suspend payment, immediate action should be
taken to advise the customer of the suspension and their rights of
review and appeal to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

Where staff consider the manual suspension of DSP, the following action
must be taken:

-   Ensure that an appropriate request for information/action was issued
    to the customers prior to any suspension action being considered. A
    notice must include details about the information/action required,
    the timeframe for response (noting this must be reasonable), the
    consequences of non-compliance, and the reference to the relevant
    Act the request has been made under.
-   Only once the appropriate time for response has passed should
    consideration be given to suspending payments. If a decision to
    manually suspend payment is made and an automatic letter is not
    sent, a manual advice is to be issued. This advice must clearly
    outline to the customer the reason their payment was suspended, the
    date of effect, reference DSP and the relevant section of the
    legislation and the customer’s review and appeal rights.

Restoration of DSP

DSP can be restored where the customer's eligibility has been
re-established after a suspension or cancellation, in some circumstances
without the need for a new claim. If there have been changes to the
customer's circumstances the system must be updated with the new
information before payment is restored in order to avoid incorrect
arrears being generated.

Payment can only start from the date that the customer became eligible
again, taking into account the date of event rules.

Cancellation of DSP

DSP can be cancelled when a customer is no longer qualified. Service
Officers must ensure that cancellation is the correct action to take.
Care needs to be taken where a customer who has a mental health
condition requests cancellation of their payment.

Coding for DSP

The Centrelink system uses codes when a decision to cancel or suspend a
payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded on the computer system. A
description of the code is used in correspondence with customers.

Some of these actions occur automatically due to an update being made to
the customer's circumstances on the computer system (for example, income
or asset details). Others are coded manually.

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of DSP

Manual Intervention will be required on occasion to review automatic
(and some manual) suspensions and cancellation of customers identified
as being vulnerable or at risk. The process of manual intervention has
been introduced to review the circumstances of vulnerable customers
where their income support payment remains suspended or cancelled for a
minimum of six weeks as a result of an auto suspension or cancellation
activity.

The new manual intervention process will be triggered by a combination
of the type of income support payment received by the customer, and the
suspension or cancellation reason.

Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL)

A customer can maintain qualification for TAL for 6 months after their
income support payment is suspended or cancelled because either they or
their partner began employment or have an increase in employment income.
The customer must continue to meet the qualifications for TAL.

Contents

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Cancellation of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL) to customers suspended or cancelled
due to employment income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
