-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for reviews of CA (child) HCC only.

CA (child) HCC only

CA (child) HCC only is issued for a child who does not qualify for CA
but, because of their disability, requires (and receives) substantially
more care and attention on a daily basis than that of a same aged child
without a physical, intellectual or psychiatric disability. This
acknowledges of the significant costs that are often associated with the
care of these children.

Reviewing CA (child) HCC only

CA (child) HCC only reviews are conducted to assess ongoing entitlement
and to test eligibility for payment level CA. CA (child) HCC only
reviews are also conducted to check ongoing qualification for CA under
the CA income test.

A CA (child) HCC only review is conducted at the same time a Child
Medical Review (CMR) for CA only. A CMR and CA (child) HCC only will
automatically commence when the child reaches the following development
milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years
-   13 years

For the purposes of CA (child) HCC only, the above developmental
milestones are the stages of a child's development at which the child
should be able to perform additional functional abilities according to
their chronological age.

When a CA (child) HCC only review is commenced, the system automatically
sends a notification letter to the carer with the following forms:

-   Review of Carer Allowance Medical Report including Functional
    Assessment (for a child under 16 years) (SA403)
-   Review of Carer Allowance Care Needs Assessment (for a child under
    16 years) (SA420)

When a CA (child) HCC only review is finalised, the Service Officer will
be able to determine if the carer is entitled to payment level CA,
continuation of CA (child) HCC with no payment of CA, or cancellation of
CA (Child) HCC only. The determination is based upon the responses
provided by the Treating Health Professional (THP) on the Medical Report
and the carer’s responses on the Care Needs Assessment form.

Record reassessment due to CA eligibility

If the review determines the carer is entitled to receive CA payment,
the process is a reassessment, not a new claim. See Reassessment of CA
Health Care Card (HCC) only entitlement to payment level Carer Allowance
(CA) for a child.

Backdating CA

Backdating provisions for CA were removed on 1 January 2017. This means
carers who qualify for CA on or after 1 January 2017 cannot have their
payment backdated before the date of claim and are subject to the start
day general rule.

When a carer notifies of a change in circumstances or a change is
identified, qualification for payment cannot be backdated beyond the
date the notification was received. See Resources for examples.

Transfers from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

WP customers getting payment level CA who were not in a bereavement
period on 19 March 2020 were automatically transferred to CP (XWP) on 20
March 2020. WP customers who only had a CA Health Care Card (HCC) on 19
March 2020 were not eligible to be transferred to CP (XWP). However, CP
(XWP) carers may have a CA HCC only for a child care receiver in
addition to payment level CA for other care receivers. If a CP (XWP)
carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended, cancelled or changed
to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled. See Transfer
from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) for CA (child) HCC only

Eligible carers are sent a Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) invitation
letter when their child care receiver turns 15 years and 6 months
inviting them to transfer by the due date if they want their entitlement
to be assessed under adult provisions. See Carer Payment (CP) and/or
Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT).

CA (child) HCC only income reviews

From 20 September 2018, a $250,000 a year adjusted taxable income test
applies to CA payment and CA HCC only recipients.

Carers are not subject to a CA income review while they are exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test. An exception
applies if the carer is only exempt because they or their partner
receive FTB – in this case they may be required to complete a CA income
review triggered from the data matching process with the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

See Reviews of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance for CA income
reviews.

Eligibility for Carer Supplement (CS)

The Carer Supplement is an annual payment of up to $600 to assist carers
with the costs of caring for a person with a disability or medical
condition. It is paid to recipients of CP, CA, Wife Pension with CA,
Department of Veterans' Affairs Partner Service Pension with CA, or
Department of Veterans' Affairs Carer Service Pension. The payments are
paid in July. Carers in receipt of CA (child) HCC only on 1 July are not
entitled to Carer Supplement.

The Resources page contains links to forms available on the Intranet and
information about the payment of CA on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Reassessment of CA Health Care Card (HCC) only entitlement to payment
level Carer Allowance (CA) for a child

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT)

Reviews of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Renewing the ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
