
Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers 009-03050000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the action required for changes in care for Carer
Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA).

On this Page:

Application for payment of CP and CA

When a carer stops caring for a care receiver, their payment should be
cancelled.

A carer who wishes to receive CP and/or CA. for a care receiver who has
recently come into their care must make an [] online claim or have
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) run by a Service Officer, this includes
Health Care Card (HCC) only CA if the care receiver is a child.

A claim is unable to be submitted online until it is fully completed and
all supporting documentation is supplied and uploaded at the time of
claim.

The carer is required to complete a claim for CP and/or CA.

Advantages of claiming CA (child) separately

If the carer qualifies for CP (child) they are automatically eligible
for CA (auto), although carers should be encouraged to apply for CA
(child) for the following reasons:

while grants of CP (child) automatically qualify customers for CA (auto)
the same applies if CP (child) cancels - CA (auto) cancels automatically
at the same time. In these instances the carer will need to lodge a new
claim for CA if the child still requires and receives additional daily
care due to their disability or medical condition

if the carer claims:

-   and is granted CA (child), their payment may continue if CP (child)
    ceases. For example due to a change in income/assets, or a short
    term or episodic condition ceases
-   both CP (child) and CA (child) and the claim for CP is rejected,
    they may still qualify for and be granted CA (child)
-   CP (child) only and the claim is rejected, a new claim for CA
    (child) is required

Medical report for an existing care receiver with a new carer

An existing care receiver who has entered the care of another person may
not have to be tested again using the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT) or the Disability Carer Load Assessment (child) Determination
(DCLAD).

If the carer and care receiver have a link, the online claim and ACC
will determine if the medical data can be re-used, whether they are
current or non-current.

If there is no link between the carer and care receiver, the online
claim and ACC cannot establish if medical data can be re-used (due to
system limitations). In these instances medical information will be
requested in all scenarios.

A medical report is required when either:

-   the claim is made within 6 months of the next scheduled medical
    review of entitlement, or
-   there is a reason to believe the care receiver's medical condition
    has changed

Disputes between carers

These guidelines apply when there is a dispute between 2 carers over the
care being provided and applies to both CP and CA. Make at least 2
genuine attempts to contact to the current carer by phone. If phone
contact is unsuccessful, send a Request for Information RFI letter to
clarify information provided in the carer's claim.

Terminology

When speaking to either carer do not refer to the other carer by their
name unless the carer you are speaking to has provided this information.
Until this has occurred, refer to them as 'another carer' or 'the other
carer'.

Preliminary action

If a second carer lodges a claim for either CP and or CA ascertain the
following. Most of this information should have already been provided.

Second Carer - check details on file

Check for any recent change of address

Do they reside with the care receiver?

Do they provide care 7 days per week?

Does anyone else provide care?

-   If so, what care do they provide?

Contact the second carer by phone (preferred) or via a Request for
Information RFI letter to clarify any ambiguity in the information which
they have provided

-   If the RFI letter is not returned the claim can be rejected FRC
-   DOC any discussion with the second carer and do not include in the
    DOC the name of the first carer, unless it is provided by the second
    carer

First Carer - check details on file

Check for any recent change of address.

Check the Document List (DL) screen, scanned DOCs and online claims for
information about the claims by the second carer

Do they reside with the care receiver?

Do they provide care 7 days per week?

Does anyone else provide care?

-   If so, what care do they provide

Resolving the dispute

A call is to be made to the carer/care receiver, unless there is an
identified risk in contacting the carer/care receiver. If the caring
dispute cannot be clarified from this contact, or there is risk
identified, then it would be appropriate to make a Multiple and Complex
Social Work Referral. The referral to Social Work should detail the
attempted contacts made and discussions had with the carer/care
receiver.

If contact with the first carer is necessary and if it is not otherwise
confirmed, confirm that they still reside with the care receiver.

-   Clarify the care which they provide in relation to the claims by
    second carer
-   If it is reasonable for the first carer to have supporting evidence,
    ask them to provide this evidence. While care schedules cannot be
    asked for, the carer could have other documents which support their
    claims, for example, a letter from a hospital stating they attend to
    the care receiver on a regular basis

Determine if it reasonable to clarify the situation with the care
receiver

-   Consider their age and medical conditions and whether the contact
    should be by a social worker

If the information from the first carer confirms the information
provided by the second carer proceed with the second carer’s claim.

If the information from the first carer does not confirm the information
provided by the second carer, is there enough information to determine
both carer’s entitlements?

-   If so, proceed with the second carer's claim and reassess the first
    carer’s entitlement
-   If not, contact the Carer Helpdesk via email

Contents

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for
one adult or child care receiver

Change of care for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 dependent children with
disabilities

Change of care for Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA)
(child)

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Changes to Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the
same care receiver

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Medical reviews for child care receivers

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
