
Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score 009-05020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to calculate the Adult
Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score as part of a new claim or review
process for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

On 9 August 2018, the Adult Disability Assessment Determination (1999)
was replaced by the Adult Disability Assessment Determination (2018).

ADAT details

The ADAT has been designed specifically for use in the assessment of an
adult care receiver's functional ability, emotional state, behaviour and
special care needs, to determine their carer's entitlements to CP and/or
CA.

The ADAT contains 2 questionnaires that together measure the amount of
help the care receiver needs to undertake basic activities of daily
living such as mobility, communication, hygiene, eating and management
in a range of cognitive and behavioural areas. This may include
supervising and prompting the care receiver to undertake these daily
activities. The responses from the questionnaires are used to calculate
a score indicating the level of care needed because of that person's
disability or medical condition.

Two or more carers

An adult care receiver (aged 16 years or over) who is likely to suffer
from their disability permanently or for an extended period may qualify
2 or more carers for separate Carer Payments if:

-   each carer personally provides constant care for the care receiver,
    such as care required for a significant period each day (at least
    the equivalent of a normal working day). This care can overlap and
    does not necessarily have to be in separate periods
-   each person can fully satisfy the qualification criteria
-   the care receiver's Adult Disability Assessment Determination (ADAD)
    score is 80 or more, including a Treating Health Professional (THP)
    score of 32 or more. Such a high score indicates the care receiver's
    needs are high

Re-use provisions may apply, however contact the Level 2 Policy Help
Desk. See the Process page for more information.

Note: if an adult care receiver is certified as being in the final phase
of a terminal illness only that part of the CP and/or CA Medical Report
for a person 16 years or over (SA332a) needs to be completed. The care
receiver is automatically assessed as having a qualifying ADAD score of
30. However, if 2 or more carers wish to claim CP the care receiver will
need to be reassessed using another SA332a and have an ADAT score of 80
or more (and 32 or more from the THP).

Calculating the ADAT score

The ADAT is a system-based tool - the answers to questions from the
forms completed by the Treating Health Professional (THP) and the carer
are coded straight onto a carer's Centrelink record and results are then
system calculated. While the system calculates the scores in the ADAT,
these scores are derived from information provided by the THP and the
carer.

The medical report for an adult care receiver must be completed by one
of the following:

-   a legally qualified medical practitioner
-   a registered nurse (including psychiatric nurse, mental health nurse
    or geriatric nurse)
-   a physiotherapist
-   an occupational therapist
-   any member of an Aged Care Assessment Team
-   an Aboriginal Health Worker may be considered equivalent to a THP if
    the carer lives in a remote area such as a remote Aboriginal
    community, there is likely to be a delay from obtaining a report
    from a THP, and the care receiver's medical condition was originally
    diagnosed by a medical practitioner (this decision can only be made
    by the Team Leader/ Senior Support Officer of the local processing
    team)

Responses on the medical report can be clarified with the THP if the
Service Officer is not satisfied the report is accurate. Alternatively,
a new medical report can be requested. The replacement medical report
must be completed by a different THP.

If the THP is a close relative (parent, child, sibling or grandparent)
of the carer or care receiver, there may be a conflict of interest.
Service Officers must use discretion in determining whether the ADAT
assessment is an accurate reflection of the adult care receiver's
disability care needs.

A person who is not in the approved list may be accepted as an approved
THP on a case-by-case basis only. Only use this discretion after all the
following have been met:

-   an SA332a has been completed by a THP from the approved THP list
-   the carer indicates that another approved THP could not provide
    adequate information
-   a person not on the approved THP list is familiar with the care
    receiver’s condition and care needs and is qualified to provide an
    assessment
-   the Level 2 Policy Help Desk supports issuing an SA332a for this
    person to complete (if one has not already been provided), and
-   after the carer has provided an SA332a completed by a person not on
    the approved THP list, the Level 2 Policy Help Desk supports using
    that report

See examples of using this discretion in the Guide at 3.6.9 on the
References page.

Note: the agency does not have the authority to approve the addition of
a class of persons to the approved list of THPs, such as psychologists.
This must be authorised by the Department of Social Services.

When a CP and/or CA Medical Report for a person aged 16 years or over
SA332(a) has been obtained to review a decision, code the information as
a new entry with the same 'effect date' so the new information is
assessed from the same date as the original decision.

When ADAT is not required

If an adult care receiver satisfies the re-use provisions they medically
qualify their carer for both CP and/or CA without the need for a new
ADAT assessment. If an adult care receiver has a terminal illness, and
the Treating Health Professional (THP) medical report indicates they are
not expected to live more than 3 months, the care receiver is medically
eligible to qualify their carer for both CP and/or CA without the need
for an ADAT assessment.

If an adult does not have a terminal illness, the ADAT enables a
combined score to be calculated from 2 questionnaires, one completed by
the THP and one by the carer, and is used to assess qualification for
carers claiming CP and/or CA for an adult, and/or application for
Special Disability Trust. It cannot be used for any other purpose, for
example Disability Support Pension assessments.

Completing the ADAT questionnaire

The ADAT questionnaire completed by the carer of the disabled adult care
receiver is contained in:

-   [] the online claim for CP and/or CA
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   CP and/or CA - Caring for a person aged 16 years or over (SA406)
-   customised claim forms - CA only (SA409), CP only (SA410) or CP and
    CA (SA411), or
-   Review of care provided - CP and/or CA - Caring for a person - aged
    16 years or over (SA010)

The Treating Health Professional (THP) questionnaire is contained in the
SA332(a). The THP can complete the form if the care receiver is aged at
least 15 years and 9 months. The questions on the SA332(a) are not about
specific disabilities or medical conditions, the aim is to assess the
level of disability, and how that impacts upon the disabled adult and
their carer.

If the carer or the THP has ticked more than 1 answer for any question,
the answer that gives the highest ADAT score should be accepted. If no
answer has been provided, the carer or THP should be contacted to find
out why. The carer or THP should be given the opportunity to answer
unanswered questions. If the ADAT produces a qualifying score and there
are unanswered questions which have no bearing on the carer's
qualification for CP or CA, staff are not required to contact the carer
or THP but should document this on the carer's record.

A functional assessment rating is calculated for each portion of the
ADAT (for example, the carer portion and the THP portion). The THP score
must reach a certain level before the carer's score is taken into
account. If the THP score on its own and the combined score are both
sufficiently high, the care receiver may qualify a carer for CP and/or
CA.

Re-use and re-claim provisions

For CP and/or CA claims, information previously gathered under the Adult
Disability Assessment Determination (ADAD) 2018 or terminal condition
assessment for CP and/or CA (adult) may be re-used. Re-use provisions
are automatically assessed when a carer claims online or the First
Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow is run.

Re-use may apply for new or previous carers.

Even if the reuse provisions apply, Service Officers need to be
satisfied that the previous ADAT reflects the current care needs and the
carer meets the daily care and constant care requirements. If the
Service Officers believes there is a reduction in the care receiver's
care needs and is not satisfied that the care receiver would achieve a
qualifying THP score and/or overall ADAT score for the respective
payment, a new ADAT can be requested.

Clarification of the provision of care should only be sought if there
are circumstances indicating the carer is not providing constant or
daily care.

In these instances, Service Officers must determine whether a person is
qualified for CP and/or CA based on all the relevant material before
them, and that all of the qualification criteria have been satisfied. If
the carer qualifies under re-use and Service Officers have concerns
about the provision of constant or daily care, carers and THPs can be
contacted to clarify the care that is required and is provided, however
carers are not required to provide care schedules or care plans.

Consider the following factors:

when the previous ADAT was conducted

the care receiver’s medical condition(s)

carer score - a low score raises concerns of the level of care required

if there has been a significant period when no one has received either
CP or CA in respect of the care receiver

if the care receiver:

-   had overseas trips which appear inconsistent with their condition(s)
-   has been employed since the last ADAT

Re-use and reclaim provisions are automatically assessed when a carer
claims online, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is used or the FCSO
workflow is run if the eligible care receiver has an existing link with
the prospective carer. See also:

-   ADAT and reclaim provisions
-   ADAT and re-use provisions

A carer may elect to provide a new THP medical report and ADAT carer
questionnaire with new information for an adult care receiver instead of
re-using previous medical reports.

If a medical report or carer questionnaire has been lodged when the
re-use or reclaim provisions apply, see information on the Process page.

If the most recently provided THP medical report and ADAT carer
questionnaire do not satisfy all the qualification requirements for
re-use or reclaim, or there is no link between the carer and care
receiver identified when claiming online or ACC is used, the carer will
be presented with a link to download:

-   a CP and/or CA Medical Report - for a person aged 16 years or over
    SA332(a), and
-   if eligible, the carer's online claim/ACC will include the ADAT
    carer questionnaire

If FCSO is run, the carer will be issued:

-   an SA332(a), and
-   a Claim for CP and/or CA (SA404) along with a CP and/or CA - Caring
    for a person aged 16 years or over (SA406), or
-   if eligible, the carer's customised claim form will include the ADAT
    carer questionnaire

Re-use provisions cannot be applied if a carer's payment has been
cancelled as a result of the carer failing to provide a medical report
or ADAT carer questionnaire required for a medical review.

Multiple medical reports

If a carer lodges multiple medical reports, usually the most recent
medical report is used for the CP/CA assessment. However, the following
factors must be considered if multiple medical reports are lodged, as on
some occasions the older medical report will be used for the CP/CA
assessment.

For carers who lodge multiple medical reports, a Service Officer must
check the following:

-   is each medical report an accurate reflection of the care receiver’s
    care needs
-   the date of each medical report
-   the qualifications of the THP (they are on the approved THP list)
-   the relevance of the THP qualification in relation to all of the
    care receiver’s conditions;

Where multiple medical reports have been lodged, but only 1 medical
report is being used for the assessment, only this report should be
recorded.

If this occurs, the carer may not be qualified at claim but:

-   subsequently become qualified and the early claim provisions apply
-   ceases to be qualified (this happens when a subsequent medical
    report is lodged and there has been a reduction is in the care needs
    which precludes payment. In this case both medical reports were an
    accurate reflection of the care needs at the time they were
    completed)

Note: it is possible for the latest medical report to reflect the care
receiver’s care needs from a date after the claim was submitted and for
the claim to be granted from the date of lodgement.

The Resources page contains a link to relevant forms, a list of ADAT
screens, a link to a table indicating the impact of various ADAT scores
and Level 2 Policy Help Desk contact details.

Related links

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
16 years or over

Carer Payment (CP) for care receivers aged 16 or over

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
