
Other financial assistance for carers 009-07000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information relating to one-off payments for
recipients of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA), as well as
information relating to ex gratia payments for carers who do not meet
the eligibility criteria for CP when caring for a child under 7 years of
age.

On this Page:

Government intent

Carer payments are intended to provide income support and assistance for
people who provide a substantial level of care, for care receivers who
have a recognised disability. A supplementary payment is available for
carers, who provide additional daily care and attention for someone with
a disability or medical condition. This payment provides financial
assistance for carers and replaces the previous ad hoc payments.

Carer Supplement (CS)

The Carer Supplement (CS) is an annual payment introduced in June 2009,
to assist carers with the costs of caring for a person with a disability
or medical condition. Payment is based on a carer having 'received' an
instalment of an identified primary payment that attracts CS for 1 July.
Note: from 1 July 2012 carers in receipt of a qualifying income support
payment who have their payment reduced to nil rate for a period that
includes 1 July are also eligible to receive the annual Carer
Supplement. For more information, see Carer Supplement (CS).

Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Families caring for a child with a disability may receive an annual
payment of $1000 to help them purchase assistance for their child. The
payment is made for each child who qualifies their parent/carer for
payment of CA on 1 July each year. This money can be spent however the
family chooses. For more information, see Annual Child Disability
Assistance Payment.

One-Off Carer Bonus

This payment was replaced by the Carer Supplement (CS). For information
relating to years prior to 2009.

Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP)

The Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) is a one-off non-taxable payment for
families where, following the diagnosis of a serious or severe illness
of a child under 7 years of age, there is a period of significant
adjustment as a result of the care needs of that child. It is to assist
families with additional costs during the adjustment period immediately
after the diagnosis. The maximum amount available to any family is
$10,000 per child. The amount payable depends on the families individual
circumstances.

Claims for Carer Adjustment Payment must be lodged within two years from
the date of diagnosis of a severe illness, medical condition or major
disability. Qualification is determined by the Department of Social
Services. For more information, see Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) for
carers of young children.

Contents

Carer Supplement (CS)

Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) for carers of young children

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Early intervention services for children with disabilities

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of two children

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Steps in the review and appeals system (CLK)

Wife Pension (WP)

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
