
Adult medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) 009-08050010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains adult medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP)
and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a person 16 years or over.

CP and/or CA adult medical review

Carers receiving CP and/or CA for an adult care receiver may be selected
for an Adult Medical Review. Adult Medical Reviews use Service Profiling
to select carers for review. Adult Medical Reviews are for carers who
are at risk of being paid CP and/or CA when they or their care receiver
may no longer qualify for payment.

Service Profiling uses a set of rules called conditions and predictors
to select carers for review. For example, a predictor may be when the
customer has been paid incorrectly, not declared earnings correctly or
has had several changes of address. Depending on the priority given to
the predictors a customer could be selected for a high, medium or low
risk review.

The purpose of carer reviews is to establish:

-   that the care receiver’s care needs or medical condition continues
    to meet eligibility requirements
-   that the carer continues to provide appropriate level of care
-   if there are any changes in their circumstances

Review exemptions

Carers are excluded from a medical review when:

the care receiver:

-   has an ADAT score greater than or equal to 40 and the medical
    condition is permanent and not improving
-   already has an initiated review
-   has a terminal illness not longer than 3 months
-   is permanently in an institution
-   is currently overseas
-   is deceased
-   address matches an Exempt Emergency Area Postcode
-   Home Office Code listed matches an Exempt Emergency Area Office Code
-   Area Office Code listed matches an Exempt Emergency Area Office Code

any of the linked carer's:

-   most recent reviews has a finalised date less than 12 weeks before
    the current date
-   have a current IRS review
-   are currently overseas
-   has a home address that matches an Exempt Emergency Area Postcode
-   Home Office Code matches an Exempt Emergency Area Office Code

Wife Pension transfer to CP (XWP)

Adult medical reviews do not apply to CP (XWP) that is paid under
grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However CP
(XWP) carers will have their CA reviewed as normal.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended, or
cancelled or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will auto-cancel. This
means a CP (XWP) carer may lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently
if they no longer qualify for CA after completion of a CA adult medical
review. See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

The Resources page contains links to forms and information on the
Services Australia website and intranet.

Related links

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Creating a carer link for Carer Payment (CP) reviews

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Completing the Claim for Carer Allowance following Carer Payment Review
(SA341)

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Review of a lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score care
receiver and that adult’s dependent child

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
