
Coding a regular absence for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is absent 009-06040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what a regular absence is for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA) and how regular absences are recorded.

On this Page:

Regular absence

A regular absence is where a care receiver has an absence on a regular
basis. An example of a regular absence could be where a care receiver is
absent from the home for two days every week for a certain period of
time. (In contrast, a one-off absence could be where the care receiver
is entering respite care for a continuous period of three weeks.) This
does not affect the carer's entitlement to CP and/or CA as long as the
total absence stays within the allowable 63 days temporary cessation of
care (respite).

The system deems these absences to be at the end of the fortnight in
which the absences occur. For example, if there were four regular
absences per fortnight, the system deems them to have occurred on the
11th, 12th, 13th and 14th days of the absence fortnight and not the days
when the absence actually occurred.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Regular absence rules do not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that
is paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.
However, regular absence rules still apply to CA as normal.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason, or reduced to a CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically be cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for CP
(XWP) permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a gap in
entitlement.

Constant care, education, training or employment and the 25 hour rule do
not apply to CP (XWP). Absence codes that only relate to CP should not
be recorded for any TCC days for a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information see, Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Day of absence

For respite and hospitalisation purposes, a 'day' must include an
overnight stay - that is, a whole 24 hour period from 12:00 am to 12:00
am (midnight to midnight). Part days do not count in the calculation of
absences for CP and CA.

The Resources page contains an example of how to calculate these
absences.

This principle also applies when calculating absences where a CA child
care receiver is away from the care situation for education, training
and treatment.

This does not change the special rules around coding of respite in
conjunction with the 25 hour rule - the 25 hour provision cannot be
extended by using a carer’s TCC (respite) entitlement.

Carer overseas

If the carer is absent due to being overseas, the rules for temporary
cessation of care and portability may differ between Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA) depending on the situation. Consider respite
and portability rules together.

Care receiver imprisoned

If the care receiver is imprisoned, this is also considered an absence
and the carer's qualification for payment may continue. CP and/or CA
will auto cancel when the 63 day respite limit is reached.

Care receiver has more than one carer

If there is more than one carer, and one receives CP and the other CA,
the absence must be recorded against both carers when the care receiver
is absent from both carers.

The Resources contains links to the Services Australia website for
information for carers, and to the My Aged Care website for information
about Commonwealth Respite and Carelink Centres. It also contains an
example of how to calculate the start and end dates for coding of
respite or hospitalisation days for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer
Allowance (CA).

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability and
temporary cessation of carer (respite) rules

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Carer Payment (CP) carer is absent

Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Carer Allowance (CA) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences
or returns to work

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

View/Update Absence From Care online

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
