
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details to assist Service Officers with enquiries
from carers in receipt of CP and/or CA (adult) when they are completing
the SA010 - Review of care provided - Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance - Caring for a person 16 years or over.

Review of care

Carers receiving Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance may be
subject to reviews. The purpose of reviews is:

-   to establish that the care receiver's care needs continue to qualify
    the carer for payment
-   to establish that the carer continues to provide constant care for
    CP or additional care and attention for CA
-   to determine if there are any changes in either the carer's or care
    receiver's circumstances

The SA010 is used to review the care receiver's medical condition so the
carer's ongoing entitlement to carer payments is correctly assessed.

A Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance - Medical Report for a person 16
years or over form (SA332A) is sent with the SA010. The SA332(a) is for
the Treating Health Professional to complete details about the care
receiver's level of care.

Wife Pension transfers to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Carer Payment (CP) reviews do not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP)
that is paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension
carers. This means CP (XWP) carers will only get an Adult Medical Review
for Carer Allowance (adult). If CA care requirements are not met and the
carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or cancelled, CP
(XWP) will automatically be cancelled. For more information, see
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

SA010 - other use

If a CP and/or CA new claim is rejected as the Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) questionnaire completed by the carer does not
reach the required score an SA010 may be issued to the carer to have the
ADAT score reassessed. See Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT).

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Coding the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
