
Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing 009-18090411

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process CA income reviews lodged online
and paper forms in Process Direct.

CA income test

To be eligible for CA and CA Health Care Card (HCC only), the carer’s
and their partner’s combined Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) must be under
$250,000 a year. The same income limit applies if the carer does not
have a partner.

Carers are considered to have met the income test while they are exempt
from providing their income details for the CA income test.

The CA income test is based on the annual ATI of the carer (and their
current partner if they have one). The ATI is the income for a financial
year nominated by the carer. The income details the carer provides can
be for either of the 2 financial years preceding the current financial
year. The current financial year is the financial year in which the
review was submitted by the carer. The income details provided cannot be
for a financial year earlier than 2 financial years preceding the
current financial year. If the carer is required to lodge a tax return,
the ATI provided should be the most recent details verified by the
Australian Tax Office (ATO). See CA income test - determining reference
tax year and assessable income components.

If the carer has a partner, they must both provide income details for
the same financial year. If either of them is 60 or older and either has
an account-based income stream, it is deemed to earn income which is
added to the ATI. Deemed income from account-based income streams is
calculated using the current account balance.

ATO and change of circumstance reviews

A CA income review may be issued if the carer is not exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test and 1 of the
following occurs:

-   the carer has lost their exemption from the CA income test
-   it cannot be determined if the carer has an exemption from the CA
    income test
-   the carer has been linked to a new partner. Note: a review is not
    required if the carer becomes single, widowed divorced or separated
-   the carer has notified they or their partner now have an
    account-based income stream and the account holder is 60 years of
    age or older. Service Officers can manually issue a Carer Allowance
    adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form
-   data-matching with income stream providers identified an undisclosed
    account based income stream, the account holder is 60 years of age
    or older, the new product is added and either current ATI
    information or current income information is held but the ATI and
    deemed income is over the limit
-   the carer has notified their ATI for the previous tax year was over
    the limit – the Service Officer manually issues an SA489 form
-   data matching with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
    triggered the review

The CA income review will result in cancellation of the carer’s CA if
the carer fails to submit the review by the due date (56 days from the
date of issue).

The carer can however submit the review within 13 weeks following
cancellation of their CA entitlement. If CA is cancelled for failing to
submit the review, the review will remain available on the carer’s
online account for a further 13 weeks after cancellation. See Restoring
CA after cancellation – Failed to Reply to Correspondence (FRC) for not
completing a CA income test review.

Eligible carers will continue to receive their payment or concession
card from the date they submit a completed review if:

-   the review activity auto completes once submitted, and the carer
    remains qualified for CA
-   the carer submitted their review before the due date but the review
    is not automatically processed. Entitlement to CA will continue
    until the review is processed and the result determined
-   the review requires manual intervention by staff (does not auto
    complete or is a paper form) and the carer is assessed as remaining
    qualified for CA

Carers will not receive an outcome letter following finalisation of the
review if their CA is to continue as they have been assessed as meeting
the income test. If a carer’s payment is to cancel as a result of the CA
income test they will receive written notification of the cancellation
and their review and appeal rights.

Automatic CA income test reviews

The system will automatically send a letter to current carers receiving
CA advising they are required to complete and submit a CA income review
within 56 days of the review being issued. At 28 days, a reminder letter
will be issued to carers that have not responded to the review request.

Automatic reviews are issued when 1 of the following occurs:

-   the carer has lost their exemption from the CA income test
-   it cannot be determined if the carer has an exemption from the CA
    income test
-   the carer has been linked to a new partner. Note: a review is not
    required if the carer becomes single, widowed, divorced or separated
-   data-matching with income stream providers identified an undisclosed
    account-based income stream, the account holder is 60 years or
    older, the new product is added and either current ATI information
    or current information is held but the ATI and deemed income is over
    the limit, or
-   data matching with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
    triggered the review

Manual CA income test reviews

There is no online option if the CA income review has been manually
issued. Examples of where a review should be issued manually are where
the carer has notified:

-   they or their partner now have an account-based income stream and
    the account holder is 60 years of age or older
-   their ATI for the previous tax year was over the limit

If a carer contacts to advise a change of circumstance or to request a
reassessment of their (and their partner's) adjusted taxable income
(ATI):

-   send a Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) to
    the carer via the Mail Forms guided procedure, and
-   record a review for its return. See Requesting information (CLK)

Customer contact

Carers selected for a CA income review are sent a letter asking them to
complete their income review within 56 days. At 28 days, a reminder
letter is issued to carers who have not responded to the review request.

[]The letter explains how to start the review online. Instructions are
tailored to carers who:

-   receive Centrelink letters to their myGov inbox
-   have a Centrelink online account, but do not receive letters to
    their myGov inbox, or
-   do not have a Centrelink online account

Encourage carers who do not have a myGov account to create one and link
it to their Centrelink online account. Most CA income reviews completed
online will auto complete.

Carers who do not have a Centrelink online account, can download the
Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form from the
Services Australia website.

Carers living in an area that is a declared disaster area will have
their CA income review delayed until the disaster rule is lifted.

Carers may contact after completing and submitting their CA income
review to:

-   query if the review has been submitted successfully
-   change the income details provided, or
-   to determine if the review has been processed

See the Resources page for FAQs.

Review or documentation lodged

A CA income review is automatically generated on the carer's record in
Process Direct when the carer is selected for an income test review.

An Online Intervention review activity (ZIRV) is automatically created
with a status of Open.

When the carer submits their online review or returns a paper Carer
Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) and it is scanned, the
activity status displays For manual action on the:

-   Online Intervention review activity (ZIRV), and
-   Change of Circumstances activity (ZCOC) created on the carer's
    record

Do not manually change the status of a review.

See the Process page to check review information and the Resources page
for FAQs.

Review assessment process

Process Direct:

-   is used to check and record review progress
-   contains the review information provided by the carer online, or
    manually recorded from the paper review
-   lists documents the carer has been asked to provide
-   uploads review data into a CA income review activity (this applies
    only to CA income reviews submitted online)
-   contains functions required to process reviews such as the ability
    to make referrals and request information from the carer

Note: CA income reviews cannot be viewed or processed in Customer First
or Customer Record, access to the Carer Allowance Adjusted Taxable
Income (CAATI) screen is only available in Process Direct. If updates
are required to existing information on the carer's record on the CAATI
screen, they can only be completed in Process Direct.

See the Resources page for information on updating existing information.

Date of effect for a CA income review

The date of effect that will apply to the CA income review will be the
date the review is completed by the assessing officer.

Note: online reviews will not automatically complete where the carer has
advised income in excess of the threshold, or has provided estimated ATI
for the current financial year. Where the income exceeds the threshold
or the Service Officer determines not to accept an estimate of a current
financial year’s income the date of effect must be manually changed to
the date the review is completed. This will minimise debts raised from
CA income reviews.

There may be limited circumstances, when the date of effect is not the
date the review is completed. For example:

-   a formal review of a decision by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO),
    or
-   if a carer has failed to advise their new partner’s details

The Resources page has FAQs, and links to:

-   the Level 2 Policy Help Desk
-   the Services Australia website
-   the Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form,
    and
-   the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) - offsets and rebates

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Process Direct

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance (CA) Income Review online service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
