
Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16 009-04030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualifications for Carer Payment (CP) (child)
for a person caring for a care receiver aged under 16 years.

On this Page:

Qualification for CP

In certain situations, 2 or more carers may qualify for CP for the same
care receiver aged under 16.

To be eligible for CP for a care receiver aged under 16 years, a carer
must meet the following criteria:

Be personally providing constant care for:

-   a child with a severe disability or severe medical condition, or
-   2 or more children who each have a disability or a medical condition
    and their combined care needs are equal to that of a single child
    with a severe disability or severe medical condition, or
-   1 or more children and an adult who each has a disability or medical
    condition and their combined care needs are equal to that of a
    single child with a severe disability or severe medical condition,
    or

Be providing constant care for 2 or more children with a severe
disability or severe medical condition in an exchanged care arrangement
and provide care for a significant period every day, equivalent to a
normal working day

A Treating Health Professional (THP) certifies in writing that because
of a severe disability or severe medical condition the care receiver
will need personal care for 6 months or more

The care is provided in the care receiver's home and the care needs are
permanent, or for an extended period of at least 6 months unless the
condition is terminal

If the condition is short term or episodic the care is required for at
least 3 months but less than 6 months

A qualifying rating of intense is required to be eligible under the
Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD), this
means the THP score is greater than 0 and the Care Needs Assessment
(CNA) is 85 or greater

To qualify for CP for a care receiver aged under 16 years the carer must
also:

-   satisfy the residence requirements
-   be personally providing constant care for a child with a severe
    disability or severe medical condition with a qualifying DCLAD score
    in the home of the care receiver. Note: the carer is not required to
    live with the care receiver
-   have income and assets below the maximum allowed under the pension's
    income and assets test

Note: for Carer Payment (child) claims, the care receiver does not need
to be a dependent child of the carer. This differs from Carer Allowance
(child) claims where the care receiver must be a dependent child of the
carer. See Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a carer is
claiming or receiving CA only.

Carers can be contacted to clarify the care they provide, however carers
are not required to provide care schedules or care plans. Provision of
the claim form is the carer's declaration that additional care is
provided. Clarification should only be sought if there is a dispute
about the care being provided or there are concerns as to whether the
carer is providing constant or daily care.

Age considerations

While there are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims
from carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require
a referral to a social worker.

This is necessary to ensure that the carer can and does, provide the
care receiver with the level of care and attention on a daily basis that
is required. A very young or elderly carer may have difficulty accessing
support services and resources. A social worker can provide help with
this.

Respite and hospitalisation

The provision for up to 63 days of respite for carers recognises the
need for carers to have a break from their caring responsibilities while
remaining qualified for payment.

There is no limit to the number of hospitalisation days for child care
receivers, however all absences must still be recorded. If the carer is
paid under the short term care or episodic care provisions, the respite
limit will be a pro-rata amount, based on the period for which Carer
Payment (child) is being granted.

Grandfathering provisions

Certain carers will maintain qualification and payability under the
DCLAD grandfathering provisions from 01 July 2010

CP (child) customers who were current on payment during the period from
1 July 2008 to 30 June 2009 will remain qualified only under the CP
(child) transitional rules.

Wife Pension customers who were getting payment level Carer Allowance on
19 March 2020 qualify for Carer Payment (XWP) under grandfathering
provisions as long as payment level CA continues without a break. They
are not required to satisfy the normal CP requirements such as constant
care, the 25 hour rule, or CP reviews including the Care Receiver Income
and Assets (CRIA) test. However, pension's income and asset tests
continue to apply. Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and
hospitalisation) rules do not apply to CP (XWP) but all CA rules
continue to apply to CA as normal.

When a CP (XWP) customer's only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason (including due to respite or hospitalisation)
or reduced to a zero rate due to Education, Training or Treatment (ETT),
CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled. A carer will lose
qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a break in payment
level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. For more information, see
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for 2 to 4 children each with a
disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2
children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) terminal illness

Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the same care
receiver

Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Pensions income and assets tests

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Temporary cessation of care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Social work services

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
