
Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) 009-04010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how carers can claim or re-claim CP and/or CA.

Initial contact

A correspondence nominee can submit a claim for CP and/or CA on behalf
of the carer, however, only nominee individuals can submit a [] claim
online for CP and/or CA. Nominee organisations cannot lodge a claim for
CP and/or CA online.

Note: lodgement of a Medical Report on its own is not considered a claim
for CP and/or CA.

If a carer or their correspondence nominee contacts to claim CP and/or
CA, an []online claim must be offered first. Service Officers can
explain the benefits of claiming online such as:

-   help to apply for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   less information for them to provide, as information from their
    Centrelink record will be pre-populated into the online claim
-   they can monitor the progress of their claim through their
    Centrelink online account
-   carer's can also use the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to
    monitor their claim

If the carer or their correspondence nominee declines the online claim
offer, a Service Officer can use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to
collect claim information from a carer or their correspondence nominee
either over the phone or face-to-face.

Once ACC is completed, tell the carer or their nominee of any
outstanding documents they must provide, or action they have to take to
submit their claim. Carers can submit the documents via their online
account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

If ACC is used to submit a claim, a Service Officer must ask the carer
or their nominee to accept a verbal declaration. A Customer Declaration
Form (CDF) must be sent to the carer or their correspondence nominee for
their signature if they are unable or decline to make a verbal
declaration.

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow can only
be used in limited circumstances when it has been determined this is the
only method available to suit the carer's or nominee's needs. FCCCS can
issue CP and/or CA new claim forms for both adult and child care
receivers. A CA adjusted taxable income details form (SA489) will always
be issued with a CA or combined CP and CA claim without checking if the
carer is exempt from providing their income details for the CA income
test or if existing income details can be reused.

For information about payments and services available for carers, see
Initial contact by a carer.

When a new claim may not be required

A new claim may not be required if:

a carer or their correspondence nominee contacts:

-   about the rejection of their CP and/or CA claim and additional
    information can be used to reassess the claim. See Reassessment of
    claims following rejection
-   within 13 weeks of being notified of the cancellation of their CP
    and/or CA due to non-completion of a Medical Review - payment can be
    restored after completion of the review
-   within 13 weeks of being notified of the cancellation of their CA
    due to non-completion of a CA income review - payment can be
    restored after the income review is completed

a care receiver is identified as being eligible for a Carers Child to
Adult Transfer

a carer is CA (Health Care Card only) current and wants to test
eligibility for CA (payment) for the same care receiver, see
Reassessment of CA Health Care Card (HCC) only entitlement to payment
level CA for a child

Online claims

[]Carers or their correspondence nominee must be registered with an
'active' Centrelink online account. Correspondence nominee individuals
must have an active Centrelink online account and be registered for
nominee online services.

Once registered, to start an online claim for CP and/or CA, carers or
their nominee must:

-   sign into myGov and access the linked Centrelink online account.
    Nominees need to select the person for whom they wish to make a
    claim
-   select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim from the menu
-   from the Make a claim page select Get Started under the Carers
    category
-   answer the streaming questions on the Check your Eligibility page to
    check their eligibility for CP and/or CA. If the carer will not be
    eligible for CP and/or CA based on the answers to the streaming
    questions, the online claim will advise why they may not be eligible
    and refer them to the Payment and Service Finder or advise them to
    contact Services Australia to discuss a more suitable payment. The
    carer or their correspondence nominee can select Back to return to
    the Make a Claim page to begin another claim type
-   the Care receiver details page will be displayed with the carer's
    current links. They can update links or add new links to claim CP
    and/or CA for the required care receiver(s). After completing care
    receiver updates, select Claim now

The Next steps page advises the claimant of any further information or
documentation required for their claim to be submitted.

THP indicates claim is for more than 1 payment

A Medical Report from a Treating Health Professional (THP) is not
considered a claim for CP and/or CA. Where a carer submits an online
claim, Assisted Customer Claim or lodges a paper claim for 1 payment
only, for example, the carer is claiming CA only and the Medical Report
indicates it is a claim for CP and CA, only a claim for CA is to be
assessed.

However, the carer must be given an opportunity to lodge or complete a
claim for the other payment, for example, CP. If the carer applies for
CP and is eligible for CP and CA, give consideration to the start date
via 'Special Circumstances'.

Identity Confirmation

Carers and care receivers aged 16 years or more are required to provide
identity documents when:

-   the carer is claiming CP and/or CA, and
-   their identity is not already confirmed

See Identity Confirmation for information on:

-   care receiver identity linkage requirements, and
-   care receiver under the age of 16 years identity requirements

There is no requirement to complete an identity document linkage for
care receivers. Linkage is only required where they claim or receive a
payment in their own right. See Payments and services that require
Identity Confirmation.

When a customer has difficulty providing identity documents, see
Alternative Identity.

Identity documents must be original and unaltered. A carer can lodge
documents:

-   in person at a service centre or Agents and Access Points (remote
    area only)
-   via a nominee
-   by post, or
-   [] online, if the carer has photo identification verified at a
    service centre and is claiming CP and/or CA

If a carer has photo identification verified at a service centre, carers
may choose to upload other identity documents against the claim's Next
steps page using [] Upload documents online.

If the care receiver wants to lodge their identity documents, they will
need the Claim ID number connected with the carer's online claim. The
Claim ID is located on the Next steps page on the customer's task list.

The online claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted.

Note: if a CP and/or CA claim has been submitted, where:

the care receiver's Identity Confirmation request is displayed as a
supplementary task, and

their identity documents are not provided, Service Officers are to:

-   request care receiver's identity documents, and
-   place the claim on hold

Do not reject the claim 'Failed to Reply to Correspondence' (FRC) unless
the carer has failed to reply to the request.

The care receiver's identity documents may display on the carers record.
This can occur when the carer uploads the documents for the care
receiver. Service Officers must check the carer receiver's record before
rejecting the claim.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers can run an ACC with the carer or their correspondence
nominee to obtain and record the claim information. ACC is similar to
the online claim and contains the same questions to ask the carer.
Service Officers can assess ACC via the ACC desktop icon, enter the
carer's Customer Reference Number (CRN) and run ACC.

Service Officers can start ACC with the carer or their nominee and
encourage them to complete their []claim online, where appropriate. By
submitting their claim online, carers and their nominees can monitor the
progress of their claim through their Centrelink online account. Note:
excluding nominees, carers can also use the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app to monitor their claim.

To submit their claim, the carer must:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all their required documents
-   confirm their and their care receiver's identity (if there is no ICI
    recorded)

Some exceptions apply.

Customer declaration and claim submission

Once ACC has been completed by the Service Officer, the claimant must
either:

access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and submit
the claim, or

accept a verbal declaration and provide all required documents before
submitting their claim. Once the verbal declaration is accepted and ACC
submitted a new claim activity will be created in the Process Direct
Inbox:

-   Process Direct notes, and/or
-   Customer First Super Case, and/or
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If the carer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow will need
to be run and a paper claim for Carer Allowance/Carer Payment issued to
the customer.

The claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted.

Paper claim form lodgement

If a carer or their correspondence nominee has previously been issued a
paper claim form via the First Contact, Concessions, Carers and Seniors
(FCCCS) workflow, all forms are required to be completed and lodged by
the claimant to assess a claim for CP and/or CA.

Note: a claim will not be considered lodged until it is fully completed
and all supporting documentation is supplied. This does not include
supporting documents from a third party, for example, waiting for a
medical report from a Treating Health Professional (THP).The below forms
may be lodged separately and the date the first form is lodged is deemed
to be the date of lodgement of the claim. Lodging the following forms
will constitute the lodging of a claim:

-   Claim for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance (SA404)
-   Claim for Carer Allowance (SA409)
-   Claim for Carer Allowance following Carer Payment review (SA341)
-   Claim for Carer Payment (SA410)
-   Claim for Carer Payment and Carer Allowance (SA411)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance - caring for a person 16 years
    or over (SA406)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance - caring for a child under 16
    years (SA407)
-   Any legacy Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance claim forms, for
    example SA336 or SA337
-   Assessment for Carer Payment under an international Social Security
    agreement form (AUS156)

Medical reports and Care Needs Assessments (CNA)

CP and/or CA medical reports and CNA forms are available on the Services
Australia website but the claim forms are not. Medical reports are
available on the website for health professionals.

CP and/or CA medical reports and CNA forms are not accepted as a claim
for CP and/or CA.

It is possible for a carer or their correspondence nominee to lodge 1 of
these forms and think they have lodged a claim. If there is no record of
a claim previously submitted, the carer or their correspondence nominee
must be contacted and asked to complete an online claim or ACC.

Carer Payment - Home Equity Access Scheme recipients

Carers currently receiving CP that is fully-funded through the Home
Equity Access Scheme may wish to claim CP when their assets are under
the limit. Carers with a benefit status of CAR/CZR- PLS are:

-   unable to submit a CP online claim
-   unable to have ACC run, and
-   advised in the CP online claim to contact Services Australia

To issue the appropriate claim forms, run the First Contact Concessions,
Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow.

Reassessment of claims following rejection

If a new medical report has been provided following the rejection of the
CP and/or CA claim not meeting the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT) or the Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination
(DCLAD) qualifying scores, do not adjust the existing CNA/Treating
Health Professional (THP) scores on the carer/care receiver’s record. A
new line must be created and new medical responses added.

This could occur in the following circumstances:

-   original claim has been rejected Failed to Reply to Correspondence
    (FRC) and a new medical report has been provided
-   original claim has been rejected due to THP score and a new medical
    report has been provided
-   original adult claim has been rejected due to combined ADAT score
    and a new medical report has been provided
-   original child claim has been rejected due to Insufficient Care Load
    and a new medical report has been provided

If the carer provides additional information during a phone
conversation, it must be recorded to ensure the carer's record reflects
their most recent circumstances. As the information provided is to
reassess the rejection, it is not referred to an Authorised Review
Officer (ARO) unless the carer clearly indicates they want to apply for
a formal review of the decision.

If new medical information is obtained via a verbal conversation with a
THP, Service Officers may adjust the existing information by changing
the confirmed line of medical information and documenting this on the
carer's record.

If a CP and/or CA claim has been previously rejected and the carer
submits a new medical report or CNA within 13 weeks of the rejection and
the claim can be reopened, the existing medical report or CNA that
resulted in the initial rejection of the CP and/or CA claim must not be
amended or deleted. A new line must be created and the new medical
report and/or CNA responses added.

The Process page explains how to code medical information for a
reassessment of a rejected claim.

See Calculating the ADAT score or Calculating the total DCLAD (2010)
score for more information.

Early claims

An early claim is a claim made by a person before being qualified and/or
payable for that payment. If they will qualify for the payment within 13
weeks of lodgement, accept the claim.

[]Early claims can be completed online or via ACC.

Re-use and re-claim provisions

Re-use provisions allow eligible Treating Health Professional (THP)
medical reports and/or CNAs previously supplied to be used for a
subsequent claim. The Carer Online Claim and ACC will identify the
option to re-use this previous data for the child care receiver if the
most recent reports meet the re-use provisions.

Re-claim provisions allow qualifying THP medical reports and CNAs
previously supplied to be used for a subsequent claim. Re-claim
provisions are automatically assessed during Carer Online Claim and ACC.

Carer Allowance income test

From 20 September 2018, carers who are not exempt from providing their
income for the CA income test will be required to provide their income
details as part of their claim.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
forms for carers, the verbal declaration scripts, CDF declarations and
the process for accepting medical reports lodged before 1 May 2017 as a
valid claim. It also contains what to do when a medical report differs
from the claim received, or when further information is provided after
rejection of a claim.

Contents

Claim for Carer Payment (CP) when care is provided for a disabled adult
and that adult's dependent child

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Related links

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Calculating the start day general rule

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink Claims

Early claims

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Identity Confirmation

Initial contact by a carer

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Re-use and re-claim provisions for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer
Allowance (CA) (child) claims

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
