
Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP) 009-04030030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess whether a claimant for Carer
Payment (CP) satisfies the residence requirements necessary to qualify
for payment. The assessment includes whether the customer is
residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment as well as
whether they are required to serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting
Period (NARWP).

On this Page:

Residence requirements for CP

To satisfy the residence criteria for CP, both the customer and their
care receiver must:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged, and
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment

In addition to the above, the customer only (not the care receiver) must
satisfy a 104 week NARWP or have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

Customers claiming CP who are new Australian residents are required to
have been in Australia as an Australian resident for the duration of the
NARWP before CP is payable. Alternatively, they may have an exemption
from the NARWP.

If a CP claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

A 1 year (52 week) NARWP was introduced for Carer Allowance (CA) from 1
January 2019 and is determined by the visa subclass and grant date of
the customer's first permanent residence visa. Therefore, in some
circumstances a person may qualify for CA while ineligible for CP.
However, the care receiver must also be an Australian resident.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Carer Payment are required to have been an Australian resident
and physically in Australia for the required duration of the NARWP,
either in 1 period, or in a number of periods before Carer Payment is
payable. Note: the period of residence required for the NARWP does not
need to have occurred immediately before claiming.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Carer
Payment may have a 2 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily for
3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the absence extends
the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Datalink with Department of Home Affairs

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, residence information will need to
be manually recorded. If Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to movement
information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

For current CP customers, it may be necessary to update country of
residence, visa information or Australian citizenship details. For
assistance, see Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and
contingency procedures if datalink is unavailable.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
