
Carer Allowance (CA) cancellations, suspensions and restorations 009-03110000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures regarding cancellations, suspensions
and restoration of Carer Allowance (CA).

Carer Allowance workflows

Carer Allowance should be cancelled or suspended using the Carer
cancellation and suspension workflow unless this is unavailable. Carer
Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) may be restored using the Carer
Restoration workflow when a carer’s qualification for payments has been
re-established after a suspension of payments and some cancellations.
The correct system codes must be used when a decision is recorded on the
system to cancel, suspend, or restore CA.

Suspension of Carer Allowance

A CA carer may not be eligible for payment temporarily as a result of
changes in their circumstances. In such cases, payment can be suspended.
Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of entitlement and full
arrears are issued if the payment is subsequently restored.

For system codes see Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for
Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Allowance

When restoring CA, it is important to re-establish the carer's
eligibility and to recommence payment from the date they became eligible
again. If there has been a change in circumstances, the carer’s record
must be updated with the relevant information on the system before
restoring payments to avoid incorrect arrears being paid.

For system codes see Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for
Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance

CA may be cancelled or suspended because of changes in circumstances, a
review of a decision, or after events that have temporarily resulted in
the carer being ineligible for payment. Restoration occurs when the
carer's qualification for payment has been re-established after a
cancellation or suspension.

For system codes see Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for
Carer Allowance (CA)

Contents

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Restoration Workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver has not
confirmed their identity

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
