[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Centrelink system codes used when a decision
is recorded on the system to cancel or suspend Carer Allowance (CA), or
to reject a claim for CA.

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons for CA

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons can be recorded manually
on a carer's record, or automatically by the system. Automatic
cancellations occur when information provided by the carer disqualifies
them from entitlement, for example, if the carer has used their total
balance of 63 temporary cessation of care (respite) days. This would
include the following situations:

-   carer is absent from the caring situation
-   care receiver is absent from the caring situation
-   continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation
-   overseas absences for Carer Payment (CP) and/or CA

In most cases, CA will only cancel once the balance of 63 respite care
days in a calendar year has expired.

When the letter is generated to the carer as a result of this action,
the code allows the correct reason for the decision to be provided in
the letter.

If the cancellation for CA is for the death of a customer see
Bereavement and Carer Allowance/Carer Payment (CP).

Payments may be cancelled, suspended or rejected for CA due to specific
eligibility requirements not being met, and/or a variety of other
reasons.

Note: sometimes, carers may withdraw their claim voluntarily. Withdrawn
claims are deemed to have never been made. They are not to be rejected.

The Process page contains a table that lists the cancellation,
suspension and rejection codes that can be used for Carer Allowance.

Related links

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) inter-environment change of
address

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Restoration workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
