-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to assist Service Officers
processing terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult). The
terminal illness review is conducted via telephone 24 months after the
grant of CP, and 12 months thereafter.

CP (adult) terminal illness reviews

For the purposes of Carer Allowance (CA) (adult) and CP (adult) a
terminal condition is where a person aged 16 years or over is in the
final phase of a terminal illness and is not expected to live more than
3 months.

Where a medical practitioner has certified the adult care receiver is
terminally ill, they do not have to undergo the Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) assessment, as payment can be granted
automatically, provided the carer meets all other eligibility criteria.

Duration of reviews

Adult Terminal Illness Reviews are no longer generated 12 months after
the date of grant. Adult Terminal Illness reviews are generated 24
months after the grant and every 12 months thereafter from the Date of
event recorded on the care receiver's medical details screen (ADMD).

Wife Pension transfers to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Terminal illness reviews for CP adult do not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer
Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased
Wife Pension carers. However, if a CP (XWP) carer gets CA for an adult
who is terminally ill, they will be subject to a CA adult terminal
illness review. For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension
(WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Manual review process

The manual review process is initially conducted via telephone. If the
care receiver is alive at the 24 month review, it will be necessary to
issue medical review forms to the carer, as the circumstances of the
care receiver's illness may have changed. The medical review forms, when
returned, will be used to assess qualification under the ADAT.

The manner in which terminal illness reviews are conducted is important.
As the purpose of the review is to determine if the care receiver is
still alive, this is obviously a very sensitive issue. Due to this
sensitivity, these reviews should be approached as a courtesy call to
see how the carer is coping with their caring responsibilities and to
check their circumstances still qualify them for the assistance being
received.

The Resources page contains links to Carer Payment/Carer Allowance
forms.

Related links

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) adult

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Creating carer links within Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)
review activities

Adult medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)

Medical reviews for child care receivers

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
