
Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16 years or over 009-03020030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess eligibility for Carer Allowance
(CA) when a person claims CA caring for a care receiver (aged 16 years
or over).

On this Page:

About CA

CA is a payment that recognises the impact of a care receiver's
disability on the family. The greater the level of disability, the
greater the impact. CA provides financial assistance to the carer in
respect of a care receiver aged 16 years or over with a severe level of
disability. CA acknowledges the impact of significant levels of
disability on the family in social, occupational, emotional and
financial terms.

Assessment and qualification

CA (16 years or over) is assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment
Tool (ADAT). The ADAT measures the functional ability and care needs of
the care receiver.

The section 954A Social Security Act 1991 qualification provisions are
outlined in Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a
disabled adult in a private home not shared by the adult and carer.

A person is qualified for CA for an adult with a disability, if the care
receiver:

is an Australian resident, and

is a family member of the person or is a person approved in writing by
the Secretary - see the References page, and

has been assessed and rated under the ADAT, with a total score of at
least 30, and a Treating Health Professional (THP) score of at least 12,
and

has a functional impairment (a physical, intellectual or psychiatric
disability) sufficient to necessitate the provision of care, and is
either:

-   in the terminal phase of a terminal illness certified by a medical
    practitioner, and is expected to live for less than 3 months. Their
    carer will generally qualify for CA (16 years or over) without
    further investigation subject to meeting the other qualification
    criteria, or
-   is likely to suffer from the disability permanently or for an
    extended period (that is, care is required for 12 months or longer),
    and

receives care on a daily basis from the carer in a private home that is
the residence of the carer and the care receiver. If the home is not
shared by the carer and care receiver, but is still a private residence,
the carer may still qualify for payment under section 954A of the Social
Security Act 1991. See Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring
for a disabled adult in a private home not shared by the adult and
carer. A link to the Guide definition of 'daily basis' in connection
with CA (including examples) can be found in the References page
section, under the heading Carer Allowance (CA) definitions

has confirmed their identity. See Identity Confirmation for more
information

Note: the carer must also be an Australian resident and have confirmed
their identity.

There are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims from
carers of any age can be accepted, including carers under the age of 16
years.

A care receiver aged 16 or over may be eligible for an income support
payment. If the care receiver wants to claim an income support payment
this must be done separately, the care receiver is required to lodge a
claim with all the required supporting documents.

Note: if a carer is qualified for CA (caring for a disabled adult), that
disabled adult cannot then qualify to receive CA for caring for another
disabled adult. However, an adult care receiver may also qualify to
receive CA (child) for a dependent child or children with disabilities
in their care. Where service officers may have concerns regarding the
carer's capability to care for someone else, a referral to social work
may be appropriate.

Age considerations

A check for basic qualification (e.g. residence, income and assets) is
to be completed before the referral to a Social Worker to ensure
unnecessary referrals are not made. Once basic qualification can be
established, all carers under 18 years of age must be referred to a
Centrelink social worker before the claim is finalised. Carers over the
age of 80 years of age are to be referred to a Centrelink social worker
after the claim has been finalised. The referral is to ensure the carer
has the physical and emotional capacity to provide the level of care
required and to be given information and assistance in accessing support
services.

While there are no legislative age limits applicable to carers, claims
from carers under 18 years of age, or 80 years of age or older, require
a mandatory referral to a social worker.

It is necessary to ensure that the carer can and does, provide the care
receiver with the level of care and attention on a daily basis that is
required. A very young or elderly carer may have difficulty accessing
support services and resources. A social worker can provide assistance
in this regard.

More than one care receiver

A person may qualify for CA for 2, but no more than 2, adults with a
disability who meet the CA (16 years or over) criteria, and may qualify
for each dependent child with a disability that meets the CA (under 16
years) criteria, regardless of the number of children.

Care should be taken when a carer who is already receiving Carer Payment
(CP) and/or CA contacts to claim CP and/or CA for a second care
receiver. A discussion should be had with the carer as to whether CP is
more appropriate for the new care receiver, this will all depend on the
individual aspects of the carer and care receiver's circumstances. If
the new care receiver is suffering from a terminal medical condition, it
may be more appropriate to claim CP for the new care receiver due to
bereavement provisions.

Two carers sharing one CA

CA may be shared by 2 people who care for the same care receiver(s),
provided the 2 carers are not members of a couple. The 2 sections of the
Social Security Act under which people sharing the care of an adult care
receiver may be paid are s954 (CA adult) and s954A (CA adult 'living
apart'). A carer who qualifies for CA under s954 can only share CA with
another carer under s954. Similarly a carer getting CA under s954A can
only share CA with another carer under s954A. However, a carer cannot be
paid under section 954A if someone is already being paid, or has lodged
a claim and been determined qualified, in respect of that care receiver
under section 954. For detailed information about 2 carers for CA, see
Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA).

Two carers may share one payment of CA under section 954A provided that
together they are providing the 20 hours of personal care per week and
this care is being provided on a daily basis.

If 2 carers who receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care
receiver advise that they have become partnered, CA can no longer be
paid to both partners. See Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance
(CA).

A situation may arise where a carer ceases to qualify for CA when they
move out of the care receiver's home (or are already a non co-resident
carer under section 954A), and a qualified co-resident carer claims CA
under section 954. The first carer would no longer be qualified under
either section 954 or section 954A, as someone else qualifies under
section 954. If the first carer is still providing daily care, however
no longer qualifies for CA, care should be taken to cancel their CA.

Carer does not provide daily care

If:

-   they provide any care on the other days. This is likely to be the
    case
-   no care is received by the care receiver from anyone on the other
    days. If so, the carer is not qualified for CA unless the cessation
    of care does not exceed 1 day per week. If qualified for CA the TCC
    provisions apply
-   another co-resident carer provides care on the other days, the carer
    is qualified for CA and no TCC. The shared care provisions may apply
-   a non co-resident carer provides care on the other days, the carer
    is not qualified for CA unless the cessation of care does not exceed
    1 day per week. If qualified for CA the TCC provisions apply

Change in circumstances

A situation may arise where a carer ceases to qualify for CA as they
move out of the care receiver's home (or are already a non co-resident
carer under section 954A), and a qualified co-resident carer claims CA
under section 954. The first carer would no longer be qualified under
either section 954 or section 954A, as someone else qualifies under
section 954. If the first carer is still providing daily care, however
no longer qualifies for CA, care should be taken to cancel their CA.

Assessment

The care receiver's medical condition and the level of the care provided
must be assessed. The Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance online claim
and the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) will ask the carer relevant
questions to test their eligibility for payment.

Removal of CA Backdating Provisions

Backdating provisions for CA were removed on 1 January 2017. New claims
for CA lodged on or after 1 January 2017 cannot be backdated beyond the
date of claim and are subject to the general start day rule.

Note: extending lodgement of a claim from 14 days to 13 weeks provisions
(due to a medical condition) have not changed. If a carer claims outside
of the 14 days from initial contact staff should consider whether they
meet any of the criteria to extend lodgement for the claim, from 14 days
up to 13 weeks from the day they lodged their claim.

Commercial carers

A person may qualify for CA even if they are utilising the services of a
commercial carer to assist with care.

Commercial carers do not qualify for CA. Additionally, the care provided
by a commercial carer cannot be used towards qualifying another person
for CA.

A person may qualify for CA when the carer is being paid to care for the
care receiver when they both reside in the same private home.

The Resources page contains some examples of 'commercial care'.

Coding and qualification

When the claim form is lodged, entitlement is determined by coding a
claim for Carer Allowance (CA). When the care and medical details are
recorded, the qualification for CA is assessed. If a care receiver is in
respite (not hospital) at the time a carer lodges a CP/CA claim or the
care receiver has passed away see Complications to Grants of Carer
Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

If the carer or the THP has ticked more than one answer, the answer that
gives the highest ADAT score should be accepted. Where no answer has
been provided, the carer or THP should be contacted to find out why. The
carer or THP should be given the opportunity to answer unanswered
questions in their respective questionnaires.

Note: where the ADAT produces a qualifying score and there are
unanswered questions which have no bearing on the carer's qualification
for CP or CA, staff are not required to contact the carer or THP but
should document this on the carer's record.

The Resources page contains Processing Service details for: CP/CA New
Claims, examples of 'commercial care', suggested letter text and a link
to online forms.

Related links

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when caring for a disabled adult in
a private home not shared by the adult and carer

Social Work Services

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FSCCC)

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
