
Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) 009-09000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and procedures about the Continence
Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS).

On this Page:

Information about CAPS

CAPS is an Australian Government Scheme that assists eligible people who
have permanent and severe incontinence to meet some of the costs
associated with continence and continence related products.

CAPS commenced on 1 July 2010 and replaces the previous Continence Aids
Assistance Scheme (CAAS). CAPS is administered by Services Australia on
behalf of the Department of Health.

Benefits of CAPS

The benefits of CAPS are that:

-   it provides a payment to people who have permanent and severe
    incontinence to assist meeting some of the costs of their continence
    and related products
-   it promotes greater competition in the continence product market and
    allows sufferers of permanent and severe incontinence to purchase
    the best product for their needs

Eligibility

An eligible applicant must be 5 years of age or older and have:

a permanent and severe loss of bladder and/or bowel function
(incontinence) due directly to one of the following:

-   an eligible neurological condition
-   an eligible 'other' condition and have a Centrelink Pensioner
    Concession Card or entitlement, either as a primary cardholder or a
    dependant of a cardholder, or
-   an eligible 'other' condition and have a Department of Veterans'
    Affairs Pensioner Concession Card or entitlement, either as a
    primary cardholder or a dependant of a cardholder

Applicants must also satisfy the following residence requirements to be
eligible for CAPS. Eligible applicants must be living in Australia and:

-   have Australian citizenship, or
-   hold a permanent visa

An applicant is not eligible for CAPS if:

they are a permanent resident in an Australian Government funded aged
care facility and are assessed with a high ACFI rating in any domain or
medium in two or more domains, in which case the facility directly
receives a subsidy for, and will provide residents with their continence
aids

they receive a home care package and continence aids are included as
part of their care plan

they are eligible to receive assistance with continence aids through the
Department of Veterans' Affairs Rehabilitation Appliances Program (RAP)

they are National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participants and
have a NDIS plan including a consumables budget (with continence aids)
in their core supports category of the plan

their incontinence:

-   is not permanent and is transient
-   can be treated with other methods such as pelvic floor exercises or
    bladder re-training, medicine or surgery, or
-   is limited to night time bed wetting/soiling (enuresis or
    encopresis)

their incontinence results from a condition other than an eligible
neurological condition and they do not have a Pensioner Concession Card
entitlement

they are serving a prison sentence

they have resided outside of Australia for a continuous period of 3
years while in receipt of CAPS payments

Payments

For new CAPS applicants, payments will commence after a completed
application is received and the applicant deemed as eligible. For the
purpose of CAPS, a completed application is when all mandatory and
conditional fields are completed. The initial payment is a pro-rata
payment calculated from the date of lodgement.

Applicants can elect to receive the annual payment in full (in July each
year) or as two half payments (in July and January each year). The
current rate is available on the Department of Health's website and
indexed annually. See External websites on the Resources page.

Payments can be made into a nominated Australian bank account of:

-   the applicant
-   a parent if the applicant is under 14, or if under 18 and does not
    have the capacity to act on their own behalf
-   a legal or authorised nominee, including a person nominated under a
    Power of Attorney, an appointed legal guardian or a Public Trustee,
    with authority to receive payments on the applicant's behalf
-   an applicant's Centrelink payment nominee
-   a Department of Veterans' Affairs Trustee or Agent
-   a responsible person, approved in writing by the Department of
    Health, to receive a payment on an applicant's behalf, or
-   an organisation that agrees to help the applicant buy their
    continence products

The payment cannot be paid into a credit card, loan or mortgage account.

Note: once the payment is exhausted, purchase of further continence
products is the customer's responsibility.

Authorised nominees and representatives

A CAPS applicant can choose to have another person act on their behalf.
This may include:

-   receiving CAPS correspondence including payment statements
-   signing the CAPS application form
-   receiving the CAPS payment
-   acting on behalf of a customer regarding CAPS

These people may be the same for all areas of assistance or they may be
different depending on the circumstances of the CAPS customer.

Correspondence recipient

A CAPS applicant may request that their correspondence be directed to
another person's address. For example this person may be a carer, family
member or a guardian. A correspondence recipient can only receive CAPS
correspondence and payment statements. Correspondence recipient does not
have the authority to act on customer’s behalf and cannot update any of
the applicant's details without customer's authority.

Legal representatives

A person or organisation may have legal authority to act on behalf of a
CAPS applicant, including completing and signing the CAPS application
form. This can include but is not limited to a person or organisation
nominated under a Power of Attorney, Enduring Power of Attorney, Court
appointed guardian or a Public Trustee. For authorised representatives
see Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and
Authorised Representative for Medicare.

This person or organisation must provide documentary evidence of their
legal authority to act. A certified copy of the authority documents can
be provided. The relevant sections of the CAPS application form must
also be completed and signed.

Authorised representatives

An authorised representative is a person or organisation authorised by
the CAPS applicant or appointed to act on their behalf. This includes a
Centrelink correspondence nominee, an Authorised representative for
Medicare purposes, a Department of Veteran Affairs' Trustee or a
responsible person who has been approved in writing by the Department of
Health to act on their behalf. This person or organisation needs to
provide documentary evidence of their authority to act. The relevant
sections of the CAPS application form must also be completed and signed.

Authorised payment representatives

An authorised payment representative is a person authorised by the CAPS
applicant or appointed to act and receive payment on their behalf. This
includes a Centrelink payment nominee, a Department of Veterans' Affairs
Trustee or a responsible person who has been approved in writing by the
Department of Health to receive a CAPS payment on their behalf. This
person needs to provide documentary evidence of their authority to act.
The relevant sections of the CAPS application form must also be
completed and signed.

Parents

Parents must sign and complete the representative section of the CAPS
application form if the CAPS applicant is:

-   under 14 years of age. A custodial parent must receive the CAPS
    correspondence and payments (unless contrary information is
    provided)
-   between 14 and 18 years of age. A custodial parent may act on their
    behalf if they do not have the capacity to do so themselves

Responsible person approved by the Secretary of the Department of Health

When someone has no legal authority and would like to act on a
customer’s behalf, a request in writing must be submitted to Department
of Health to be approved as the responsible person for CAPS.

The Department of Health requires the following details when assessing a
request to be a responsible person:

the CAPS applicant's full name and date of birth;

the CAPS applicant's residential address;

contact number and residential address of the responsible person;

reasons why the applicant cannot act on their own behalf (such as health
conditions), and

a statement that the applicant has no other legal representation

a certified Statutory Declaration, outlining the following

-   they provide care and assistance to the CAPS applicant

the arrangement for the receipt of CAPS payments are for the benefit of
the CAPS applicant

confirmation that the responsible person will use these funds only for
the purpose for which they are provided

Requests to be a responsible person must be mailed to the Department of
Health. See the Resources page for the contact details.

Organisations

CAPS applicants can direct their payment to an organisation by
completing the relevant sections of the CAPS application form. If an
organisation agrees to receive the CAPS payments on behalf of an
applicant, the organisation must complete the Organisation authorised as
payment recipient section of the CAPS application form. They must also
complete and sign the Organisation declaration of the CAPS application
form. These organisations are third parties. The customer / nominee must
keep a record of the details of the organisation that they are
nominating their CAPS payments to go to and advise any changes to their
circumstances. The Organisation must keep a record of the customer
details and payments received.

Information for health professionals

Definition of health professional for CAPS

For the purpose of the CAPS, a health professional can be (but is not
limited to) any of the following:

-   Aboriginal health worker
-   continence nurse
-   general practitioner
-   medical specialist
-   community nurse
-   physiotherapist
-   occupational therapist
-   registered nurse
-   'other health professionals', see Health Professionals table in
    Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Other requirements

A health professional must complete the health report section of the
CAPS application form to:

-   certify that the applicant is permanently and severely incontinent
-   record the applicant's eligible condition
-   make an accurate continence assessment of the applicant in relation
    to their incontinence and the cause of the applicant's incontinence.
    The assessment must be based on medical evidence that the applicant
    has been diagnosed with an eligible neurological condition or any
    other eligible conditions.

Note: the health professional can view the list of eligible conditions
on the Department of Health website. See the Resources page.
If the Health professional is an immediate family member of the CAPS
customer, they cannot complete the CAPS health report.

Centrelink role

CAPS Service Officers can access Centrelink information for the purposes
of:

-   confirming the identity of CAPS recipients
-   determining the claimant's eligibility for CAPS with Pensioner
    Concession Card (PCC)
-   confirming and updating the contact details of CAPS recipients
-   confirming the nominee arrangements of the CAPS recipients, and
-   confirming the primary carers of CAPS recipients
-   confirming date of death and residency details
-   confirming address details. If the address details recorded on the
    Centrelink system are different to CAPS processing system,
    customer/nominee must be contacted for their consent to update the
    current address details on the CAPS/CDMS system

Note: Customer Reference Numbers (CRN) provided on the CAPS application
form must be verified on the Centrelink record to confirm the CAPS
applicant identity. Check the Centrelink CRN recorded on CDMS relates to
the customer.

CAPS application form

Customers can request CAPS applications:

-   from the Department of Health's website, see External websites on
    Resources page
-   by contacting Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS) or the National
    Continence Helpline (contact details the website).

Note: the National Continence Helpline provides information about
bladder and bowel control problems, continence product advice, referrals
to continence services and information about eligibility for state
funded schemes.

The Resources page contains links to external websites, contact details
and a checklist with scenarios about authorised nominees and
representatives.

Contents

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Customer contact, application, ceasing
entitlement and review

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Errors and reports

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Quality checking

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Other requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
