
Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03110030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the suspension of CA payments.

Suspension of CA

CA may be suspended if a carer is temporarily not qualified for payment
or the payment is not payable as a result of:

-   changes in either the carer or care receivers' circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for CA, or
-   information is required to ensure that CA is directed correctly
    (such as a valid address or bank account details)

Before CA is suspended, an appropriate request for information must be
issued and the appropriate time for response has passed.

A decision to suspend CA potentially has a great impact on the carer and
must be made in accordance with legislation and the relevant process.
Suspensions placed on carers records that do not follow the correct
process may cause financial hardship and distress.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification and
full arrears may be issued if CA is subsequently restored.

CA suspension or cancellation can only occur under the following
sections of the Social Security Administration Act 1999 (SSAA).

-   section 80 - loss of qualification
-   section 81 - failure to comply with certain notices, or
-   section 82 - failure to take action to obtain a foreign payment

The choice to cancel or suspend depends on whether the loss of CA will
be temporary or not. Any decision to cancel or suspend must be
documented with the reason and the section of the Act.

CA eligibility

A carer may not be eligible for CA temporarily as a result of changes in
their circumstances. In such cases, CA can be suspended. Suspension does
not necessarily indicate a loss of eligibility and full arrears may be
issued if CA is subsequently restored.

Before suspending CA, a Service Officer needs to establish that the
carer is temporarily not eligible for payment. If the deciding to
suspend CA, the Service Officer must immediately tell the carer the
suspension reason and their review and appeal rights to avoid placing
them in financial hardship.

Suspending CA will cancel Carer Payment (XWP). CP will auto restore if
payment level Carer Allowance entitlement is reinstated within 13 weeks
without a gap in entitlement. However, it is important to only suspend
the carer's CA if necessary. For more information, see Transfer from
Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

If a carer receives CA for more than 1 care receiver, it is not possible
to suspend 1 payment of CA. In these situations, as a matter of urgency,
contact the carer and obtain the required information.

Reasons for suspending CA

The reasons for the suspension of CA include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the carer is in prison or psychiatric confinement in connection with
    an offence

If the carer is in imprisoned or placed in psychiatric confinement for
13 weeks or less, CA is suspended from the day after the carer enters
custody. The carer does not lose entitlement until the absence is a full
24 hour period (midnight to midnight). If the carer is still in prison
or psychiatric confinement after 13 weeks, the suspended CA will
automatically cancel from the day after the carer had entered custody.
The carer does not lose entitlement until the absence is a full 24 hour
period (midnight to midnight).

Note: Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions may apply when a
care receiver is imprisoned, but not when a carer is imprisoned for more
than 13 weeks.

If the system does not cancel CA after coding these circumstances, a
Service Officer can manually code the cancellation if it is appropriate.

Contact with the carer

Before suspending CA, information must be requested from the carer under
the appropriate section of the Social Security (Administration) Act;
section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The decision maker must be
satisfied that there is sufficient evidence the carer is either
temporarily not qualified for the payment or the payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information.

Nominee arrangements

If the carer has a correspondence nominee, the Service Officer must try
to contact the nominee before suspending CA.

Notification of suspension

Carers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If the
system does not issue a letter, send a manual Q134 letter that includes:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the carer's review and appeal rights

When CA is suspended additional appropriate actions are also required,
for example, issue letter, code manual review, DOC the decision.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Carer contacts after suspension

When the payment is suspended, a letter will be sent to the carer
advising their CA has been suspended, the reason for the suspension, the
information or documentation required to enable payments to be restored
and their review and appeal rights.

If the customer contacts, explain the reason for suspension. Provide
information about the documents required or what is required so that
payment can be restored.

A review will be created for 13 weeks after the decision to suspend. If
a carer does not contact after the suspension, or does not provide the
requested information, the suspended payment will be cancelled as a
result of the review. An advice of the cancellation will issue at this
time.

Related links

Restoration of Partner Allowance (PA) and Widow Allowance (WA)

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Restoration Workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

Updating address details

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver has not
confirmed their identity

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
