
Employment assistance for carers in receipt of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance 009-01020000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the employment assistance available to carers who
are in receipt of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

Workforce Australia Services

Disability Employment Services, Workforce Australia Employment Services
Providers and Community Development Program (CDP) providers are the
Australian Government's gateway for job seekers to access training,
skills development and work experience. The Employment Service Providers
will assist carers to develop a Job Plan that will set out the specific
services and training carers can receive based on their individual
circumstances and caring responsibilities. Referrals are made via the
Job Seeker Snapshot.

Carers who are paid CP and/or CA can be referred to Employment Services
Providers at any time. Links to further information on Workforce
Australia Services is available in the Resources page.

Other non-employment related services, such as support services for
carers, are also available.

Carer Payment (CP)

Carers in receipt of CP are eligible for the following employment
assistance services:

-   Workforce Australia Online - Carers (who are under Age Pension age)
    can register as a volunteer job seeker. Access to Workforce
    Australia Online as a volunteer job seeker is not time limited
-   Community Development Program (CDP) - when a carer lives in a
    Department of Employment and Workplace Relations designated remote
    area, they are able to be referred to a Community Development
    Program (CDP) provider
-   Self-Employment Assistance - Carers may be able to access assistance
    through Self-Employment Assistance. Carers can be away from caring
    responsibilities to participate in Self-Employment Assistance for up
    to 25 hours per week (including travel time)
-   Disability Employment Services (DES) - Carers can access these
    services. Assessment and referral is undertaken through a Job
    Capacity Assessment (JCA) or through an Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt)
-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) - ACCS
    (Transition to Work) is intended to provide additional assistance
    with the cost of child care for families transitioning from income
    support by engaging in work, study or training activities. CP is an
    ACCS (Transition to work) eligible payment. A customer may be
    eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work) if they are first assessed as
    eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and they then meet the general
    eligibility requirements.

Carer Allowance (CA)

Carers in receipt of CA are eligible for the following employment
assistance services:

-   Workforce Australia Online - Carers in receipt of CA (but not in
    receipt of any other income support payment) can register as a
    volunteer job seeker. Access to Workforce Australia Online as a
    volunteer job seeker is not time limited
-   Community Development Program (CDP) - when a carer lives in a
    Department of Employment and Workplace Relations designated remote
    area, they are able to be referred to a Community Development
    Program (CDP) provider
-   Disability Employment Services (DES) - Carers can access these
    services if also in receipt of an income support payment. Assessment
    and referral is undertaken through an Employment Services Assessment
    (ESAt)

Note: if a carer in receipt of CA also receives CP, refer above to CP
eligibility information. If they receive a different income support
payment, refer to 'Related links' (below) for guidance on eligibility.

The Resources page contains information on the types of employment
assistance services that Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
customers may be eligible for and links to useful resources for carers,
including links to the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
website.

Related links

Job Seeker Snapshot

Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers in Workforce Australia

Registering Volunteer job seekers

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Support services for carers

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
