[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Carer Allowance (CA) provides 2 levels of
assistance depending on the level of disability of the CA child. The
first level of assistance provides only for a Health Care Card (HCC) for
the CA child (no fortnightly payment). The second level provides
financial assistance and a HCC for a child care receiver with a
disability.

On this page:

Assessment of eligibility for CA at the payment level

All carers must assess their eligibility for CA at the payment level. It
is no longer possible to code a CA HCC only claim.

If a care receiver does not qualify their carer for CA at the payment
level, consideration is given to HCC only CA, where no payments are
made, but recognition is given to the high cost of medications, and a
HCC is issued for that purpose.

See Coding a paper claim for CA where the care receiver is under 16 to
assess entitlement for HCC only CA.

HCC only CA

HCC only CA is issued for a child who does not qualify for CA but who
needs and receives, because of their disability, substantially more care
and attention on a daily basis than a non-disabled child of the same
age. This is in acknowledgment of the significant costs that are often
associated with the care of these children.

Carer stops providing daily care and attention

If a carer who is single stops providing daily care and attention to the
care receiver, cancel the HCC as qualification is lost. For instance, if
the carer is imprisoned or travels overseas while the care receiver
(child) remains in Australia.

If a carer who is partnered stops providing daily care and attention to
the care receiver, and:

their partner provides:

-   daily care and attention to the care receiver, the child’s
    qualification to HCC remains
-   no daily care and attention to the care receiver, cancel the HCC as
    qualification is lost

a third party (someone other than the carer or their partner) provides
daily care and attention, cancel the HCC as qualification is lost. The
third party can test their eligibility by claiming CA

Respite care and temporary cessation of care provisions do not apply to
CA HCC only.

Child care receivers approaching 16 years of age

HCC can be provided to 16-25 year olds who are full time students and
who have a disability or medical condition that previously qualified
their carer for CA (child) on the day before the care receiver turned
16.

See Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) if the child care
receiver is approaching 16 years of age.

Child named on card is unable to sign

Social security law does not require that a concession card be signed. A
signature is only one method of determining that the person using the
concession card is the person entitled to use it. If the child is:

-   old enough to write their name on the card and is able to
    identically reproduce this signature upon request, it may be
    appropriate for the child to sign the card
-   unable to sign the card, a legal guardian can sign on the child's
    behalf. The guardian should indicate in the signature block they are
    signing on another person's behalf

Note: Services Australia only provides the concession cards, not the
concessions. It is ultimately the concession provider who determines
whether to accept a concession card that is not signed by the person
named on it.

Related links

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is under
16

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Reassessment of CA Health Care Card (HCC) only entitlement to payment
level Carer Allowance (CA) for a child

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
