
Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent 009-06030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the effect on Carer Allowance
(CA) when the carer is temporarily absent from the caring situation.

On this Page:

Definition of a 'day' of absence

For respite and hospitalisation purposes, a whole 'day' is 24 hour
period from 12:00 am to 12:00 am 'midnight to midnight'. Part days do
not count in the calculation of absences for CA. The Resources page has
an example of how this is calculated.

Absence is less than 24 hours

If, for example, a neighbour, day care centre or other family member
provides care while the carer has a break to attend to their own
personal needs each Wednesday afternoon, this does not jeopardise the
carer's qualification for CA as they still provide care on that day.

For absences that are not for a full 24 hour period ensure the
requirement for daily care is still being met, see the References page
for criteria.

Temporary Cessation of Care (TCC)

The temporary cessation of care (or 'respite') provisions allow carers
to continue to receive CA when they take a break from providing care,
for up to 63 days in each calendar year. These days may be used for any
purpose, including formal respite care such as community in-home,
residential respite or informal respite that is provided by a friend or
family member.

In most other cases, such as where the care receiver is absent from the
care situation, a carer can utilise up to 63 temporary cessation of care
(or 'respite') days, and 63 hospitalisation days per calendar year and
still remain eligible for CA.

This means a carer has 2 allocations of 63 days during which they do not
have to provide additional daily care and attention at home, but during
which they may still continue to qualify for CA.

The hospitalisation provisions only apply when the care receiver is in
hospital. For a child care receiver, there is no limit for
hospitalisation, however the 63 day TCC limit still applies and all
absences must be recorded on the carer's record.

Note: when a care receiver remains in hospital for longer than 63 days
in 1 calendar year, a carer may use the balance of their 63 day
temporary cessation of care entitlement to remain eligible for CA. The
balance of 63 hospitalisation days per calendar year does not apply if
the carer is hospitalised. If the carer is temporarily admitted to
hospital, then the temporary cessation of care provisions only may
apply.

Carer admitted to hospital or institution

If the carer is temporarily admitted to an institution or hospitalised
and is expected to return to their caring duties once released, respite
care is to be utilised, as the carer is temporarily not providing care
to the care receiver. However, if the balance of respite days exceeds 63
days, CA is to be cancelled.

If the carer is permanently admitted to an institution or hospitalised
and is not expected to return to their caring duties once released, CA
is to be cancelled from the first day they did not provide care. In most
cases it will be the day after they entered the institution or hospital.
(An 'indefinite' stay in hospital may also qualify the carer and care
receiver for payment under the separated due to ill health rules if they
are also partners.

Note: a social worker referral may be necessary to ensure that the care
receiver is continuing to receive adequate care and attention on a daily
basis from another carer. The social worker can also provide information
to assist Service Officers to determine whether the carer has the
physical and/or emotional capacity to deal with the care receiver's care
needs when they are discharged from the hospital or institution.

Carer in gaol or psychiatric confinement

If the carer is in gaol or in psychiatric confinement in connection with
an offence, payment of CA will not continue.

CA is suspended when the absence is for 13 weeks or less and cancelled
when the absence is for more than 13 weeks. Respite days cannot be used
if the carer is in gaol or psychiatric confinement in connection an
offence. A carer could be charged with an offence without being
imprisoned or confined.

If a carer is in periodic detention or weekend detention for a whole 24
hour period from 'midnight to midnight', they lose qualification for CA
as respite cannot be used for this absence type and daily care and
attention is not being provided.

Absence must be temporary

What is relevant about any absence is that it must be temporary in
nature and the carer must be likely to resume providing care at the end
of the absence from the care situation.

Shared care or exchanged care

For Carer Allowance (CA), when care is shared, or in the case of
exchanged care, an absence generally occurs when neither carer provides
any care in the 'midnight to midnight' 24 hour period. For example when
there is no arrangement to swap or change caring days and the care
receiver is in the home of a third carer. In these cases, record
temporary cessation of care against both carers (if both are receiving
CA for this care receiver).

Short periods of care

The temporary cessation of care provisions do not apply for breaks from
caring that are less than a full 24 hour absence, 'midnight to
midnight'.

Short periods of care (of less than 24 hours) during the day or evening
by another person or organisation do not count as temporary cessation of
care, even if this occurs regularly.

The exception to the 24 hour definition is for carers granted under
section 954A. For these carers, a respite 'day' is any day when the
carer does not provide any care.

Note: the rules for temporary cessation of care (respite) and
portability may differ between Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA) depending on the situation. The respite and portability rules must
be considered together in each case.

Health Care Card only CA

The temporary cessation of care provisions do not apply to CA HCC only.
The provisions that allow carers to remain qualified for Carer Allowance
if they temporarily cease to provide care for up to 63 days in calendar
year require the carer to be receiving payment of Carer Allowance.

When the carer, or the carer’s partner, is unable to provide daily care
and attention for an indefinite period, then the child’s qualification
to the HCC is lost and must be cancelled. See Health Care Card (HCC)
Carer Allowance.

 

The Resources page contains an example of how to calculate the start and
end dates for coding of respite or hospitalisation days for CA.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Payment (CP) absences for more than one carer under the Adult
Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) 80+

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance care receiver is absent from the
caring situation

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
