-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assistance available from
Services Australia following the death of an adult or child care
receiver where Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) is received.

Confirmation and recording of death

Before any action is taken, confirmation of death must be provided. Once
confirmed, it is important that the death be recorded as soon as
possible to ensure that customers receive their correct entitlement.

The procedures required to complete a death action vary according to
which family member has died and which payments the family were
receiving.

The notification period for the occurrence of a bereavement event is 28
days for carers in receipt of CP and/or CA. The References page contains
links to the policy.

Bereavement payments for a Family Tax Benefit child

A carer receiving CA (child) may qualify for a bereavement payment
following the death of a child care receiver. The bereavement payment
depends on whether or not the child met the definition of a Family Tax
Benefit child:

-   Where the child met the definition of a Family Tax Benefit child
    immediately before their date of death the carer may be entitled to
    14 weeks of bereavement payment. This will be paid as a lump sum. It
    does not matter if the carer received Family Tax Benefit payments or
    not
-   Where the child did not meet the definition of a Family Tax Benefit
    child the carer may be entitled to four weeks of bereavement
    payment. This will be paid as a lump sum

The bereavement payment is paid at the CA rate paid that immediately
applied before the child's death.

Bereavement Payments for a CA (auto) child

There is no lump sum bereavement payment for a CA (auto) child.

CA (auto) is not paid under CA bereavement conditions but continues to
be paid because of the CP bereavement period.

Where the carer received CA (auto), this will remain current only for
the duration of the Carer Payment bereavement period. No bereavement
lump sum will be payable to the carer in respect of the deceased child
care receiver but a bereavement lump sum maybe payable for CP.

When the carers CP (child) cancels at the end of the bereavement period,
CA (auto) will also cancel immediately.

Bereavement assistance for adult or child care receivers

When an adult care receiver dies, the level of bereavement assistance
depends on whether:

-   the carer is single or a member of a couple
-   the carer’s partner was receiving an income support payment or not
-   the carer is getting CP (XWP)

When a child care receiver dies, the level of bereavement assistance
depends on whether:

-   the carer has a child with a severe disability or severe medical
    condition
-   the carer has one or two or more disabled children
-   the carer is getting CP (XWP)

When a child care receiver dies, and they were in a short term or
episodic care situation, the CP (child) carer will receive a lump sum
bereavement payment and continuation of CP during the bereavement period
even if this exceeds the date of the Medical Report, Medical Certificate
end date, or end of the episodic or short term care period

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia Website for
information and what to do when someone has died.

Contents

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Death of a lower score adult and the effect on Carer Payment (CP)

Death of a dependent child of a lower Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT) score adult

Simultaneous death of care receivers and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Social Work Services

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment and/or Carer AllowanceCarer
Supplement (CS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
