
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines to Service Officers the process of assessing a
Carer Payment (CP) (child) claim for carers providing care of 2 to 4
children under the combined care provisions.

On this Page:

General information

Under the combined care provisions, CP (child) provides income support
to parents or carers who provide full-time personal care or supervision
of 2 to 4 children, each with a disability or medical condition. To
qualify for CP (child) (combined care):

-   each care receiver must be under the age of 16
-   the carer must personally provide constant care to the combined care
    receivers
-   care must be provided in the care receiver’s private home
-   the provision of care by the person must severely restrict their
    capacity to undertake paid employment
-   the combined care load of 2 to 4 children will be at least
    equivalent to 1 child with a ‘severe’ disability or medical
    condition
-   the care provided to the care receivers attains a qualifying rating
    of ‘intense’ under the Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
    Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Once it is established that the children enable their carer to qualify
for CP, the claim can be assessed.

Related claims

In the case where the separated or divorced parents care for up to 4
eligible children, but not necessarily to the same child/ren every day,
they may be considered for payment of CP (child) under the exchanged
care provisions.

Where the carer is caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2 children, they
may qualify for payment under the multiple care provisions.

Carer Allowance (auto)

Carer Allowance (CA) (auto) is available to all recipients of (CP)
(child). If CP (child) cancels, CA (auto) will cancel automatically at
the same time as CP (child). In these instances the customer will need
to lodge a new claim for CA (child) if the child still requires, and
receives, additional daily care and attention due to their disability or
medical condition.

Re-use and reclaim provisions

There are specific provisions for re-use of previous forms and reports
such as the Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) for claims that have
an intention to claim before 1 July 2010 that are lodged or appealed on
or after 1 July 2010. See Disability Care Load Assessment (child)
Determination (DCLAD) (2010).

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for two to four children each
with a disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
