
Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 disabled children 009-05010030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help Service Officers assess
whether a carer is entitled to receive Carer Allowance (CA) for the
combined care of 2 children when neither child attracts CA in their own
right. Assessment for CA is limited to the scores of a maximum of 2
children, unlike Carer Payment (CP) (child) which relates to the scores
of up to 4 children.

On this Page:

Auto CA for 2 CP child care receivers

If the carer is receiving CP (child) for 2 children with a disability or
medical condition who combined require the equivalent care of 1
qualifying child, the carer will automatically be paid 2 payments of CA
(auto). If both children qualify for CA in their own right, the carer
may qualify for 2 payments of CA.

Verification

If there are inconsistencies between the carer's responses and those of
the Treating Health Professional (THP) or if verification is required, a
process called validation is applied as part of the Disability Care Load
Assessment Determination (DCLAD) process.

For care receivers under 3 years of age, a validation workaround is
required. Information about validation can be found in the References
page.

Grandfathering provisions

The following carers will maintain qualification and payability under
grandfathering provisions from 1 July 2010. Carers who are current or
suspended on 30 June 2010 and who were granted CP (child):

-   under the Disability Care Load Assessment Determination
    (DCLAD) (2009) or CA (child) under the Child Disability Assessment
    Determination (CDAD) (2001) will maintain qualification and
    payability under their existing provisions until they are selected
    for review under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or after 1
    July 2010. This group of care receivers will not appear on the Carer
    Payment Grandfathered (CRGF) screen
-   due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child (PDC), or 2 children
    who require the equivalent care of a PDC, will maintain
    qualification and payability under PDC provisions until they are
    selected for review under DCLAD 2010 or lose qualification on or
    after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who re-claim CP (child) for
    the same care receiver will be required to provide a DCLAD 2010 care
    load assessment and medical report from 1 July 2010. This group of
    care receivers will appear on the CRGF screen

Re-use and re-claim provisions

From 1 July 2010 a Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD)
(2010) must be completed for each care receiver as part of the claim for
CP and/or CA. There are specific provisions for re-use of previous
Treating Health Professional (THP) medical reports and Care Needs
Assessments (CNA) for claims lodged on or after 1 July 2010.

Related links

Health Care Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance (CA) (child)

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (2010)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
