
Suspension of Carer Payment (CP) 009-04150030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to suspend CP and actions to take
before and after.

Suspension of Carer Payment

CP may be suspended if a carer is temporarily not qualified for payment
or the payment is not payable because of:

-   changes in either the carer or care receiver’s circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for CP, or
-   information is required to ensure that CP is directed correctly
    (such as a valid address or bank account details)

Before suspending CP, an appropriate request for information must be
issued and the customer given the appropriate time to respond. See
Requesting information (CLK).

A decision to suspend CP has potentially a great impact on the carer and
must be made in accordance with legislation and the relevant process.
Suspensions placed on carer's records that do not follow the correct
process may cause financial hardship and distress.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification. Full
arrears may be issued if CP is subsequently restored.

Reasons for suspending CP

The reasons for the suspension of CP include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the carer failed to reply to correspondence
-   the carer has separated from their partner
-   the carer is in prison or psychiatric confinement

If the carer is imprisoned or placed in psychiatric confinement for 13
weeks or less, CP is suspended from the day after the carer enters
custody. The carer does not lose entitlement until the absence is a full
24 hours (midnight to midnight). If the carer is still in prison or
psychiatric confinement after 13 weeks, the suspended CP will auto
cancel from the day after the carer had entered custody. The carer does
not lose entitlement until the absence is a full 24 hours (midnight to
midnight).

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions may apply when a care
receiver is imprisoned but do not apply when a carer is imprisoned for
more than 13 weeks.

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions do not apply to Carer
Payment (XWP). However will still apply to Carer Allowance (CA) as
normal. See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

If CP does not auto cancel after coding these circumstances, a Service
Officer may manually code the cancellation if it is appropriate.

CP suspension or cancellation can only occur under the following
sections of the Social Security Administration Act 1999 (SSAA):

-   section 80 - loss of qualification
-   section 81 – failure to comply with certain notices, or
-   section 82 – failure to take action to obtain a foreign payment

The choice to cancel or suspend depends on whether the loss of CP will
be temporary or not. Any decision to suspend or cancel must be
documented with the reason and the section of the Act.

Contact with the carer

Before CP is suspended, information must be requested from the carer
under the appropriate section of the Social Security (Administration)
Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

The decision maker must be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence
that the carer is either temporarily not qualified for the payment or
the payment is not payable. See Requesting information (CLK).

Nominee arrangements

If the carer has a correspondence nominee, the Service Officer must try
to contact the nominee before suspending CP.

Notification of suspension

Carers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If the
system does not issue a letter, send a manual Q134 letter that includes:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the carer’s review and appeal rights

When CP is suspended additional appropriate actions are also required,
for example, issue letter, code manual review, DOC the decision.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Carer contacts after suspension

If the customer contacts, explain the reason for suspension. Provide
information about the documents required or what is required so that
payment can be restored.

CP eligibility

A carer may not be eligible for CP temporarily due to changes in their
circumstances. In such cases, payment can be suspended. Suspension does
not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification and full arrears may be
issued if CP is restored.

Before suspending CP, confirm that the carer is temporarily not eligible
for payment. If deciding to suspend CP, act fast to advise the carer of
the suspension reason and their review and appeal rights, to avoid
placing them in financial hardship.

If it is necessary to suspend CP, and the carer is also receiving CA, it
may also be necessary to suspend CA.

Home Equity Access Scheme customers

CP customers who receive loan payments under the Home Equity Access
Scheme are eligible to continue receiving their loan payments if CP
suspends for certain reasons.

In these circumstances, the CP status is set to Current Zero Rate (CZR)
for reason PLS to enable the loan payments to continue. During periods
of CZR-PLS, the customer is not eligible to receive any other rate
components until the CP suspension is lifted.

See Home Equity Access Scheme cancellation and rejections.

The Resources page contains an attachment outlining the legislative
basis for suspending payments.

Related links

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Updating address details

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
