
Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days 009-06010090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what may occur if a carer exceeds the total
allowable 63 days for temporary cessation of care (TCC) (respite) in a
calendar year. Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) may continue
if there is a 'special reason'.

Special reasons

Different provisions apply if the care receiver has been in hospital;
see Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation (CLK).

Generally a decision to continue payment on the basis of a special
reason would only be made if the reason for ceasing care was outside the
control of the carer and consistent with the need for, and provision of,
personal care and attention. It should be clear in these situations that
a return to home care at the required level can be expected after a
definite period and that the carer will resume providing the care.

For example, a special reason could exist where the care receiver
required occasional periods of hospitalisation which exceeded 63 days in
total, and cessation of care which exceeded 63 days in total. A special
reason would not exist where the carer simply chose to extend a holiday
beyond 63 days.

Access to the Department of Health respite program is based on a
financial year, rather than calendar year. An extension under special
circumstances may be used to allow the carer to access care available
under Department of Health funding rules, if there is a genuine need for
respite, without the carer losing qualification for payment. Extensions
are assessed on a case by case basis.

Emergency situation respite provisions

Respite provisions used in an emergency situation such as fire, flood
will meet the criteria of 'special reason' for extension of the 63 days
respite in a year. Where an emergency situation has occurred that
results in the excess use of respite provisions, it is appropriate to
allow an extension of respite days under 'special reasons' for the
period care was impacted by the emergency situation. A decision to allow
an extension must be documented on the carer’s record. Where a carer
identifies that, during an emergency situation, they will have to use
their respite provisions, this should be clearly documented so this
period of respite can be identified for consideration of extension of
respite under 'special reasons' in that same year.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP(XWP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. Temporary Cessation of Care
(TCC) rules continue to apply to payment level CA as normal. This means
CP (XWP) carers who are not providing additional care and attention each
day can continue to be paid CA by using their TCC days.

Once CA TCC days are exhausted, the carer’s’ CA may be continued if
there is a 'special reason’ or ‘emergency situation’. The continuation
of payment under a ‘special reason’ or ‘emergency situation’ only
applies to CA. Where TCC cannot be extended, and the carer’s only or
last CA is cancelled, then CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled. A
carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if payment level
CA is not reinstated without a gap in entitlement.

Respite codes that only relate to CP should not be recorded for any TCC
days for a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

The Resources contains links to the Services Australia website for
information for carers, and to the Carer Gateway website for information
about services and support available to carers.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding a regular absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation (CLK)

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Hospitalisation reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
for a child under 16 years

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
