
Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) 009-06010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a carer may temporarily cease providing care
in the home to an adult and/or child care receiver who has been
hospitalised and still claim or continue to qualify for payment where
the carer participates in the care or treatment of the care receiver.
For adult care receivers, the temporary cessation of care cannot be
extended beyond 63 days. There are no absence limits for child care
receivers. This is known as the 'hospitalisation provision'.

On this page:

Temporary cessation of care (TCC)

For information about:

-   the differences between temporary cessation of care provisions for
    adults and children, see Temporary cessation of care (respite) and
    hospitalisation (CLK)
-   respite, see Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for
    Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

When calculating absences, only whole days are counted. That is, periods
of 24 hours or more from 12am to 12am (midnight to midnight). The 63
days in total can either be continuous or broken.

The hospitalisation provision is a separate allocation from TCC
provisions (or respite). It allows a person to claim or continue to
receive CP and/or CA without drawing on their temporary cessation of
care (respite) days if either of the following occurs:

the carer is participating in the care of the care receiver:

-   and, upon release, the care receiver is expected to return to the
    care of the carer at the appropriate residence, and
-   it is reasonable to assume that, had the care receiver not been
    hospitalised, 1 or more people would qualify for CA and/or CP in
    respect of the hospitalised person. Note: if the care receiver is
    hospitalised 'indefinitely', the hospitalisation provisions may
    still be used as long as the care receiver is expected to return to
    the care of the carer when discharged from hospital. (An
    'indefinite' stay in hospital may also qualify the carer and care
    receiver for payment under the
    separated due to ill health rules if they are also partners)

the person is actively participating in the care of a care receiver who
is terminally ill

Extension 63 days hospitalisation provision

There is no discretion to extend beyond the allowable 63 days
hospitalisation provision (for an adult care receiver) for an
appropriate special reason as there is with the

respite provisions. If the hospitalisation period (for an adult care
receiver) exceeds the allowable 63 days, the carer may be eligible to
access their respite days for that calendar year (if they have any
remaining).

For example, if an adult care receiver is hospitalised for 90 days, it
is possible for the carer to use all 63 days for hospitalisation and 27
days respite care in order to remain eligible for a CP and/or CA
(assuming the carer has 27 respite days left to use).

When the care receiver enters into TCC, the carer can still get CP
and/or CA as long as the period of respite care does not exceed 63 days
in a calendar year (this is the approved temporary cessation of care or
respite period).

Palliative care

A person receiving palliative care will have an active, progressive and
far-advanced disease, with little or no prospect of cure. The aim of
palliative care is to achieve the best possible quality of life for the
individual patient, their carers and family.

Palliative care services can be provided in the home, in community-based
settings like nursing homes, palliative care units, and in hospitals.
People who are dying need to be able to move freely between these places
in response to their medical care and support needs.

The pattern of care will be different for every individual, and may
depend on factors like; geography, services in an area, and the needs
and desires of the person, family members and friends.

Before the hospitalisation provisions can be applied, it must be
determined that the palliative care is being provided in a hospital.

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) has been cancelled

For hospitalisation absences, if a carer’s CP and/or CA has been
cancelled due to hospitalisation absences and they reclaim for the same
care receiver (within the same year) once the care receiver returns
home, there are no hospitalisation days available until 1 January of the
next calendar year.

For respite absences, if a carer's CP and/or CA has been cancelled due
to respite absences and they reclaim for the same care receiver (within
the same year) the system will not allow hospitalisation days until 1
January of the next calendar year. There is an interim process to allow
hospital days to be accessed in the same calendar year where the carer
has not already exceeded their allowable 63 hospital day limit.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, Temporary Cessation
of Care (TCC) (respite and hospitalisation) rules still apply to CA as
normal.

When a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will be
automatically cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for CP (XWP)
permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a gap in
entitlement.

Constant care and the 25 hour rule do not apply to CP (XWP). Respite
codes that only relate to CP should not be recorded for any TCC days for
a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Care awaiting placement

A care receiver who has been assessed as 'care awaiting placement' may
be in either a hospital or an Age Care or Multipurpose Service Facility
whilst waiting for a permanent placement. In these situations, the
following usually occurs:

-   the care receiver is admitted to hospital
-   an Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) assessment
-   the care receiver is assessed as care awaiting placement and either
    remains in the hospital or is transferred to an Aged Care or
    Multipurpose Service Facility on a temporary basis
-   the care receiver is transferred to an Aged Care or Multipurpose
    Service Facility on a permanent basis

If the care receiver is assessed as care awaiting placement and is in a
hospital, then the carer should be contacted to clarify whether the care
receiver is likely to return home. If the care receiver is likely to
return home, the hospitalisation and/or temporary cessation of care
provisions would apply.

Care awaiting placement in an Aged Care or Multipurpose Service Facility
would usually be considered as a permanent admission to an institution.

When determining the date of admission, consider the advice from the
carer and any other relevant factors before making a decision.

Care receiver is not likely to return home

If the care receiver is not likely to return home or has been admitted
to an Aged Care or Multipurpose Service Facility, and there are no
extenuating circumstances, then they are considered to have permanently
entered an institution. If the carer receives:

-   CA, then their payment will be cancelled
-   CP, then section 198AAA of the Social Security Act applies and
    payment can continue for 14 weeks

The date of cancellation of CA would be from the date that the care
receiver was not expected to return home. In most cases, this would not
be the date that the care receiver was admitted to hospital, as the
initial admission is usually temporary. The date of cancellation would
be after admission to the hospital and up to the Aged Care or
Multipurpose Service Facility admission date.

Some hospitals, particularly in rural areas, may also contain government
funded aged care beds, or a multipurpose service wing. If the care
receiver has been admitted to a hospital with multiple facilities such
as these, you will need to ascertain whether the care receiver is in a
hospital ward, a government-funded aged care bed, or in the multipurpose
service wing. The above guidelines should then be applied.

Carer admitted to hospital

If the carer is hospitalised and is expected to return to the caring
duties once released, respite care is to be utilised, as the carer is
temporarily not providing care to the care receiver. However, if the
balance of respite days exceeds 63 days, and CP cannot be extended for a
special reason, CP is to be cancelled.

If the carer is hospitalised and is not expected to return to their
caring duties once released, CP is to be cancelled from the first day
they did not provide care. (An 'indefinite' stay in hospital may also
qualify the carer and care receiver for payment under the separated due
to ill health rules if they are also partners).

Note: a social worker referral may be necessary to ensure that the care
receiver is continuing to receive adequate care and attention on a daily
basis from someone else while their carer is in hospital. The social
worker can also provide information to assist Service Officers to
determine whether the carer has the physical and/or emotional capacity
to deal with the care receiver's care needs when they are discharged
from hospital.

If a CP (XWP) carer is admitted to hospital and their only or last
payment level CA is suspended or cancelled, for example due to exceeding
63 days respite or the carer is not expected to return to their caring
duties, then their CP will be automatically cancelled.

Rehabilitation facility

The term hospital is not defined in either the Social Security Act or
the Social Security Guide. A hospital is an institution providing
medical and surgical treatment and nursing care for sick or injured
people. If the rehabilitation facility is attached to a hospital, it
would meet the definition of a hospital and the hospitalisation
provisions may apply.

The Resources page contains an example of the hospitalisation provisions
being applied in a palliative care situation.

Related links

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Continuation of respite after the expiry of hospitalisation

What to do with an absence Manual Follow-up (MFU)

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

View/Update Absence From Care online

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
