
Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03000000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Carer Allowance (CA) including eligibility,
claiming and changes of circumstances.

Government intent

Carers are an integral part of Australia's health system and are the
foundation of our aged, disability and community care systems. All
carers and care receivers, regardless of their cultural and linguistic
differences, age, disability, religion, socioeconomic status, gender
identification and geographical location should have the same rights,
choices and opportunities as other Australians. They should be able to
enjoy optimum health, social and economic wellbeing and participate in
family, social and community life, employment and education.

CA is an income supplement for people who provide additional daily care
and attention for an adult or child with a disability or medical
condition, or an adult who is frail aged. CA is not taxable or assets
tested. To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined
Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. This
includes deemed amount from account-based income streams if the account
holder is 60 years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the
carer does not have a partner.

The carer's and their partner's income does not affect the rate of CA
that is paid.

CA can be paid in addition to wages or another income support payment.
CA recognises the impact of a person's disability on the carer.

Claiming CA

If a carer contacts with an intention to claim CA, the following service
offer must be delivered.

[] First offer an online claim. Explain the benefits of claiming online:

-   Help to apply for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   Less information for them to provide as the online claim will
    prefill details known to Services Australia
-   They can monitor the progress of their claim through their online
    account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If they decline an online claim, run the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
with the carer. After completing the ACC advise the carer of any
documents they still need to provide, or action they need to take to
submit their claim

Assessing claims for CA

Claims for CA (child)

Claims are assessed under the Disability Care Load Assessment
Determination (DCLAD) (2010), unless the child has a terminal condition
or a Recognised Disability from the List of Recognised Disabilities
(LoRD).This list contains disabilities or severe medical conditions that
have been assessed as constantly severe enough to consistently require a
sufficient level of care to allow qualification for CA.

The Treating Health Professional (THP) must state the condition is
either permanent or temporary for at least 12 months and the child must
still receive care and attention from the carer on a daily basis in a
residence that is the home of both the carer and care receiver.

Claims for CA (adult)

Claims are assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT).
The ADAT measures the functional ability and care needs of the care
receiver.

The THP must state the condition is either permanent or temporary for a
least 12 months and the care receiver receives care on a daily basis
from the carer in a private home that is the residence of the carer and
the care receiver. If the home is not shared by the carer and care
receiver, but is still a private residence, the carer may still qualify
for payment under section 954A of the Social Security Act 1991.

CA income test

To be eligible for CA, the carer’s and their partner’s combined Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner.

The income test does not apply if the carer is exempt from the CA income
test.

Income details are provided at the CA new claim stage and income may be
reviewed following data matching with the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) or a change of circumstances that may affect their entitlement
under the CA income test.

See:

-   Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year
    and assessable income components
-   Carer Allowance income review online service

CA care receivers turning 16 years of age

The Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) is the process of
transitioning eligible carers from child care receiver provisions to
adult care receiver provisions when the care receiver turns 16 years of
age.

It is not a new claim process. It is a quicker and easier process for
the carer requiring less documentation than a new claim.

Eligible carers are sent a CTAT invitation letter when their care
receiver turns 15 years and 9 months advising them to request a transfer
by the due date if they want their entitlement to continuation of
payment to be assessed under adult provisions. If the carer fails to
complete the CTAT prior to the due date, their CA will be cancelled and
a new claim will be required.

[] Carers who get their Centrelink letters in their myGov inbox will get
the invitation letter and a link to the CTAT online service. Customers
will also be able to access the service from their Centrelink online
account. Paper CTAT forms are not included with the invitation letter
but are available on the Services Australia website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report - For a person -
    16 years or over (SA332A)

Carers whose CA is suspended or cancelled will need to contact to
discuss their entitlement status. If the carer’s CP is suspended or
cancelled at the time their child care receiver reaches the required age
milestone of 15 years and 9 months, the carer will not be eligible to
receive the CTAT invitation letter. The invitation letter will advise
carers that their payment(s) under child provisions is stopping and to
request a transfer assessment under adult provisions.

When a carer contacts about the CTAT, explain that the
suspension/cancellation must be resolved before assessing their
eligibility to transfer. If their CA child entitlement cannot be
re-established, the carer will need to make a new claim.

Change of circumstances for CA

CA carers are obliged to advise the agency of any event or change in
circumstances that could affect their payment. This includes contact
details, and changes to accommodation or relationship. It also includes
changes in care arrangements and cessation of care.

CA carers are also required to notify changes that may affect their
eligibility under the CA income test. These include if their and
partner’s Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the previous financial year,
including any deemed income from account-based income streams, is
$250,000 or more. CA carers must also notify when they or their partner
receive an account-based income stream and the account holder is 60
years of age or older.

Death of a carer

There is a need to check whether the carer was receiving Carer Payment
(CP) and/or CA. A decision needs to be made about whether the deceased
estate is entitled to a bereavement payment.

If the care receiver has also died, an assessment is also required on
whether the deceased person was entitled to a bereavement payment (or
would have been if they had not themselves died).

See Death of a carer (CLK).

Death of a care receiver

Before any action is taken, verification of death must be provided. Once
verified, it is important that the death be recorded as soon as possible
to ensure that carers receive their correct entitlement.

Qualification for bereavement assistance depends on whether the carer
receives Carer Payment (CP) and/or CA and on the circumstances of the
carer/care receiver before the death.

Overseas absences

When a carer and/or care receiver advises of an overseas absence, it may
be necessary to code portability details as well as coding the respite
absence.

There are separate procedures concerning respite absences, and on
portability for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

For help on when to code portability and/or absence details, see CA and
CP interaction of portability and temporary cessation of care (respite)
rules.

CA cancellations, suspensions and restorations

CA can be suspended and/or cancelled when a carer is no longer entitled
to the payment as a result of changes in their or their care receiver's
circumstances, or if they have failed to comply with the requirements
for payment.

Before a carer's payment is suspended and/or cancelled, it must be
established that the carer is not eligible for payment. If the decision
is to suspend and/or cancel payment, the Service Officer must act
swiftly to advise the carer of the reason and their review and appeal
rights, to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

When restoring CA, it is important to re-establish the carer's
eligibility and to restart payment from the date they became eligible
again. If there has been a change in circumstances, update relevant
details on the system before restoring payments to avoid incorrect
arrears being paid.

Contents

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Change of circumstances for Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of a carer (CLK)

Death of a care receiver (CLK)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences

Carer Allowance (CA) cancellations, suspensions and restorations

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance Income Review online service

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
