-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when the expected date of return for a Carer
Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) medical review may be extended.

On this Page:

Granting an extension

In some circumstances the return date of a medical review may need to be
extended due to the carer needing more time to complete and submit the
required forms.

The carer may be experiencing difficulties or delays in getting their
forms completed by a doctor or Treating Health Professional (THP), or
perhaps delays in the mail.

The granting of an extension is at the Service Officer’s discretion. The
Service Officer will discuss with the carer the reasons for the request.

Note: most requests from carers would be considered reasonable, and
therefore normally accepted.

Review deferral

Reviews can be deferred by a maximum of 28 days. It is possible to defer
both the reminder letter (the 'reminder/request contact stage') and the
cancellation stage. However, it is only possible to defer both for 28
days in total - for example, if the reminder stage is deferred by 15
days, the cancellation stage is only able to be deferred by 13 days.

The carer has 21 days to complete the initial review forms. If the carer
fails to return the review within 21 days, a reminder letter is sent
with no forms enclosed.

If the carer fails to respond to the reminder letter within 21 days (42
days in total) payments are suspended.

If no further response is received within 13 weeks of suspension,
payment will be cancelled.

Carers should be encouraged to return the Care Needs Assessment section
of the review as soon as possible (even if the medical report has not
yet been completed by a THP), as recording the return of the Care Needs
Assessment will prevent the carers payment being suspended by removing
the review activity from Future Activity List (FAL).

Note: Child Care Load reviews, service components 427, 428 and 430, are
not able to be extended or deferred.

Related links

Medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Medical reviews for child care receivers (CLK)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
