
Change of circumstances for Carer Payment (CP) 009-04110000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on when a Carer Payment (CP) customer
must advise of a change in their circumstances.

Notification obligations

Carer Payment customers are obliged to advise Services Australia,
usually within 14 days, of any event or change in circumstances that
could affect their payment.

Notifiable events

Carers are advised of what they must notify in their grant notification
letter and on the back of each reassessment letter sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes a carer must advise. As
circumstances vary for each carer, this list is not exhaustive.

Changes of circumstances that may require new or update to a carer’s
record include any change to:

-   Income and assets, including commencing employment
-   Contact details, including changes to address and/or telephone
    number
-   Accommodation details, including changes to address and rent
-   Relationship status
-   Residence status
-   Temporary absence (for example, hospitalisation, respite)
-   Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation
-   Change in a child’s/person’s condition or amount of care provided
-   Paid or voluntary work, study or training for Carer Payment
    customers only

Study, training or volunteering

Carers can work, study, train or undertake volunteer work and still
qualify for CP as long as the total time the carer is not providing
care, including travel time, does not exceed 25 hours per week.

In situations where activities exceed 25 hours per week, immediate
follow up action is required.

Carers’ circumstances may still need to be reviewed even if activities
do not exceed 25 hours per week.

Complex enquiries should be handed off to appropriate carers Service
Officers or transferred to the Disability, Sickness and Carers queue.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

The 25 hour rule does not apply to CP (XWP) that is paid under
grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. Temporary
Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules will still apply
to CA as normal. CP (XWP) customers still need to notify the agency
about changes to their and/or their partner’s income and assets. For
more information see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment
(CP).

Change of address and returned mail

The CP qualifications require that the care must be provided in a
private residence that is the home of the care receiver/s. So, although
it is not necessary for the carer and the care receiver to live in the
same home for CP qualification, a review must be carried out if either
person notifies a change of address, to ensure the carer is still
eligible.

All carers are required to notify Services Australia of a change of
address within 14 days of moving.

In cases where a carer’s mail has been returned from an address that is
still held on the agencies records, an attempt must be made to contact
the carer or their Correspondence nominee by phone.

If the correct address details cannot be obtained, the attempts to
contact the carer should be recorded on the carer’s record, and the
carer’s payment suspended whereabouts unknown.

Contents

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) processing in the Earnings and reporting tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
