
Claim for Carer Payment (CP) when care is provided for a disabled adult and that adult's dependent child 009-04010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers when a
carer claims Carer Payment (CP) because they are providing constant care
for a disabled adult and that adult's dependent child.

On this Page:

Medical criteria

For payment of CP (adult) to be granted under these conditions, the
disabled adult must have a score of at least 20 under the Adult
Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT), including a Treating Health
Professional's (THP) score of at least 8.

This is referred to as the lower ADAT score. The THP score is obtained
from responses provided on the Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance -
Medical Report (for a person 16 years or over) form (SA332a).

Caring criteria

The disabled adult's dependent child must be either less than 6 years of
age, or from 6 to less than 16 years and attracting Carer Allowance
(CA). The carer must be directly involved in providing care for the
adult care receiver but does not have to be directly involved in caring
for the child. The constant care provision can be satisfied if the
disabled adult care receiver is caring for the child and the carer is
supervising the provision of care.

The care must be provided in the residence of the care receiver (the
disabled adult) and the carer must satisfy the usual qualifications for
CP including provision of constant care, the pensions Income and Assets
Test, and residency requirements. The care must be required permanently
or for a minimum period of 6 months, unless the condition is terminal.

The Resources page contains a link to the Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance - Medical Report (for a person 16 years or over) form
(SA332a).

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) for care receivers aged 16 or over

Carer Payment (CP) grant overlaps existing Carer Allowance (CA) absence

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

Coding a claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is 16
years of age or over

Pensions income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Residence requirements

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) claim

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score

Determining the appropriate tax year for the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
