
Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver has not confirmed their identity 009-03110050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers restoring Carer
Allowance (CA) when payments have been cancelled because the care
receiver has not provided sufficient documentation to confirm their
identity.

Adequate Identity documentation for Carer Allowance

Carers must confirm their and their care receiver's identity when
claiming CA, if not already confirmed. Exceptions apply for vulnerable
customers see Alternative Identity. If a care receiver is a child
attracting a Family Tax Benefit (FTB), identity confirmation is not
needed for the child care receiver.

Identity documents must be original and unaltered. A carer can lodge
documents:

-   in person at a service centre or a Services Australia Agent (remote
    area only)
-   via a nominee
-   by post, or
-   [] online, if the carer has photo identification verified at a
    service centre

The Identity Confirmation process requires completion of linkage. A
customer must attend a service centre or Services Australia Agent, with
an approved photographic identity document. The document links the
person to their identity documents and gives confidence the person is
the owner of the identity.

A care receiver is not required to complete linkage unless they claim a
payment and have an Identity Status of ‘No linkage’. For information
about identity requirements and recording details, see Coding Identity
documents.

If CA has cancelled because sufficient identity documentation was not
recorded when CA was initially granted, both the carer and care
receiver's records should be checked to see if sufficient identity
documentation was provided at grant or in respect of another payment, to
achieve the required identity status. If the care receiver has a
'non-payment identity confirmed' or 'confirmed' identity status, CA may
be restored without any further action being taken by the carer.

If the carer's record check determines that the carer and care
receiver's identities have not been confirmed, CA cannot be restored
until all the required identity documents have been supplied.

Note: Service Officers must ensure the identity of the carer and care
receiver has been confirmed before CA is restored.

Alternative Identity Confirmation for Carer Allowance

When carers and care receivers have real difficulty in obtaining
sufficient documents to meet identity requirements, staff should
consider the use of Alternative Identity processes to help carers and
care receivers to confirm their identity.

For information on ‘Alternative identity processes’, see Alternative
Identity

There may be some exceptional cases where it is impractical or
unreasonable to use any of the above options. For example, when a
customer has a valid reason/s for not attending in person when
establishing identity. They may be incapable (mentally or physically) of
providing the required information. There are special rules that apply
under exceptional circumstances, see Supporting Identity Confirmation
for customers unable to attend in person.

Known to Centrelink for Carer Allowance

If a carer is having genuine difficulty in confirming:

-   their own identity
-   identity for a child or adult care receiver

The Service Officer should consider if the Alternative Identity
Confirmation code of ‘KC’ (Known to Centrelink) is appropriate to
satisfy identity requirements. This provides customers with a smoother
claim process by recognising their payment history with Services
Australia as a means of identifying them. For frequently asked questions
on using legacy Alternative Identity Confirmation, see the Resources
page of Alternative Identity.

The Resources page contains links to forms available to staff on the
intranet, Australian State and Territory Registries of Births, Deaths
and Marriages, the Services Australia Intranet webform to request
confirmation of a citizenship.

Related links

Identity Review Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
