
Assessing claims for Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03040000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing claims for a customer
who may be eligible for Carer Allowance (CA).

On this Page:

Carer Allowance

Carer Allowance (CA) is an income supplement available to carers who
provide daily care and attention for adults or children with a
disability, medical condition, or those who are frail aged.

CA is not taxable or assets tested. There is an income test. To be
eligible for CA, the carer's and their partner's combined adjusted
taxable income must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
income from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner.

The income test does not affect the rate of CA.

CA may be paid on top of wages, Carer Payment or other payments.

The income test does not apply if the carer or their partner receive an
income-tested income support payment, Family Tax Benefit paid in
fortnightly instalments or the holder of a Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC). The carer is exempt from providing their income details for
the CA income test.

Service Officers now have the ability to backdate a claim for CA that
was received more than 12 months in the past. A warning message will
display to remind staff to check that the correct date has been
recorded.

Requirement for a claim to be lodged

[] Carers can complete an online claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or
Carer Allowance (CA) including lodgement of supporting documents.

All forms issued by First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors
(FCCCS) need to be completed and lodged by the carer to assess a claim
for CA. Service Officers can determine which forms were issued by FCCCS
by referring to the FCCCS DOC on the carer's record. A CA adjustable
taxable income details form (SA489), will always be issued with a CA or
combined Carer Payment and CA new claim without checking if the carer is
exempt from providing their income details or if the existing CA income
details can be reused.

Paper claim for CA (Child)

If the carer has claimed both CP (child) and CA (child), the CA claim
should be determined before the CP claim. If the carer is not eligible
for CA (child) payments, they may be eligible for CA (auto) payments if
CP (child) has been granted. Coding a claim for CP may automatically
assess eligibility for CA (auto).

If CA Health Care Card (HCC) only has been granted, and during the CP
claim the Disability Care Load Assessment score has increased (such as
via the Care Load Validation process), a manual assessment of
eligibility for CA auto or CA manual may be required. CA (auto) child
care receivers are eligible for an HCC in their name in addition to any
Pensioner Concession Card or HCC held by the carer. Normal concession
card hierarchy rules apply.

Paper claim for CA (Adult)

For CA for an adult care receiver to be assessed, a claim for CP and/or
CA (SA404/SA409) or Claim for CA following CP Review (SA341) must be
lodged. A CP and/or CA Medical Report for a person (SA332a) may also be
required. CA is assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool
(ADAT). The carer does not have to complete an SA332(a) if they already
receive CP for the same care receiver and the care receiver has
qualified for CP.

Recognised disability

Child

For CA (child), a child with a recognised disability is automatically
considered to be a disabled child and does not have to be tested against
the Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (2010) which is used
to assess CA (child) claims form 1 July 2010.

However, the Treating Health Professional must state the condition is
either permanent or temporary for at least 12 months and the child must
still receive care and attention from the carer on a daily basis in a
residence that is the home of both the carer and care receiver.

A recognised disability is a condition or disability which is considered
to be a severe disability or a chronic medical condition with severe
impact.

A severe disability is defined as one which is severe, moderate or
profound that is permanent or likely to be permanent.

Some disabilities are included on the list only when a young person
reaches a certain age. To be included there must be clear diagnostic
criteria that are widely accepted, and the disability must be reasonably
prevalent.

Adult

CA is assessed under the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) which
measures the functional ability and care needs and allows the care
receiver to be assessed and have their level of disability objectively
determined.

Re-use of a previous ADAT may be possible under specific provisions. The
SA332(a) can be completed by a Treating Health Professional if the care
receiver is aged 15 years and 9 months or older.

Automatic and manual coding when rejecting a CA claim

A carer who has lodged a claim for CA may not be eligible because they
do not meet the basic qualifications or payability for that payment.
Sometimes carers may have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim.

In all these circumstances, the claim is rejected. The system uses
information provided by the carer when a decision to reject a claim is
made. While many rejection reasons will automatically reject the CA
claim after a carer’s details have been input onto the system, there are
some other rejection reasons that need to be coded manually. For
example; the care and dependency requirements may not be met, or for
failing to reply to correspondence.

When manually rejecting a CA claim, ensure that an advice of the
decision is sent to the carer giving them reasons for the rejection of
their claim, and detailing the steps to follow in the review and appeals
process.

Contents

Assessing a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) using the combined assessment
scores of 2 children

Assessing a recognised disability

Carer Payment (CP) grant overlaps existing Carer Allowance (CA) absence

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
under 16 years

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
16 or over

Completing the Claim for Carer Allowance following Carer Payment Review
(SA341)

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Care Allowance (CA)

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance

Processing claims for Care Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Reassessment of CA Health Care Card (HCC) only entitlement to payment
level Carer Allowance (CA) for a child

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Related links

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
