-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed by Service Officer's
when a Carer Allowance (CA) (child) care receiver is absent from home
for education, training or treatment (ETT).

On this Page:

Child care receivers

CA (child) carers whose children are absent from home for education,
training or treatment (ETT) and who have utilised their 63 respite days
per calendar year do not lose qualification for CA payment, but are only
payable for the period that the child is in their care.

To be considered absent from the carer, the child care receiver must be
away for a full 24 hour period, that is, 12:00 am to 12:00 am (midnight
to midnight). For example, attending boarding school and staying
overnight, for a full 24 hour period, is an absence for ETT, whereas
attending school during normal hours and returning home that afternoon
is not considered an absence for ETT.

Note: ETT does not apply to Carer Payment (CP).

CA Health Care Card (HCC) after 63 respite days

If the child is expected to return to the care situation and an end date
for the ETT has been coded, the carer will remain qualified for CA on
'nil rate', and retain eligibility for the CA Health Care Card (HCC)
during the ETT period for up to 13 weeks (after the balance of 63
respite days has been used). An end date should be coded to allow the
system to continue the CA HCC. A new 13 week period commences each time
the child leaves care, provided an expected date of return has been
coded on the carer's record.

Pro rata payment

If the child is in the parent's care for some part of each fortnight,
eligibility for payment is maintained on a pro rata basis after the 63
days respite quota has been used. For example, if on the advice of the
carer, the child is at school Monday to Friday but returns home on
weekends. Service Officers should code Tuesday to Thursday as the
regular 24 hour (midnight to midnight) absence days out of care.

ETT nil rate advices

For absences due to ETT, once the 63 days of respite have been utilised,
an automatic advice regarding 'entering a nil rate period' will be
issued to payment level Carer Allowance (CA) carers who are not on a pro
rata rate of CA.

CA paid under CA auto provisions and CA Health Care Card (HCC) only
carers will not receive this letter.

The carer will be issued a reminder letter at 10 weeks if the expected
date of return is after 13 weeks of a nil rate period commencing, (if 1
January does not occur before the expiry of the 13 week period). The
reminder letter will notify the carer that the child's CA HCC will
cancel at the expiry of the 13 week period and that they have until that
date to notify any return to care which will occur within the 13 week
period.

If the carer has not notified a return to care date within the allowable
13 week period, the CA HCC will cancel with a reason of 'ETT' and an
advice issued automatically to both payment level carers on the nil rate
and HCC only carers.

Reclaim after cancellation

After cancellation the carer may reclaim, however they cannot requalify
while the child care receiver is absent from the care situation. The
child care receiver must again be receiving additional care and
attention on a daily basis in the home of the child care receiver and
carer to requalify for CA (child).

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

CA absence rules for ETT continue to apply to CA as normal. This means
that CA may change to a nil rate due to ETT when a carer has used their
63 TCC days. This may affect a carer's qualification for CP (XWP) -
Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering provisions for
ceased Wife Pension carers. If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment
level CA is suspended or cancelled, or changed to a CA Health Care Card
only or nil rate due to ETT, the system will automatically cancel CP
(XWP). A carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they
have a break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020.

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Adult care receivers

For an adult Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver, ETT does not apply.
There is no pro-rata allowance for adult CA care receivers after the 63
respite days quota has been used. The carer loses qualification to their
payment when their allocated 63 respite days per calendar year are
exhausted.

The Resources page contains links to information for carers and an
example of how to calculate the start and end dates for coding of
respite or hospitalisation days for Carer Allowance and Carer Payment.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) care receiver commences
or returns to work

View/Update Absence From Care online

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
