
Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03110010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for cancelling CP and CA using
the Carer cancellation and suspension workflow.

Initial decisions about suspensions and cancellations

Cancellation or suspension of CP or CA can only be done under the
following reasons of the Social Security Administration Act 1999 (SSAA).

-   s80 SSAA - loss of qualification
-   s81 SSAA – failure to comply with certain notices, or
-   s82 SSAA – failure to take action to obtain a foreign payment

The decision to either cancel or suspend is determined by whether the
loss of payment will be temporary or not. Any determination to cancel or
suspend must be documented with the reason and the section of the act
quoted.

To make initial decisions about suspensions and cancellations, see:

-   Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)
-   Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)
-   Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

CP and/or CA can be suspended or cancelled when a carer is no longer
entitled to the payment as a result of changes in their or their care
receiver's circumstances, or if they have failed to comply with the
requirements for payment.

A person (carer, care receiver, nominee or third party) advises the
agency of a change in circumstances which would result in cancellation
of the carer's payment. Under no circumstances should the Service
Officer cancel CP and/or CA unless it can be established that the carer
no longer qualifies for CP and/or CA. Where it cannot be established
that CP and/or CA should be cancelled, the Service Officer must send an
ACTDOC to CD1 for further investigation.

Example

A person contacts the agency to advise the carer is not providing
adequate daily care as the carer is working full time. Under no
circumstances should the payment(s) be suspended or cancelled unless
there is clear evidence supporting the statement, for example, the carer
notifies they are working full time.

The Service Officer must also adhere to Person Permitted to Enquire
(PPE) rules when discussing the information provided and are not to
release information if the person does not have permission to enquire.

If the decision to cancel CP is made by Services Australia, the Service
Officer must ensure that a letter is sent to the carer with the
cancellation reasons and review and appeal rights.

Suspension

A carer may not be eligible for CP and/or CA temporarily as a result of
changes in their circumstances. In such cases, payment can be suspended.
Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of entitlement and full
arrears are issued in most circumstances if the payment is subsequently
restored.

Reasons for suspension of CP and/or CA include:

-   direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the carer failed to reply to correspondence

If CP and/or CA has remained suspended for a period of 13 weeks, a
manual review will mature on the carer's record. Re-examine the original
decision to suspend and make a new decision to cancel or restore
payments.

If the carer does not contact after the suspension, or does not provide
the requested information, the suspended payments must be cancelled as a
result of the review. An advice of the cancellation will issue at this
time.

If a carer receives CA for more than one care receiver, it is not
possible to suspend one payment of CA. In these situations, as a matter
of urgency, contact the carer to obtain the information.

Automatic cancellation

A carer may not be eligible for CP and/or CA because of changes in their
or the care receiver's circumstances. Before cancelling a carer's
payment, take care to establish that the carer has lost entitlement to
that payment. The most appropriate way of achieving this is to code all
of the carer's and/or their care receiver's circumstances. This will
allow the system to cancel the carer's payment automatically following
reassessments where no continuing entitlements exist.

If the payment does not automatically cancel after circumstances are
coded, but the Service Officer makes a decision to cancel CP and/or CA,
the payments can be cancelled using the Carer cancellation and
suspension workflow.

If a care receiver advises the agency of a change in circumstances which
would result in cancellation of CP and/or CA, the Service Officer should
be satisfied that the information provided is correct before actioning
any cancellation. Such investigation should include a circumstance
(non-medical) review and may even need a report from a social worker as
to the degree of care and attention actually being provided by the
carer.

Note: CA cancellations as a result of the CA income test are generally
automatic. If a carer requests their CA be cancelled due to the CA
income test, manual cancellation is required. The Service Officer must
be satisfied the carer is not exempt from providing their income details
for the CA income test and the carer understands the CA eligibility
requirements. See Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing.

Manual cancellation

The Carer cancellation and suspension workflow will allow staff to:

-   cancel or suspend CP at payment level, and/or CA at payment level or
    care receiver level in a single activity
-   choose action on CP and not CA or vice versa. In some cases, the
    workflow will auto-populate the reason field where it is appropriate
    to cancel or suspend both CP and CA
-   perform different actions at the same time, for example, cancel CA
    if care requirements are not met and cancel CP if the carer's
    activities exceed 25 hours per week

Where the care receiver is not the carer's partner or child, the care
receiver's circumstances will need to be updated separate to the
workflow.

The workflow can only be actioned in the carer's record. Within the
workflow there will be detailed help and direct links to Operational
Blueprint.

Understanding the difference between carer level and care receiver level
of cancellation is extremely important when there is more than one care
receiver.

Note: if CA cancellation is a result of a carer not completing the
Update your caring details online task within 14 days following a change
of address, manual cancellation must be completed using Process Direct.
See Change of address for CP and CA.

Meaning of 'cancel at carer level'

For both CP and/or CA (for all care receivers) 'cancel at carer level'
is where the change in circumstances applies to the carer and all
payments are to cease, for example, where the carer has not provided
confirmation of identity for themselves.

Meaning of 'cancel at care receiver level'

A carer may receive CA for one or more care receivers and it may be
necessary to cancel a chosen care receiver(s) only where the change in
circumstances applies to the care receiver, for example, when
confirmation of identity has not been provided for the care receiver.
The payment will cancel for the chosen care receiver(s) only and CA may
remain current if there are other qualifying care receivers. It is not
possible to suspend payment at the care receiver level.

The workflow allows all current BA and CJBA codes to be selected.
However, it will recognise and prompt to hand off when a Service Officer
tries to use a code that is limited to carer Processing Service use.
When this occurs, the activity should be handed off to the appropriate
Processing Service for assessment and completion.

If the decision is to cancel (or suspend), ensure a letter is sent to
the carer with the cancellation reasons and their review and appeal
rights.

Suspending or cancelling Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

CP (XWP) cannot be cancelled manually at the care receiver level. This
is because care receiver assessments do not apply to CP (XWP). CP (XWP)
will auto cancel if the carer’s only or last payment level CA stops,
unless the carer is eligible for a bereavement continuation period. If
cancelled, it will auto restore if payment level CA entitlement is
reinstated, without a gap and within 13 weeks.

CP (XWP) can be manually suspended or cancelled at the carer level for
certain reasons only. This is because care requirements do not apply to
CP (XWP).

Customer contact

When a carer contacts about the suspension and/or cancellation:

-   fully explain the reason for the suspension/cancellation, and
-   give further details about the required documents, or advise the
    carer to attend the Service Centre so that the payment can be
    restored or they can claim another payment

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA)

Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Changing address (CLK)

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) turning 16 years of age

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Restoration of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Restoration Workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver has not
confirmed their identity

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
