
Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an institution 009-06040070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for when a care receiver permanently
enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an institution.

To be eligible for CP, the care receiver must require care permanently,
or for a minimum period of six months. In these cases, as the care
receiver has already been residing in an institution, it is likely they
have demonstrated they require care permanently.

On this page:

Care receiver permanently entering an institution

When a care receiver permanently enters an institution, they permanently
leave the care of their carer. Carers in receipt of Carer Payment (CP)
continue to receive payment for 14 weeks from the first date the carer
did not provide constant care. In most cases, it will be the day after
the person enters the institution.

There is no equivalent provision for Carer Allowance (CA). When a
permanent cessation of care occurs, CA should be cancelled from the
first date the carer did not provide care and attention.

A self-care unit or hostel providing only meals is not an institution.
In addition, an 'institution' does not mean a prison. If the care
receiver is imprisoned, the temporary cessation of care rules must be
examined to determine if the carer remains qualified for payment.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Wife Pension (WP) customers who were receiving payment level Carer
Allowance (CA) on 19 March 2020 were automatically transferred to Carer
Payment (CP) (XWP). CP (XWP) carers remain qualified as long as payment
level CA continues. The rules for CP when a care receiver permanently
enters an institution do not apply to CP (XWP) carers. This means CP
(XWP) customers will not continue to receive payment of CP for 14 weeks.

When the carer’s only or last payment level CA is cancelled from the
first date the carer ceased providing care and attention, then CP (XWP)
will automatically be cancelled. A carer will lose qualification for CP
(XWP) permanently if they have a break in payment level CA entitlement
after 19 March 2020.

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Care awaiting placement

A care receiver who has been assessed as 'care awaiting placement' may
be in either a hospital or an Aged Care or Multipurpose Service Facility
whilst waiting for a permanent placement. In these situations, the
following usually happens:

-   The care receiver is admitted to hospital
-   An Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) assessment occurs
-   The care receiver is assessed as care awaiting placement and either
    remains in the hospital or is transferred to an Aged Care or
    Multipurpose Service Facility on a temporary basis
-   The care receiver is transferred to an Aged Care or Multipurpose
    Service Facility on a permanent basis

Care in a hospital whilst awaiting placement would usually be considered
a temporary admission. The carer should be contacted to clarify whether
the care receiver is likely to return home. If the care receiver is
likely to return home, the hospitalisation and/or temporary cessation of
care provisions should be considered.

Care in an Aged Care or Multipurpose Service Facility whilst awaiting
placement would usually be considered a permanent admission to an
institution.

When determining the date of admission, consider the advice from the
carer and any other relevant factors before making a decision.

Care receiver enters supported accommodation

If a care receiver moves into supported accommodation, entitlement to CP
and/or CA will depend on the following factors:

-   Has the care receiver moved into the supported accommodation on a
    temporary or permanent basis? In some cases, the initial move may be
    temporary with an intention of making a permanent move
-   Is the carer continuing to provide constant care (CP) or 20 hours of
    care per week (CA) and they provide care on a daily basis?
-   What care is being provided by the supported accommodation? This can
    range from very little care to full time care

CP care receiver leaves the institution

A care receiver who is permanently admitted to an institution may
subsequently leave the institution and return to the care situation on
either a temporary or permanent basis.

CP care receiver leaves the institution on a temporary basis

There may be circumstances where a care receiver temporarily vacates the
institution, which is their usual private residence to stay with a carer
who is now claiming CP. The private residence of the carer would become
the home of the care receiver whilst they are temporarily absent from
the institution. The delegate needs to be satisfied that the carer is
providing constant care to the care receiver in a private residence that
is now considered the home of the care receiver. All other qualification
criteria for CP needs to be met including obtaining a qualifying score
under the ADAT and Australian residence etc.

To be eligible for CP, the care receiver must require care permanently,
or for a minimum period of six months. In these cases, as the care
receiver has already been residing in an institution, it is likely they
have demonstrated they require care permanently.

Where the care receiver has not formally left the institution (for
example, they are having a break for social leave) there is nothing in
the legislation to prevent continuation of CP for 14 weeks when they
return to the institution. However, the policy is that a person is not
entitled to a further 14 weeks continuation of CP in these situations.

Although there is no specific time limit in relation to the number of
days the care receiver may stay with the carer, care receivers are
likely to have to pay additional fees to the institution once they have
utilised their annual 52 days of ‘social leave’.

CP care receiver leaves the institution on a permanent basis

In these cases, Service Officers need to determine whether to reclassify
the most recent admission to the institution as a temporary admittance.
Based on this assessment, Service Officers need to decide if CP can be
continued or restored, utilising the Temporary Cessation Care (TCC)
provisions where appropriate. A DOC must be created on the carer’s
record with the decision on whether the care receiver’s recent admission
to the institution has been deemed temporary or permanent.

Where the care receiver was intending, or even trialling, to permanently
leave the institution, but this has not worked out, and they return to
the institution on a permanent basis the 14 week extension to CP can be
applied.

Special Circumstances

If the care receiver’s total TCC days exceed the allowable 63 days in
the calendar year, CP can only be paid for the entire period the care
receiver was in the institution if a TCC special circumstances extension
is granted.

Note: generally, a decision to continue payment on the basis of ’special
circumstances’ would only be made if the reason for ceasing care was
outside the control of the carer and consistent with the need for, and
provision of, personal care and attention. Delegation to determine
special circumstances extensions is at the APS 5/6 level.

CA care receiver leaves the institution

If the care receiver was permanently admitted to the institution and the
total TCC days for the calendar year did not exceed 63 days, the carer
may be able to remain eligible for CA until any remaining entitlement to
TCC days has expired

If the care receiver was temporarily admitted to the institution and the
total TCC days for the calendar year did not exceed 63 days, the carer
may be eligible to retrospectively access their remaining TCC
entitlement, which may allow for the restoration of the CA.

If the care receiver was in the institution for more than 63 days, the
TCC provisions would not usually apply. If there are special
circumstances involved this must be determined by an APS 5/6 level
officer or contact the Carer Helpdesk for assistance.

Care receiver is not likely to return home

If the care receiver is not likely to return home or has been admitted
to an Aged Care or Multipurpose Service Facility, and there are no
extenuating circumstances, then they are considered to have permanently
entered an institution. If the carer receives:

-   Carer Allowance (CA), their payment will be cancelled
-   Carer Payment (CP), section 198AAA of the Social Security Act
    applies and payment can continue for 14 weeks

The date of cancellation of CA would be from the date that the care
receiver was not expected to return home. In most cases, this would not
be the date that the care receiver was admitted to hospital, as the
initial admission is usually temporary. The date of cancellation would
be after admission to the hospital and up to the Aged Care or
Multipurpose Service Facility admission date.

Some hospitals, particularly in rural areas, may also contain government
funded aged care beds, or a multipurpose service wing. If the care
receiver has been admitted to a hospital with multiple facilities such
as these, ascertain whether the care receiver is in a hospital ward, a
government funded aged care bed, or in the multipurpose service wing.
The above guidelines should then be applied.

Carer commences work or study

Because a carer's CA is cancelled, subsequent actions by the carer after
the care receiver has entered the institution, like commencement of work
or study or bereavement, are not relevant.

For CP, the carer can commence work in excess of 25 hours per week
during the 14 week period from the date the carer ceased to provide
constant care and the care receiver entered an institution, as the usual
CP constant care criterion does not have to be met. All of the normal
income and assets rules still apply, which means the carer's rate of
payment may be affected by the income earned.

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

If the care receiver passes away during this 14 week period, and the CP
recipient and their care receiver were a couple, s198AAA ceases to apply
and section 237 (qualification for bereavement payments) may apply
instead. A new 14 week bereavement period may commence and the carer may
be eligible for a LBP. If the carer and the care receiver were not a
couple, the carer is not eligible for a LBP, but will continue to
receive CP until the 14 week period ends, as adjustment for the loss of
income support.

The Resources page contains an example of the date of event used when a
care receiver permanently enters an institution and an example of what
to do when an intended permanent entry changes to temporary. It also
contains a link to the Module AC - Accommodation.

Related links

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
