
Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas 009-03100030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for Service Officers to decide if
Carer Payment (CP) is payable to the customer while they are outside
Australia and for how long, when the portability script is not
available. It also explains the actions the Service Officer and the
customer are to take before the customer's departure.

On this Page:

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer or care receiver leaves Australia to live in another
country, cancel CP from the date of departure.

Some customers continuing to provide care may be able to transfer to CP
under an international agreement.

Temporary absence

CP is portable for the maximum portability period of up to 6 weeks as
long as the departure is temporary. CP can be paid outside Australia for
any reason, however, respite rules and portability rules must be
considered together to decide if payment can be made overseas.

CP can continue for more than 6 weeks while the carer is studying
overseas, if they are:

-   Studying full-time as part of their Australian course. This can
    include short holidays before, during or after the course. They must
    stay enrolled in the Australian course
-   Providing care to the care receiver
-   Not spending more than 25 hours per week away from the care receiver
    for work, study or training. This can include paid work,
    self-employment or voluntary work. It can include travelling time

If the customer is not able to return to Australia after the maximum
portability period, Centrelink has discretion to extend the period of
portability in very limited circumstances.

Some customers continuing to provide care after the maximum portability
period may be able to transfer to CP under an international agreement.

Add-on payments can continue during a temporary departure if the
customer remains qualified for the payment.

Note: the portability provisions differ between CP and Carer Allowance
(CA).

Respite rules

Discuss respite with the customer at this interview. Check the remaining
respite balance on the Absences Enquiry (ABCE) screen and manually
calculate when respite may run out before launching the Portability
Script - Departures and Returns, if the customer:

-   will not be travelling outside Australia with the care receiver, or
-   there will be periods when they will not provide care while outside
    Australia

The date of cancellation for exceeding respite must be input in the
script.

After running the Portability Script - Departures and Returns, it will
be necessary to use the Temporary Cessation of Care workflow to record
any absence from care. It is important to advise the customer that if
they use up all their respite days, their CP will be cancelled from that
date and they must reclaim on their return to Australia. In these cases,
payability outside Australia is limited to their remaining respite days.

If the carer and care receiver(s) travel outside Australia together,
respite is not accessed unless the carer ceases to provide care outside
Australia. Hospitalisation provisions also apply if an adult care
receiver is admitted to hospital while outside Australia.

If the carer travels outside Australia without the care receiver the
'respite period' allows the carer to have a break from their usual
caring role for up to 63 days in any calendar year without affecting
payment. However, they are subject to the maximum portability period for
carer payment, which is 6 weeks (or 42 days). Once the 'respite period'
is used up, if the carer has not returned to the caring role and/or if
they remain outside Australia (even where absence has not been for the
maximum portability period) cancel CP due to exceeding respite.

Portability Interview

Use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns to assess the
customer's entitlement to payment while overseas. Use the script also to
assess the customer's entitlement where they are only thinking about
going overseas and want to know about their payment before making a
final decision.

Send a letter to the customer confirming the advice given and providing
contact details for Services Australia while overseas.

Portability period

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes, a person is not inside Australia for any part
of the day they departed Australia, regardless of the time of departure.
If the customer is travelling outside Australia on a cruise, the date of
departure is the date the ship leaves the last Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as they are inside
Australia on that day (regardless of the time of return) and no longer
affected by portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for
example airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia
for portability purposes.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise the Australian
Government agency Services Australia when a Centrelink customer or child
leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses portability of the
payment, regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note:
Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system prompts them to contact the department.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, the payment may be
restored automatically or manually if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment ceasing.

A Carer Payment (XWP) customer loses their qualification for CP under
grandfathering provisions if they have a break in payment level Carer
Payment (XWP) can only be restored if their CA is reinstated without a
gap in entitlement. For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension
(WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Transferring to an international agreement

If a customer who is continuing to provide care is going to an agreement
country and the customer's payment will cancel on departure or after 6
weeks absence from Australia, it may be possible for them to transfer to
payment under an international agreement that covers Carer Payment.

Due to the complexity of the rules, refer all such cases to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) as soon as possible.

Customers paid using an international agreement

The relevant agreement determines the portability rules for customers
already paid under an agreement.

Customers travelling to New Zealand or paid under the New Zealand Agreement

Customers in receipt of Age pension, DSP or Carer Payment may be
affected by the portability and/or rate provisions of the New Zealand
Agreement if they are:

-   travelling to New Zealand
-   in receipt of a defined New Zealand benefit, or
-   paid their Australian payment by virtue of the Agreement

For more information, see New Zealand Agreement information.

The Resources page contains examples of portability of Carer Payment
(CP), links to the Services Australia website for information about
payments while outside Australian and travelling overseas with
medicines, links to relevant forms and contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Absences for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) overseas absences

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Carer Payment (CP) carer undertakes paid employment, self employment,
voluntary work, education or training activities

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Coding departures and returns for customer leaving Australia

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer payment (CP)
when the care receiver is absent

Discretion to extend portability period

International Social Security Agreements

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Portability of add-ons

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Returning to Australia

Student studying outside Australia

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Transfer to international social security agreements

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

View/Update overseas travel online

Assessing and coding employment income

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
