-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures for the lodgement, gathering of
information, and assessment of Carer Payment (CP) claims for care
receivers under the age of 16 years.

On this Page:

Purpose of CP

CP is an income support payment paid to carers who, because of the
demands of their caring role, are unable to support themselves through
substantial paid employment.

To be eligible for CP a carer must be providing a significant level of
constant care to a child (under 16 years), who needs care permanently or
for a minimum period of at least 6 months in most cases.

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD)

The DCLAD is used to determine if a child care receiver qualifies a
carer for Carer Payment. It comprises a Care Needs Assessment completed
by the carer and a medical report completed by a Treating Health
Professional (THP).

The criteria used in the assessment do not target particular medical
conditions. The tool uses specific questions relating to a broad range
of possible care needs that a care receiver may have. It is not
necessary for a care receiver's needs to score against all question
categories to be eligible for the payment. It is the combination of the
scores which determines eligibility for payment.

The care receiver’s language skills, self-care skills, social and
community skills, and functional ability are taken into account.
Behaviour and special care needs are also examined for the impact they
have on the care load. Some elements of the assessment, for example the
care receiver’s functional ability, are age adjusted to assess their
level of care needs compared to the care needs of other children of a
similar age. An additional set of questions are applied to children from
3 years of age to ensure the assessment considers developmental
milestones. This process is based on the expert advice of paediatric,
medical and allied health professionals from a variety of medical
professions who developed the assessment.

Constant care

A carer is said to provide constant care if they personally provide care
on a daily basis for a significant period during each day. The care may
be active, supervisory or monitoring. This includes circumstances where
the carer or care receiver is absent from the care situation for part of
the day, but the intensity of the care required and provided during the
remainder of any 24 hour period is such that it roughly equates to a
normal working day.

The assessing Service Officer has the delegation to determine if the
constant care provisions are satisfied, based on the medical report and
the Care Needs Assessment (CNA) Questionnaire provided with the CP
(child) claim. The constant care requirements are usually satisfied if
the Treating Health Professional (THP) report and CNA Questionnaire
result in a qualifying score for CP, or an assessment of terminal
illness unless there are circumstances indicating constant care is not
being provided. If there are circumstances that could indicate constant
care is not being provided, this can be taken into account in the
determination.

The Service Officer needs to consider the care receiver's medical
condition(s), the THP score, the CNA score, the THP and carer's
responses to the provision of significant care and any other relevant
factors. Any inconsistency needs to be considered and in some instances
clarified. For example: if the condition is consistent with high THP and
CAN scores but the THP report state significant care was not required,
we should clarify with the THP why they believe personal care is not
required for a significant period on a daily basis. It is possible they
have not considered the need for supervision/monitoring. Even if they do
not change their views on the need for significant care the delegation
rests with the Service Officer.

Constant care rules

In establishing constant care for child care receivers the following
rules apply:

The carer must be personally providing constant care for any of the
following:

-   a child under 16 years with a severe disability or severe medical
    condition
-   a disabled adult and 1 or 2 children with a disability or medical
    condition (multiple care)
-   2 to 4 children each with a disability or medical condition
    (combined care)
-   a qualifying child for a one-off period of at least 3 months but
    less than 6 months (short term care)
-   a qualifying child for a period of at least 3 months but less than 6
    months where the child's condition is of an episodic nature and
    likely to re-occur (episodic care), or
-   child care receivers under the exchanged care provisions

The carer advises they provide constant care to the care receiver in
their home

The Treating Health Professional (THP) indicates on their report that
either:

-   the child care receiver requires personal care, due to a severe
    disability or severe medical condition, for a significant period
    every day for 6 months or more. If the carer provides care for more
    than 1 care receiver, a response of 'No' or 'not sure' by the THP on
    the medical report or 'No' response by the carer is not an automatic
    assessment that constant care is not provided. Consider the total
    level of care provided to all care receivers. A carer should
    reasonably be expected to provide at least the equivalent of a
    normal working day in personal care. Also consider any factors
    indicating constant care is not being provided.
    If the carer provides care for 1 care receiver and there is a
    response of 'No' or 'not sure' by the THP, on the medical report,
    consider if constant care is being provided based on the information
    in the medical report and the CNA Questionnaire. Depending on the
    circumstances of the individual, clarification may be required from
    the THP
-   the care receiver is in the final phase of a terminal illness and is
    not expected to live for more than 24 months

Re-use and re-claim provisions

Re-use provisions allow eligible Treating Health Professional (THP)
Medical Reports and/or Care Needs Assessments (CNA) previously supplied
to be used for a subsequent claim. The online claim and First Contact
Service Offer (FCSO) workflow will identify the option to re-use this
data for the child care receiver if the most recent reports meet the
re-use provisions.

Re-claim provisions allow qualifying THP Medical Reports and CNAs
previously supplied to be used for a subsequent claim. Re-claim
provisions are automatically assessed when a carer claims online or FCSO
is run.

Grandfathering provisions

Carers whose CP were current or suspended on 30 June 2010 and were

-   granted CP (child) under the DCLAD (2009) or CA (child) under the
    Child Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) (2001) will
    maintain qualification and payability under their existing
    provisions. This remains until they are selected for review under
    DCLAD 2020 or lose qualification on or after 1 July 2010. This group
    of care receivers will not appear on the Carer Payment Grandfathered
    (CRGF) screen
-   granted CP (child) due to caring for a Profoundly Disabled Child
    (PDC), or two children who require the equivalent care of a PDC,
    will maintain qualification and payability under PDC provisions
    until they are selected for review under DCLAD 2020 or lose
    qualification on or after 1 July 2010. Carers in this group who
    reclaim CP (child) for the same care receiver from 1 July 2010 to 17
    August 2020 will be required to provide a DCLAD (2020) care load
    assessment and medical report. These groups of care receivers will
    appear on the  CRGF  screen

Qualification for CP under 16 years

Qualification for CP under 16 years is based on the circumstances of
both the carer and the care receiver and the provision of constant care.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website.

Contents

Carer Payment (CP) (child) short term care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) episodic care

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for 2 to 4 children each with a
disability or medical condition (combined care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2
children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) referrals for Carer Payment (CP)
(child)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) terminal illness

Related links

Initial contact by a carer

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

Insulin Pumps subsidy for young people with Type 1 Diabetes

Pension income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Re-use and re-claim provisions for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) and
Carer Payment (CP) (child) claims

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
