-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process CP and/or CA online claims,
Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) and paper claims using Process Direct.

Submitting claims and documentation

Carers can make a claim for CP and/or CA either by:

-   submitting an [] online claim
-   with help from a Service Officer running ACC, or
-   in limited circumstances by lodging a paper claim form

Carers cannot submit claims online or via ACC unless they have provided
all required documents (some exceptions apply).

Claims submitted using ACC need a verbal declaration. If the verbal
declaration is not complete and documented, send a Customer Declaration
Form (CDF), signed and scanned to the carer's record.

If the customer has accepted the declaration via the online account,
Online customer declaration accepted - Yes displays in the Customer
Claim Summary.

If ACC is used to submit a verbal claim on behalf of a customer and a
verbal declaration is completed, Staff assisted verbal declaration
accepted - Yes displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   Customer Claim Summary

Note: the declaration displays in the system it was originally confirmed
in. A customer may start a claim online or via ACC and then submit it
using the other system. See Claiming CP and/or CA.

Paper claim forms lodged at service centres

Check:

-   each question has been answered
-   the claim form signed
-   all required documents provided

If the carer has not provided all documents

Tell the carer:

-   what they need to provide
-   any delays in providing these documents will delay the processing of
    their claim

The paper claim must be accepted and scanned to the customer's record
immediately.

If required documents for an online or ACC CP and/or CA new claim are
lodged at a service centre, run the Request and Manage Customer Tasks
guided procedure to mark the corresponding task as provided.

Verifying partner details before finalising an online claim or ACC

If a customer advises they are partnered within an online claim or ACC,
the relationship status must be verified with both parties before the
customer's and partner's records are linked.

Verification can be given by the partner either:

-   through the 'Partner Confirmation Logon' service on the Services
    Australia website, using the Temporary Access Code (TAC) provided at
    the end of the claim
-   verbally if partner is present or
-   by completing a Partner details (MOD P) form

CP/CA claim work item

A Claim ID is created as a work item when:

-   the CP and/or CA claim has been submitted (online or via ACC) and
-   a Social Online Application (SOA) new claim work item is generated
    on the carer's record

The claim information can be viewed on the Transaction Summary (TS)
screen via the Customer and Claim information table. This includes key
information relating to the CP and/or CA claim work item in Process
Direct.

A SOA shell claim (with no claim information) is auto-created if a paper
claim (SA404, SA409, SA410 or SA411) is scanned onto the customer
record.

Claim assessment process

Process Direct is used to review the CP and/or CA claim information and
to process the claim.

Process Direct:

is used to check and record claim progress

contains the claim information provided by the carer online, collected
through ACC or manually recorded from the paper claim

lists documents the carer needs to provide

uploads claim data into a CP and/or CA claim activity (this applies only
to online claims and ACC)

contains functions needed to process claims such as:

-   the ability to view scans
-   make referrals
-   request information from the carer

includes staff tasks needing to be complete before the claim can be
finalised

Start date

From 1 July 2018, carers are generally granted CP and/or CA from the
date they submit a complete claim with all relevant supporting
documentation.

Intent to claim provisions

only apply to customers in vulnerable circumstances

CP and/or CA claims may be deemed to be made on the date Services
Australia was contacted or the customer started their online claim

a vulnerable circumstance must exist:

-   at any time during the 8 week period up to the contact date
-   the customer must be qualified on the contact date and
-   they must submit their claim within 14 days of the contact, or
-   within 13 weeks under special circumstances

Deemed claims under incorrect claim and inappropriate claim provisions
are not limited to customers in vulnerable circumstances.

After determining the date a claim was made, staff should assess if
backdating provisions apply. The correct start date for carers who
submit a Claim for Carer Allowance following Carer Payment Review
(SA341) form, is the date of receipt of the SA341 (the date the carer
lodges the SA341).

From 7 December 2020, employment income paid after the start date must
be assessed for the same period for which it is paid by the employer.

Identity Confirmation

When Identity Confirmation is not confirmed, a carer's identity must be
confirmed when claiming CP and/or CA. Exceptions may be made for
vulnerable customers.

Where a care receiver is a child attracting a Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
identity requirements are not required for the child care receiver. See
Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity.

Care receiver getting CA for another adult care receiver

If the carer claims CA for a care receiver, the care receiver cannot
also qualify for CA for another disabled adult.

Before granting, rejecting or cancelling any CA payments:

-   more details will be needed from the carer and the care receiver to
    clarify the circumstances and
-   confirm whether the care receiver has ceased providing care

Determining the start date for CA in this situation:

the decision is independent of

-   whether the care receiver has been paid CA
-   the date CA was cancelled, or whether the care receiver is entitled
    to CA

the start date determination should follow the normal start date
procedures that apply for new claims

Care receiver eligibility for income support payment

Tell the carer that a care receiver aged 16 years of age or over may be
eligible for an income support payment.

If the care receiver wants to make a claim, see Claiming income support
payments from Centrelink.

Multiple CP claims received

If a carer lodges multiple claims for CP for 2 or more care receivers,
find out who the carer is claiming for.

If a carer is already in receipt of CP for one care receiver and lodges
a secondary CP claim, find out if this is a change in care receiver.

Multiple care, combined care and exchanged care (child) must be
considered.

Note: See Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for 2 to 4 children
each with a disability or medical condition (combined care) if a carer
lodges a claim for CP for 2 to 4 children.

The Process page contains information about contacting customers with
multiple claims.

CP/CA and FTB

To receive CP or CA a carer is not required to receive FTB in respect of
a child care receiver. For CA, the child must be a dependent child of
the carer. For either CP or CA (auto) there is no requirement for the
child care receiver to be a dependent child of the carer.

Carer Payment (CP) (XWP) customer submits a claim for Carer Payment

A current Carer Payment (XWP) carer may wish to claim Carer Payment
(Standard) for benefits not available under CP (XWP). They can submit an
online claim while still current.

To process the claim:

-   cancel CP (XWP) from the date the claim is submitted, and
-   change the grandfathering status

If not eligible for CP (Standard):

-   the carer's CP (XWP) will be re-granted (if still eligible) and
-   the customer will be notified of both outcomes

It is not possible to claim CP (XWP) - a full assessment is required. If
found not qualified for CP under non-grandfathering provisions, grant
the customer CP (XWP) if eligible.

See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer or care receiver is deceased

If a carer or care receiver passes away before the claim is completed,
finalise the claim before the death action is completed. If the death
action has already been coded, see:

-   Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
    (CA), and
-   Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or
    Carer Allowance (CA) is finalised

Additional coding is needed within the claim to end date any Electronic
Messaging (EM) subscriptions.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for the Level 2 Policy Help Desk
-   links to mySupport
-   Process Direct resources
-   tables containing scenarios of where a medical report for a CP claim
    results in the cancellation of CA
-   tables for multiple claims lodged examples, and
-   QSS32 text

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT)

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Identify Confirmation

Alternative Identity

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Incorrect claims

Inappropriate claims

Calculating start day - general rule

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) claim

Waiting periods for income support payments

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
