
Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) 009-08060100

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Child Medical Reviews (CMR) for
carers who are only in receipt of CA (child) or Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)
carers receiving payment level CA (child).

Entitlement and review

CA entitlement is based on the medical condition of the child, and the
need for care due to the condition at the time of the claim or review.
In some cases, the child may qualify the carer for CA at the time of
claim, but once the child reaches a certain developmental milestone, it
is deemed that the condition may no longer need the level of care needed
to qualify the carer for payment.

Child Medical Reviews (CMR) apply to carers in receipt of CA child only
or CP (XWP) carers receiving payment level CA (child). The review
process coincides with patterns of childhood development and detects
changes in care arrangements. Carers are exempt from the medical review
if CA was granted less than 12 months before the scheduled review date,
or if they have been medically reviewed in the last 12 months.

Reviews will be carried out for carers who are assessed under the CA
combined care rules, if 1 or both care receivers reach the developmental
milestones. Carers who receive CP and CA under the CP combined care
assessment or multiple care assessment will be reviewed manually.

All CMRs use the Disability Care Load Assessment (Child) Determination
(DCLAD) (2010) to review carers and care receivers.

The frequency of medical reviews for children with certain illnesses
will vary because they are regarded as 'recognised disabilities' up
until the child turns a certain age. A medical review will be scheduled
at this time, to determine ongoing eligibility. Where entitlement to CA
continues, a subsequent medical review date for these cases will occur
at the next applicable age related review.

Developmental milestones

For the purposes of CA (child), developmental milestones are the stages
of a child's development at which the child should be able to perform
additional functional abilities according to their chronological age.

A CMR will auto-start when the child reaches the following development
milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years
-   13 years

If the carer is a member of a couple, and one receives CA and the other
receives CP for the same care receiver, these carers will not receive a
CMR.

Wife Pension transfers to CP (XWP)

CP (XWP) carers will be subject to Child Medical Reviews for CA (child)
if they get payment level CA (child) or care for a child care receiver
who qualifies for CA HCC only. CP (XWP) is CP that is paid under
grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.

A carer who is grandfathered as CP (XWP) remains qualified for CP (XWP)
provided they continue to get payment level CA without a break in
entitlement. This means that if the carer’s only or last payment level
CA is suspended, cancelled or changed to CA HCC only as a result of a
review or for any reason, CP (XWP) will auto-cancel. Qualification for
CP (XWP) is permanently lost if they have a break in payment level CA
entitlement. See Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

CA Health Care Card only reviews

CA Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews are included in the CMRs. The
purpose of a CA HCC only review is to determine:

-   a carer's ongoing entitlement to CA HCC only or
-   whether a carer may have become eligible for CA at payment level

See Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews.

CA (child) income reviews

From 20 September 2018, a $250,000 a year adjusted taxable income test
applies to CA payment and CA HCC only customers.

Carers are not subject to a CA income review while they are exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test. An exception
applies if the carer is only exempt because they or their partner
receive FTB, in this case they may need to complete a CA income review
triggered from the data matching process with the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).

See Reviews of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance.

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Related links

Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer
Allowance (CA) (child)

Assessing a recognised disability

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA)

Reviews of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Renewing the ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
