[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information about carer reviews. Carers who are
receiving Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) may be subject
to a medical review of the care receiver. The purpose of carer reviews
is to establish that the care receiver's care needs, disability and/or
medical condition continue to qualify the carer for CP and/or CA.

Government Intent

The purpose of carer reviews are to:

-   establish that the care receiver's care needs continue to qualify
    the carer for payment
-   establish that the carer continues to provide constant care for CP
    or additional daily care and attention for CA, and
-   determine if there are any changes in either their circumstances or
    the care receiver's circumstances
-   determine if the carer continues to qualify for CA under the CA
    income test

If a carer or care receiver advises they are affected by family and
domestic violence (FDV), or staff suspect they are, follow the Family
and Domestic Violence Support Model to determine an appropriate referral
and further agency support.

Carer reviews

Adult Medical Reviews are generated to carers that may be at risk of
being paid CP/CA incorrectly as the care receiver no longer has a
medical condition. A carer is selected for a review by meeting certain
conditions and predictors which fall into high, medium or low risk
groups.

Non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets Test Review is applied to
adult and child non-customer care receivers, when they have income
recorded within $5,000 of the applicable income threshold and/or assets
recorded in the medium or high assets value range. If the care receiver
has qualified their carer to CP by satisfying the non-customer income
and assets test, a review activity will mature on 1 November each year.

Adult Terminal Illness Reviews are conducted for all CP/CA (16 years of
age and over), carers caring for an adult with a terminal illness. The
review process commences 24 months after grant, then every 12 months
thereafter.

Child Terminal Illness Reviews are mandatory reviews for all carers
granted CP (child) due to caring for a child with a terminal illness.
Carers who are granted CP under child terminal illness provisions are
granted CA Auto. CP and CA will be reviewed 24 months after grant, and
then every 12 months thereafter.

Care Allowance Child Medical Reviews apply to carers in receipt of Carer
Allowance only (under 16 years).

Carers are reviewed at the following age milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years, and
-   13 years

Carers who do not receive CA at payment level, but are entitled to CA
Health Care Card (HCC) only, will also be reviewed when their care
receiver reaches the above age milestones.

Carer Payment Age Milestone Mandatory Reviews are mandatory age
milestone reviews for carers receiving CP with a care receiver under 14
years and 9 months of age. Carers also receiving CA will have their CA
reviewed at the same time. The review will commence automatically once
the child reaches the age of:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   13 years

Severe Multiple and Physical Disability Reviews are manual reviews where
a Manual Follow (MFU) up is created for child care receivers who
entitled their carer for CA because of this specific condition which is
on the List of Recognised Disabilities (LoRD). Carers are to be reviewed
when the child turns 6 months old.

Carer Payment Child Care Load and Medical Reviews automatically select
carers current on CP with a care receiver under 14 years and 9 months of
age. If the carer also receives CA (under 16 years) for the same child,
they will be reviewed for CA at the same time their CP is reviewed. A
carer is selected for a review by meeting certain conditions and
predictors which fall into high or medium risk groups.

Hospitalisation Reviews are undertaken for carers receiving CP and/or CA
for a child care receiver who is continuously hospitalised for over 12
weeks. A MFU will be generated and the 'Review of Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance while your child is in hospital SA396 form' must be
issued manually to the carer. After the care receiver has been in
hospital for a full 24 month period, a full medical and care load review
must be initiated.

Lower Adult Disability Assessment Determination (ADAD) Reviews are
manual reviews to ensure the carer who qualified for CP (adult) under
the provisions of Lower ADAD remain eligible for CP. The reviews are
generated by a MFU when the child of the care receiver turns 5 years and
9 months, and 15 years and 9 months of age.

A Carer Allowance Income Review is automatically generated on the
carer's record in Process Direct when the carer is selected for an
income test review. Carers receiving CA and CA HCC only, are reviewed to
determine if the carer’s and their partner’s combined Adjusted Taxable
Income is under $250,000 a year. The same income limit applies if the
carer does not have a partner.

Manual Reviews may be required when information is received that
indicates entitlement to CP and/or CA has been lost. There are no time
restrictions on when a manual review may be conducted, a manual review
can be started whenever it is deemed appropriate. A manual review may be
initiated but are not limited to the following:

-   Services Australia receives notification a carer or care receiver
    has returned to full time work
-   a carer or care receiver advises the agency the care receiver's
    medical condition has improved significantly
-   the agency has been advised by a third party the carer is no longer
    providing care for the care receiver

Note: the above scenarios are only examples, a review should be
commenced in any situation when entitlement to CP and/or CA may be lost.

Contents

Creating carer links within Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)
review activities

Extending the return date for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA) medical reviews

Medical reviews for child care receivers (CLK)

Reviews of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Related links

Reviews of the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Adult medical reviews for Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA)

Care Load reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child)

Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) and Health Care
Card (HCC) only Carer Allowance

Hospitalisation reviews for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
for a child under 16 years

Reviews of terminal illness for Carer Allowance (CA) (adult)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Recognised disability medical reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) child

Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health Care Card (HCC) only reviews

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

How to code and action a manual review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
