
Carer Allowance (CA) income test - acceptable evidence of income 009-18090457

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines acceptable proof of income for CA and how to
verify and update the information.

On this Page:

CA income test

From 20 September 2018, to be eligible for CA and CA Health Care Card
(HCC only), the carer and their partner’s combined Adjusted Taxable
Income (ATI) must be under $250,000 a year. The same income limit
applies if the carer does not have a partner.

Carers are considered to have met the income test while they are exempt
from providing their income details for the CA income test.

The CA income test is based on the ATI of the carer (and their current
partner) for the applicable financial year. It includes deemed income
from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60 years of
age or older.

For more information on CA income test see:

-   CA income test
-   CA income test - determining reference tax year and assessable
    income components

ATO and change of circumstance reviews

A CA income review may be issued to a carer who is not exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test if they:

-   have a change in circumstances, or
-   are identified by an ATO data-match

See CA income review processing.

Evidence required for CA income

When providing income details, carers may be prompted to provide these
supporting documents:

-   Details of income stream product (SA330) form or a similar schedule
-   Documents and an explanation to verify the change in circumstances
    which led to their income (or their and their partner’s combined
    income) being lower in the current financial year

No evidence of the previous years or the year prior adjusted taxable
income is required. Carers are not required to provide their Notice of
Assessment from the Australian Taxation Office.

Deemed income from account-based income streams is included in the CA
income test. The carer or their partner must provide a SA330 form or
similar schedule from their provider, before a new account-based income
stream can be added or (in some cases) an existing account-based income
stream can be updated. See CA income test - determining reference tax
year and assessable income components.

The SA330 form or a similar schedule will not be requested if the
information is already on the carer’s or their partner’s record, unless
the carer changes the account balance in the online claim or online
review. If the carer provides a paper claim form or paper review form,
they will be prompted to provide an SA330 form if the details have
changed.

Data matching with income stream providers means the current balance of
account-based income streams will be regularly updated. See CA income
test - determining reference tax year and assessable income components.

Returning documents

A carer may be required to provide documents supporting the information
declared in their claim or review before it can be submitted.

These documents must be provided when the claim or review is:

-   [] submitted online via Upload documents
-   lodged at a service centre, or
-   via post or fax

Carers who return their documents to their nearest service centre must
provide their Claim or Review ID number.

For more information, see CA income review processing.

Original documents not required

The carer is not required to supply original supporting documents -
copies are acceptable.

Acceptable evidence for a current year estimate

If the carer’s combined Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the past year
they selected was too high, their CA qualification may be assessed using
a current year estimate of income.

They need to meet the acceptable reasons for using a current year
estimate for the CA income test. Note: coronavirus (COVID-19) impacts
are now considered an acceptable reason. See Carer Allowance CA) -
determining reference tax year and assessable income components.

Carers must provide suitable evidence for their current year estimate to
be considered. This includes:

-   an explanation of the change of circumstances and how it affects
    their current year income
-   documents to verify their change of circumstances

Verifying income for the CA income test

Three categories of verification of income may be required for the CA
income test:

-   current year estimate
-   account-based income stream
-   verification of Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) components

See the Process page for more information.

Evidence not required for CA income

The Services Australia uses information from the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) to verify individual Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)
components for a person who is required to lodge a tax return. A CA
income review will be created where a person meets certain risk profile
rules.

Individual ATI components provided through the online claim or online
review will be uploaded to Process Direct, except in the case of a
review not automatically completed. If a review is not auto-completed or
in the case of online claims, Service Officers must carefully consider
the information provided, especially if income is close to the limit or
a current year estimate is provided. See the Process page for more
information.

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Carer Allowance (CA) income review online service

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
