
Carer Allowance (CA) Income Review online service 009-18090456

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how carers and their nominees can complete a CA
Income Review online.

Services carers can access online

Carers registered online will be able to log on as an authenticated
customer via myGov to:

-   view the CA income review task
-   complete an existing CA income review
-   submit an existing CA income review

Carers cannot delete or cancel an existing CA income review. If their
entitlement has cancelled and the carer accesses their online account
within 13 weeks of the cancellation date, the CA income review will be
available for the carer to complete. If a carer accesses their online
account 13 weeks after the CA cancellation date, the CA income review
will no longer exist.

CA income reviews

From 20 September 2018, a $250,000 a year adjusted taxable income test
applies to CA and CA Health Care Card (HCC) only.

To be eligible for CA, the carer and their partner’s combined adjusted
taxable income must be below $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner.

Carers are not subject to the CA income test or a CA income review while
they are exempt from providing their income details for the CA income
test. However, carers who are only exempt because they or their partner
currently receives Family Tax Benefit, are subject to Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) triggered CA income reviews.

From 1 July 2019, a CA income test review may be issued where a carer
who is not exempt from providing their income details for the CA income
test, experiences a change in circumstances or is identified by an ATO
data-match, see Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing. Reviews
may be issued automatically in some circumstances or manually for
others.

CA income reviews are used to check that the carer’s adjusted taxable
income (or their and their partner’s combined Adjusted Taxable Income
(ATI) if applicable) is under the CA income limit.

The CA Income Review online service allows current CA carers to respond
to a CA income review through the online channel.

The online service is the recommended channel because it is easier and
faster for carers and allows staff to process the reviews efficiently.
Many reviews lodged through the online service will be automatically
completed without staff intervention.

When a review is required

A CA income review is initiated if the carer is not exempt from
providing their income details for the CA income test and one of the
following occurs:

-   The carer was current on 20 September 2018 and was selected at that
    time to provide income details
-   The carer lodged their CA claim before 20 September 2018 and was
    granted after this date without Adjusted Taxable Information (ATI)
    information
-   The carer has lost their exemption from the CA income test
-   It is unable to be determined if the carer has an exemption from the
    CA income test
-   The carer has been linked to a new partner Note: a review is not
    required if the carer becomes single, widowed divorced or separated
-   The carer has notified they or their partner now have an
    account-based income stream and the account holder is 60 years of
    age or older - the Service Officer manually issues an SA489 – Carer
    Allowance adjusted taxable income details form. Data-matching with
    income stream providers identified an undisclosed account-based
    income stream, the account holder is 60 years of age or older, the
    new product is added and the department either holds current ATI
    information or current information is held but the ATI and deemed
    income is over the limit
-   The carer has notified their ATI for the previous tax year was over
    the limit - the Service Officer manually issues an SA489 – Carer
    Allowance adjusted taxable income details form
-   Data matching with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
    triggered the review

CA carers must have a benefit status of 'current' or 'assessed' for
their review to be triggered. If the carer subsequently becomes exempt
from providing their income details for the CA income test before
submitting the review, the review will auto-finalise. If the carer loses
their exemption at a later date, a review may be required at that later
time.

Carers in a postcode declared as a disaster area will have their CA
income review delayed until the disaster rule is lifted.

Automatic CA income test reviews

The system will send current carers receiving CA a letter advising they
need to complete and submit a CA income review within 56 days of the
review being issued. At 28 days, a reminder letter will be issued to
carers who have not responded to the review request.

Automatic reviews will be issued for the following circumstance:

-   The carer has lost their exemption from the CA income test
-   It is unable to be determined if the carer has an exemption from the
    CA income test
-   The carer has been linked to a new partner, Note: a review is not
    required if the carer becomes single, widowed divorced or separated
-   Data-matching with income stream providers identified an undisclosed
    account-based income stream, the account holder is 60 years of age
    or older, the new product is added and the department either holds
    current ATI information or current information is held but the ATI
    and deemed income is over the limit
-   Data matching with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
    triggered the review

The letter explains how to complete the review online, letter content
will vary depending on whether the carer:

-   receives their Centrelink letters to their myGov Inbox
-   has a Centrelink online account but does not receive letters to
    their myGov Inbox, or
-   does not have a Centrelink online account

Carers who do not have a Centrelink online account and/or have a
Centrelink online account not linked to a myGov account are advised on
the letter to create one.

Carers who do not have a Centrelink online account can download the
Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) form from the
Services Australia website.

CA income review information can be found on the department's website by
searching using these words or by navigating to the Managing section for
Carer Allowance.

The Resources page contains a link to Centrelink online guides for help
getting started, and to the Services Australia website for the SA489
form.

Manual CA income test reviews

There is no online option for the Carer Allowance income review that has
been manually issued. Examples of where a review should be issued
manually are:

-   the carer has notified they or their partner now have an
    account-based income stream and the account holder is 60 years of
    age or older
-   the carer has notified their ATI for the previous tax year was over
    the limit

If a carer contacts to advise a change of circumstance or request a
reassessment of their (and their partners) adjusted taxable income
(ATI), a Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details (SA489) should
be sent to the carer via the Mail Forms guided procedure and a review
recorded for its return (see: Requesting information (CLK)).

Carers who receive Centrelink letters to their myGov Inbox

Carers subscribed to receiving letters via their myGov Inbox are advised
in the review letter to select the link in their myGov Inbox. The link
goes directly to the Carer Allowance Income Review online service.

Information is included for Centrelink nominees, advising to select the
'Carer Allowance Income Review' from the 'Tasks' section in the carer's
Centrelink online account or from the Carers menu. This is because the
link is not sent to the nominee’s myGov Inbox.

Carers with a Centrelink online account not receiving letters to their myGov Inbox

Carers who are not subscribed to receive letters to their myGov Inbox,
but have a Centrelink online account, can create a myGov account and
link it to their Centrelink online account. A message containing a link
will be sent to the carer's myGov Inbox directing them to the online CA
income review.

The carer is also advised that they can select the 'Carer Allowance
Income Review' from either:

Tasks section in their Centrelink online account, or

Menu in their Centrelink online account by selecting:

-   Carers, and
-   Carer Allowance income review

Carers not subscribed to Centrelink Online or myGov

Carers who do not have a Centrelink online account are advised to create
one or download the Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income details
(SA489) form from the Services Australia website. The Resources page
contains a link to this form.

There are no forms included with the review letter. If SA489 form is
returned by post or in person, it must be scanned.

Carers must submit their Carer Allowance Income Review online or lodge
the SA489 form within 28 days. Otherwise their payment and/or CA Health
Care Card (HCC) only will be cancelled FRC - Failed to Reply to
Correspondence.

Returning documents

Carers may be prompted to provide the following supporting documents:

-   Details of income stream product (SA330) form or a similar schedule
-   documents and an explanation to verify the change in circumstances
    which led to their income (or their and their partner’s combined
    income) being lower in the current financial year

If prompted, these documents are required before the carer can submit
their review. Carers can upload these from the Next Steps page using
Upload documents. Uploading of any required documents should be
completed within the review task. See the Resources page for more
information about carers that upload documents outside their review
task.

A CA income review is automatically generated on the carer’s record in
Process Direct when the carer is selected for an income test review. The
status of the review changes when:

-   the carer submits their CA income Review through the online service
-   The carer uploads the paper Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income
    details (SA489) form through their online account, or
-   a Service Officer scans a paper SA489 to the carer’s Centrelink
    record

Tax Notices of Assessment (TNA) cannot be accepted in place of a review.

Online versus service centre lodgement

Carers may choose to upload their CA income review Required documents or
the Carer Allowance adjusted taxable income (SA489) form online, or take
them to their nearest service centre.

Service Officers scanning CA income review forms and associated
documents must ensure the first page of the document to be scanned
displays the barcode. For example, page 1 of the SA489.

This ensures the expected processing checks are performed and the
Customer Relationship Management System is prompted to update the CA
income review activity status ready for processing.

Income review not lodged on time

From 1 July 2019, carers selected for an automatic CA income review are
sent a letter asking them to complete their income review within 56
days. At 28 days, a reminder letter will be issued to carers who have
not responded to the review request. The CA income review will result in
cancellation of the carer’s CA if the carer fails to submit the review
by the due date (56 days from the date of issue).

The carer can however submit the review within 13 weeks following
cancellation of their CA entitlement. If CA is cancelled for failing to
submit the review, the review will remain available on the carer’s
online account for a further 13 weeks after cancellation. For more
information about restoring CA following a cancellation for failing to
respond to the CA income review, see Carer Allowance (CA) income review
processing.

Eligible carers will continue to receive their payment or concession
card from the date they submit a completed review if:

-   The review activity auto completes once submitted, and the carer
    remain qualified for CA
-   The carer submitted their review before the due date but the review
    is not automatically processed. Entitlement to CA will continue
    until the review is processed and the result determined
-   The review requires manual intervention by staff (does not auto
    complete or is a paper form) and the carer is assessed as remaining
    qualified for CA

Review result

When the CA income review is finalised, the result will either be
continuation or cancellation of CA. If CA (child) is cancelled, the CA
Health Care Card will also cease. Cancellation will be due to either
excess income or a current year estimate not being accepted.

Carers will not receive an outcome letter following finalisation of the
review if their CA is to continue as they have been assessed as meeting
the income test. If a carer’s payment is to cancel as a result of the CA
income test they will receive written notification of the cancellation
and their review and appeal rights.

For more information, see CA income review processing.

The Resources page contains FAQs, links to the Services Australia
website and forms.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance (CA) Income test - acceptable evidence of income

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Upload documents service

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) Child to Adult Transfer
(CTAT) for further information

Online access to services via myGov

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
