
Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) absences where qualification is from the combined disabilities of more than one care receiver 009-06040060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment
(CP) where the combined disabilities of more than one care receiver
forms part of the qualification for payment and looks at what happens
when one of the care receivers is absent . It also explains how to code
these absences.

Absences from caring

CP and CA carers have up to 63 days per calendar year where they can be
temporarily absent from the caring situation and still qualify for
payment. This is called a 'respite' absence. Carers caring for an adult
16 years and over, are also allowed 63 days when the care receiver is
receiving care in hospital and the carer is participating in that care.
This is called a 'hospitalisation' absence. Note: there is no
hospitalisation limit for child care receivers, however the 63 day
respite limit still applies and all absences must be coded. When either
of the care receivers are absent, the same absence period must be coded
on the absences screens of every care receiver included in the combined
qualification. This is the case even if only one of the care receivers
has the absence.

If the carer is absent due to being overseas, the rules for temporary
cessation of care and portability may differ between CA and CP depending
on the situation. However the respite and portability rules must be
considered together. See Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
interaction of portability and temporary cessation of care (respite)
rules.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for two to four children each
with a disability or medical condition (combined care)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) interaction of portability
and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Assessment of circumstances for couples separated due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
