-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for recording absences for Carer
Allowance (CA) when the care of the care receiver is shared between two
eligible carers and the care receiver is absent.

On this Page:

Exchanged care provisions

Exchanged care provisions for CA child care receivers usually apply when
the two carers are separated or divorced parents of the care receiver
and one or both carers also receive Carer Payment (CP). However, shared
care can also apply to other CA cases.

Shared care for Carer Allowance

Shared care for CA may be applied when two carers regularly provide care
and attention to the same care receiver. In this case both carers may be
eligible to claim a share of CA each, whether the second carer claims or
not. Care must be shared regularly for shared care provisions to apply.
Note: the application of hospitalisation and respite provisions for
shared care arrangements may lead to complications which must be
discussed with the carers.

Reminder: while shared care provisions do not apply to Carer Payment
(CP), the shared care arrangement must be considered when determining
eligibility or continuing eligibility for CP. See Eligibility for Carer
Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years or over and Assessing
Carer Payment (CP) when the care is shared.

Shared care - one person claims Carer Allowance

A carer who shares care of an adult or child care receiver with another
carer is entitled to receive 100% of the maximum rate of CA when the
other carer has not made a claim for CA, or has made a claim that has
not been assessed (Section 964 of the Social Security Act). This applies
regardless of the number of days of care provided by the qualified carer
who has claimed. That is, they may only provide care for one day per
week/fortnight, and still be paid the maximum rate of CA, as long as the
care receiver/s continue to receive care and attention on a daily basis
from either of the two carers in the private residence of the carer and
the care receiver (for CA child and CA adult co-resident cases). CA can
only be shared between two carers who together are responsible for
providing care and attention each day of the week. Care may also be
provided by a third or subsequent carer however CA can only be shared
between two qualified carers.

A second person claims Carer Allowance for the same care receiver/s

A carer who shares care of an adult or child care receiver with another
carer is entitled to receive 100% of the maximum rate of CA until
another carer qualifies for CA for the same care receiver, and a
declaration is made by the secretary in accordance with Section 981.

When shared care provisions do not apply

When two members of a couple share the care of a care receiver, shared
care provisions cannot be applied. Share care provisions will also not
apply when, one carer lives with the adult care receiver (section 954)
and the other carer does not. In this case, both carers could not
qualify for CA at the same time. For example, a co-resident carer
provides care Monday to Friday and a non co-resident carer provides care
on Saturday and Sunday. Neither qualify for CA as the care is not
provided by two co-resident or two non co-resident carers.

In the case of a child care receiver, the child must be a dependent
child of both carers. If the care is shared between a parent and a
grandparent it is highly unlikely that this will be the case. CA can
only be paid to the carer who has the dependent child. If the shared
care provisions do not apply and the arrangement is temporary, then the
temporary cessation of care (TCC) provisions may apply whilst the child
is in the care of the other carer. If the shared care provisions do not
apply and the arrangement is not temporary, then the carer may loose
entitlement to CA if daily care is not being provided. This needs to be
investigated. Whilst there are similar rules for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), to qualify for FTB a customer requires an FTB child rather than a
dependent child. FTB will be paid on the percentage of care provided
even if the second carer does not claim or qualify for FTB.

Backdating

If a decision is made to pay CA to two carers under the shared care
provision, the date of effect is the date the Section 981 decision is
made, other date of effect provisions (for example, deemed date of
claim, backdating, arrears) do not apply.

When an absence should be recorded

When CA care is shared, recording or updating an absence on one carer
will automatically record or update the record of the other carer,
provided the other carer currently receives a part rate of CA for the
same care receiver. For CA, 63 days of temporary cessation of care are
allowed for each care receiver. This means that if the rate of CA is
shared, the 63 days are also shared, which is why the absence is coded
on both carers' records.

If shared care CA is restored or granted and backdated, absences that
apply to the other carer may need to be applied to both carers. A
warning will display in these cases, advising the Service Officer to
check the other carer's record for temporary cessation of care dates
during the restoration/backdating period.

No care and attention from either carer

An absence should only be recorded if the care receiver has not received
any care and attention from either of the two carers for a period of 24
hours from midnight to midnight. If one carer temporarily provides extra
care on a short term basis when the other carer would normally have
provided this care, this is not temporary cessation of care.

Daily care and attention from another person

A warning will appear when coding a shared care respite absence,
reminding the Service Officer to check if the care receiver is in the
care of the other carer, whether or not the other carer receives a part
rate of CA.

If the care receiver continues to receive care and attention on a daily
basis from one carer or the other, under shared care provisions, then
temporary cessation of care has not occurred. Therefore, when the care
receiver is in the care of one of the carers as part of a regular shared
care arrangement, temporary cessation of care days should not be
recorded against the other carer who is not providing the care.

In the case of a child care receiver or co-resident adult care receiver,
temporary cessation of care has not occurred if daily care and attention
continues to be provided by a current partner or another person who
lives with the carer.

In the case of a non-co-resident carer, temporary cessation of care has
not occurred if the daily care and attention continues to be provided by
another person who does not live with the care receiver.

Hospitalisation and shared care

If shared care provisions apply, and the care receiver is hospitalised
for a 24 hour period (from midnight to midnight) the hospitalisation
will be automatically recorded on both carers' records. As the care
receiver is in hospital, it is not necessary to check if they are with
the other carer, so no warning is displayed when the hospital absence is
coded. Refer to normal coding for hospitalisation. Note: there is no
limit to hospitalisation for child care receivers, however respite
limits still apply and absences must be coded.

Exchanged care between two separated parents

When Carer Payment (CP) (child) is paid under exchanged care provisions,
CA is paid to each parent based on the proportion of care they regularly
provide for each child. Therefore temporary cessation of care is always
assessed based on shared care provisions.

For example, if one parent provides more or less care than normal, this
is not temporary cessation of care for CA if the other parent is
providing that care. Temporary cessation of care only occurs for CA if
neither of the parents (or their current partner or another person they
live with) provides care for a 24 hour period from midnight to midnight.

Absence overseas and shared care

When a carer and/or care receiver advises of an overseas absence, it may
be necessary to code portability details as well as coding the respite
absence. There are separate procedures concerning respite absences, and
on portability for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
depending on the payment the carer receives.

Under portability provisions, CA may be portable for up to six weeks. In
shared care cases, each carer may still access up to six weeks
portability, subject to respite considerations and whether shared care
provisions continue to apply.

Generally, if the care receiver receives care and attention daily from
one or other of the carers who normally share care on a fortnightly
basis (whether they have both claimed or not) temporary cessation of
care has not occurred. However, if the care receiver does not accompany
the carer overseas and remains with the other carer for an extended
period, the Service Officer should be satisfied that CA can continue to
be paid based on shared care provisions.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer Payment (CP) (child) exchanged care

Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP) interaction of portability and
temporary cessation of care (respite) rules

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding a regular absence for Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP)
when the care receiver is absent

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences

Carer Allowance (CA) child care receiver undertakes education, training
or treatment

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
