
Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA) 009-03050040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in the actioning of changes
to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA). It does not include information
about the effect of the change of care on Family Tax Benefit (FTB), if
it is received by the carer for the care receiver(s).

Carer Allowance changes to shared care

When a carer contacts to advise of a change to the shared care
arrangements for Carer Allowance (CA), the Service Officer needs to
ensure the relevant information is gathered and verified, that the
carers continue to satisfy the qualifications for shared care and that
the records are updated to reflect the new circumstances. If the shared
care has changed a new declaration is to be made and implemented from
the date the declaration was made.

If 2 carers who receive a shared care rate of CA for the same care
receiver advise that they have become partnered, CA can no longer be
paid to both partners. It must be determined who is the primary carer.
When CA is cancelled for one carer, the primary carer will automatically
receive 100% of the payment. Letters will be sent to both carers to
advise who the primary carer is and whose payment is to be cancelled. If
the carer is unable to identify who is now the primary carer, CA is to
be suspended for both carers.

Note: while shared care provisions do not apply to Carer Payment (CP),
the shared care arrangement must be considered when determining
eligibility or continuing eligibility for CP. See Eligibility for Carer
Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years or over and Assessing
Carer Payment (CP) when the care is shared.

If the carer is also in receipt of FTB for the care receiver, the
qualification for FTB must also be assessed.

Dispute between carers

If there is a dispute between two carers over the care being provided
see Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
customers

Related links

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same
care receiver

Shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
