
Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) is finalised 009-03090070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for finalising CP and/or CA claims
when the care receiver has passed away. It applies when a care receiver
passes away after the carer has started a claim, or when the carer
claims using backdating provisions, even if the care receiver has
already passed away.

Finalise CP and/or CA claim before death action

In these situations, do not action the death on the care receiver's
record until the CP and/or CA claim is finalised. It may be necessary to
suspend the deceased care receiver's payment and inhibit the advices,
until the CP and/or CA claim is ready to be finalised. If the date of
death is not recent, calculate the correct arrears owing and zero out
any arrears of CA past the date of death to avoid overpayment.

Referral to the social worker is not required where:

-   the carer is under 18 years of age or over 80 years of age and would
    normally be referred to a Centrelink social worker for assessment,
    and
-   the care receiver has passed away prior to the claim being finalised

Make a decision on the evidence available. If required, seek advice from
the Carer Helpdesk.

Letters to the carer

When the CP and/or CA claim is finalised, the system-generated grant
and/or rejection letters for a deceased care receiver are held by the
system as they are not appropriate to send to the carer.

If granting or rejecting a CP and/or CA claim for the carer of a
deceased care receiver, a manual Q999 must be issued to the carer. The
Resources page contains examples of suggested text for a manual letter.

Bereavement assistance

Qualification for bereavement assistance depends on whether the carer
qualifies for CP and/or CA. Before granting a claim for CP and/or CA,
the Service Officer should ensure that the carer is eligible for CP
and/or CA during the bereavement period and if so, that arrears are not
paid for more than 14 weeks from the date of death.

If the carer qualifies for:

CA, bereavement assistance may be payable:

-   if the care receiver was a child
-   under certain circumstances if the care receiver was an adult

CP, bereavement assistance is payable

Code death action on care receiver's record

When the CP and/or CA claim is finalised and arrears have been adjusted
(if applicable), the Service Officer can then code the death action on
the care receiver's record.

If the care receiver is:

a child, the death action should cancel the CA and the system will
assess the carer's eligibility for a lump sum Bereavement Payment of CP
and/or CA. It will also assess entitlement for CP for the bereavement
period.

an adult and the carer is in receipt of:

-   CA only, the system will automatically cancel CA. The carer will not
    be eligible for a Bereavement Payment
-   both CP and CA, the system will automatically cancel CA and assess
    the carer's entitlement to CP during the bereavement period and
    eligibility for a lump sum Bereavement Payment for that care
    receiver
-   both CA and an income support payment (other than CP) that does not
    qualify them for a Bereavement Payment, the system will cancel CA at
    the end of the bereavement rate continuation period and assess the
    carer’s eligibility for a lump sum CA Bereavement Payment
-   both CA and an income support payment that qualifies for a
    Bereavement Payment, the system will automatically cancel CA

The death action should generate an appropriate bereavement letter
ensuring the carer is sent a grant letter and a bereavement letter.

Death action processed before payment claim is finalised

If the death action has already been actioned on the care receiver's
record before the CP and/or CA claim is processed, the death action
should be undone, taking care not to pay arrears past the date of death.
Once the claim is finalised, the death action should be recoded, taking
care not to duplicate any lump sum Bereavement Payments if already paid.
Note: undoing a death action may only be completed by a staff member at
APS5 level or above.

Note: undoing a death action cannot be completed within Process direct.
The resurrection of the record must be completed in Customer First. Once
the death action has been undone and finalised, the claim can be
processed in Process Direct.

The Resources page contains samples of suggested text for a manual
letter.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is 16 or
over

Coding a claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is under
16

Carer Supplement

Death of a carer

Death of a care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment (CP)

Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Undoing a death action

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
