
This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information on when a Carer Allowance (CA) carer
must advise of a change in their circumstances.

On this page:

Ongoing entitlement

Service Officers must determine the continuing entitlement to Carer
Allowance (CA) when a carer advises of a change in their circumstance.
There are possible consequences when a change of circumstance is
notified for carers who are in receipt of CA.

Notifiable events

Carers are advised of what they must notify in their grant notification
letter and on the back of each reassessment letter sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes a carer must advise. As
circumstances vary for each carer, this list is not exhaustive.

Changes of circumstances that may require an update to a carer’s record
include any change to:

-   employment
-   contact details, including changes to address and/or telephone
    number
-   residence status
-   temporary absence (for example, care receiver commencing education,
    employment or training)
-   temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation
-   the care receiver’s condition or amount of care provided
-   relationship status
-   in receipt of an account-based income stream if the account holder
    is 60 years of age or older
-   Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the previous financial year - if
    this was $250,000 or more (including deemed income from
    account-based income streams)

Change of address and returned mail

All customers are required to notify Services Australia of a change of
address within 14 days of moving.

When CA (child) is paid, care and attention must be provided in a
private home that is the residence of the carer and the care receiver.
CA (adult) can be paid under 2 different provisions of the Social
Security Act. Under section 954, care and attention must be provided in
a private home that is the residence of the carer and the care receiver.
Under section 954A, CA (adult) may be paid if the care is provided in
the private home of either the carer or care receiver.

A review must be carried out if either person notifies a change of
address, to ensure the carer is still eligible.

In cases where a carer’s mail has been returned from an address that is
still held on the department's records, an attempt must be made to
contact the carer or their Correspondence nominee by phone.

If the correct address details cannot be obtained, the attempts to
contact should be recorded on the carer’s record, and payment suspended
whereabouts unknown.

Consumer Price Index (CPI) activities for Carer Allowance customers

CA CPI activities normally auto-complete, but can fail for several
reasons, including:

-   changes of circumstance that prevent auto-completion
-   cessation of care or a carer link being end-dated

If a CA CPI activity presents, staff need to attempt to complete the
activity in the first instance. Some activities will complete without
any issues when taken to the Assessment Results (AR) screen.

For other activities, the CA CPI activity can result in a cancellation
of the customer’s payments, causing a potential overpayment. Investigate
these outcomes the same as any overpayment. Consider if:

-   care has ended
-   a carer link was end-dated and why
-   there were other changes in circumstances

Cancellation/overpayment reason unknown

Carer processing staff are to email business.process.carers for
investigation when unsure of the reason:

-   the record is cancelling, or
-   an overpayment is being created in the provisional Activity

Do not complete these activities until the cause for
cancellation/overpayment has been determined and investigated.

When a cause for cancellation or overpayment has been determined,
processing staff must action the records accordingly. If there is an
overpayment, start normal debt recovery actions and document all actions
on the customer’s record.

Note: do not place these activities on hold.

Contents

Commencing or returning to work for Carer Allowance

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Completing the form - Review of care provided for Carer Payment and/or
Carer Allowance when caring for a person 16 years or over (SA010)

Related links

Carer Allowance (CA) income test - determining reference tax year and
assessable income components

Carer Allowance (CA) income review processing

Carer Allowance (CA) Income Review online service

Carer Allowance (CA) income test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
