
Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim 009-03040120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reasons for rejecting a claim for CA and the
actions to process the claim.

Reasons for rejecting a CA claim

A carer who has lodged a claim for CA may not be eligible because they
do not meet the basic qualifications or payability for CA.

Sometimes carers may have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim.

In all these circumstances, the claim is rejected.

Voluntary withdrawal of a CA claim

Sometimes, a carer may withdraw their claim voluntarily. A withdrawn
claim is not rejected, it is deemed to have never been made. Cancel the
new claim activity if the carer withdraws their claim.

Automatic and manual coding when rejecting a CA claim

The system uses information provided by the carer when rejecting a
claim. After coding carer details, the system will auto-reject the CA
claim for many rejection reasons. However, some rejection reasons need
to be coded manually. For example, the care and dependency requirements
may not be met (CRM), or for failing to reply to correspondence (FRC).

Code all information provided by the carer related to their claim. This
allows the system to use the appropriate rejection reason. It removes
the need to reject the claim manually for documents not returned. If the
carer has lodged a carer questionnaire but not a medical report, the
carer questionnaire is usually recorded, rather than rejecting the claim
FRC due to the non-return of the medical report. If the carer is already
receiving CP, delete the new Medical report or the Care Assessment
Questionnaire coding and reject the claim FRC. Otherwise, CP will cancel
from the date the claim is submitted and a debt incorrectly raised.

When manually rejecting a CA claim, send an advice of the decision to
the care to:

-   explain the reasons for rejecting their claim, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights.

Relevant date

If a person makes a claim for a social security payment or concession
card, the person's start day is (provisionally) the day the claim is
made.

Note: from 1 July 2018, intent to claim provisions only apply to
customers in vulnerable circumstances.

Rejecting a CA claim for a residence related reason

A carer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may have
the claim rejected based on information they have provided on their
claim.

Visa, citizenship and movement information provided directly from the
Department of Home Affairs datalink may cause the claim to be rejected.
The information provided by the Department of Home Affairs datalink
always takes precedence over any conflicting information provided by the
carer.

Rejecting a CA online claim – Failed to reply to correspondence (FRC)

If a claim is submitted under an exception category, it cannot be
rejected until 22 days. If the claim presents via WLM and 22 days has
not been reached, hold the claim until day 22 before rejecting it.

The claim can be rejected at any time when:

-   a claim has been submitted
-   documents lodged are inappropriate or not relevant to the claim
-   the claim has not been lodged under an exception category
-   the carer has failed to respond to a request for information

For requests sent by Australia Post, a reasonable time to comply would
be 22 days (14 days plus an extra 8 days) from the date of the original
notice.

The original documents can be requested again with the claim placed on
hold for 14 days when:

-   a claim has been submitted, and
-   documents lodged are not relevant to the claim
-   but the carer believed they were lodging the correct information

If the care receiver's POI is a supplementary task for a submitted CP
and/or CA claim and the POI is not provided, it must be requested and
the claim placed on hold. Do not reject the claim FRC unless the carer
has failed to reply to the request for further information.

Note: in some cases, when a carer uploads a care receiver's POI, this
displays on the care receiver's record. Check the carer receiver's
record before rejecting the claim.

List of rejection codes for CA

This procedure includes rejection codes that relate to qualifications
for caring for a disabled adult in a private home not shared by the
carer and care receiver. For a list of CA rejection codes, see
Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Allowance (CA).

Claims lodged after the death of a care receiver

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a carer would
also be assessed.

The intent to claim provisions only apply to carers in vulnerable
circumstances. For a vulnerable carer to be paid from the date of
contact, they must have been qualified for the payment on the intent to
claim contact date and identified as a vulnerable carer.

From 1 July 2018, eligible care receivers receive payments or concession
cards from the date they submitted a complete claim with all relevant
supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

The Resources page contains information on national support services and
the Carer Allowance (CA) rejection DOC.

Related links

Requesting information

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
