
ABSTUDY customer in state care 010-02040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of a customer's status when in
state care.

State care

A student or Australian Apprentice may be considered to be in state care
if:

-   they are not living with a parent and they are in the guardianship,
    care or custody of a court, a government minister or department of
    an Australian state or territory government, or
-   there is a current direction from a court, government minister or
    department placing the student or Australian Apprentice in the
    guardianship, care or custody of someone who is not their parent, or
-   the student or Australian Apprentice stopped being in one of the
    above situations only because of their age

A student or Australian Apprentice under a court, ministerial or
departmental order or direction is considered to be in state care
regardless of their legal guardianship status.

Note: in general, Australian states and territories provide the upkeep
of children in their care until the child is 16 years old. Australian
state and territory governments retain a welfare responsibility for
young people in state care.

A student or Australian Apprentice may be considered to not be in state
care if they have left the carer's home to live in a government funded
or subsidised refuge or residential care facility and the
state/territory welfare department has not accepted ongoing
responsibility for them.

Independence status and criteria

There is no category of independence based solely on a student or
Australian Apprentice being, or having been, in state care.

Instead, a customer in this circumstance applying for ABSTUDY may be
considered independent under the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH).
This is also known as Homeless criteria.

Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) criteria

A student or Australian Apprentice in state care may be considered
homeless if:

-   they have reached the minimum school leaving age, and
-   have left the carer's home, and
-   are living in a government funded or subsidised refuge or
    residential care facility, and
-   the state/territory welfare department has not accepted ongoing
    responsibility for the customer

These students or Australian Apprentices can be granted independent
status based on the UTLAH criteria (homelessness), providing they supply
verification of their circumstances from the state/territory welfare
department.

Students not meeting UTLAH criteria

Consider Youth Allowance criteria for customers in state care.

See Assessing independence when a customer is in state care, or other
independence categories for ABSTUDY customers.

ABSTUDY Awards for customers in state care

Students or Australian Apprentices who are in state care and don't meet
the independence criteria as above, may be eligible for payments under
the following ABSTUDY Awards:

Schooling B Award, if either:

-   they have reached 15 years of age, or
-   they are under 15 years of age but meets the criteria for the Away
    from Home entitlements

Tertiary Award or Masters and Doctorate Award, if either:

-   they have reached the minimum school leaving age, or
-   they are under the minimum school leaving age but meets the criteria
    for the Away from Home entitlements

Schooling A Award if s/he is aged 14 years of age or younger and does
not meet the criteria for Away from Home entitlements

Note: Australian Apprentices may only qualify for an ABSTUDY payment
under the Tertiary Award.

Parental Means Test

ABSTUDY customers in state care are exempt from the Parental Means Test.

Living Allowance rates

Where the student or Australian Apprentice is considered to be in state
care and is entitled to Living Allowance, it is paid at the following
rates:

-   if the carer receives a regular foster care or similar allowance,
    the standard rate of Living Allowance is payable; or
-   if the carer does not receive a regular foster care or similar
    allowance, the Away from Home rate of Living Allowance is payable

Note: the above applies even where the student or Australian Apprentice
meets the criteria for away from home entitlements. That is, a student
in state care is eligible for the Away from home criteria and lives away
from their carer, however as the carer receives a regular foster care
allowance, the at home rate of Living Allowance is paid.

Students under 16 years eligible for Living Allowance

Those students or Australian Apprentices who are 15 years or younger and
who are entitled to Living Allowance are paid at the 16-17 year old
rate.

The student or Australian Apprentice may also be exempt from the ABSTUDY
personal income test if they are under 16 years of age.

Payee

Students or Australian Apprentices who qualify for ABSTUDY under this
provision receive their allowances direct unless they are a student who
is boarding at a school or hostel that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY
Hostel Agreement. The carer does not receive payments on the customer's
behalf, however, the authority may request that payment be made direct
to the carer or a person nominated by the customer if:

-   the relevant government authority or an organisation approved by
    that authority believes that payment of allowances direct to younger
    students or Australian Apprentices could jeopardise the
    customer-carer relationship, or
-   it is determined that the student or Australian Apprentice is unable
    to manage their own finances (for example, a customer in a special
    school)

In these cases, the request should be included in the documentation from
the welfare department. Payment directions such as name and bank account
detail must be included in the relevant section of the ABSTUDY claim
form.

Customers placed into care of a person

The following information is required from a customer who is in state
care when they have been placed into the care of a person.

-   Under 16 years - the carer is the applicant. If the carer is lodging
    a paper claim form, a signed claim form or Mod JY must be provided
    by the applicant to process the claim. If the carer is lodging a
    claim via the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool, a verbal declaration must be
    offered. See ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process
-   16 years or over - the student or apprentice is the applicant. If
    the student or apprentice is lodging a paper claim form, an ABSTUDY
    claim may be processed without the carer signing the relevant claim
    form or Mod JY. However, carer information must still be provided
    and can be accepted verbally over the phone. If the student or
    apprentice is lodging a claim via the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool, a
    verbal declaration must be offered and the carer can provide their
    information verbally over the phone as part of the claiming process.
    See ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

In the Northern Territory, it has been determined that Territory
Families (Northern Territory Government) maintain a high level of daily
care and control of children when they are placed into the care of the
Chief Executive Officer of Territory Families. Therefore, when the child
is placed with a foster carer by Territory Families, they are considered
to be placed into the care of an organisation.

Customers placed in the care of an organisation

In most cases, customers in state care would be placed into the care of
a person. But in some situations, customers are linked to the
department. For example, a customer is placed directly into a boarding
school, residential facility, only provided with respite care during
school holidays. Or the state government department maintains a high
level of daily care and control after the customer has been placed with
a foster carer. When this occurs, an organisation can be an applicant
and an officer of that organisation should be able to sign the form.

If staff of the organisation have not signed the application form as
'the applicant', Services Australia may accept a formal letter from the
organisation about the child's care to verify the information in the
claim about the customer. For example, when the state care organisation
returns a letter advising the student is boarding or planning to start
boarding at a boarding school or hostel, this verifies the child is in
the care of the organisation. It can be accepted in lieu of the
'applicant's' signature on the ABSTUDY forms. If there is insufficient
formal correspondence supplied to this effect, confirmation from the
relevant state/territory department (verbal or written) is sufficient.

The Resources page contains scenarios of where a student may or may not
be assessed as being in State Care.

Related links

Reviews of independence for ABSTUDY

Rates and Thresholds

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Assessing ABSTUDY student in state care for the away from home rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
