
Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-07010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to determine an approved
course of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES).

Approved provider and course

For the purposes of YA student, Austudy and PES, an approved course of
study is one approved by the Minister for Social Services, who has the
authority to approve courses and providers.

For a course to be approved, both the course content and the provider
must meet certain requirements. These requirements are determined by the
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) or the relevant
state/territory authorities. Services Australia is not involved in this
accreditation process. For student payment purposes, there is no minimum
duration for a course to be approved.

The National Course Approvals sub-site contains a directory of approved
education providers and information about their courses.

Requirement to undertake an approved course of study

For customers to be regarded as satisfying the activity test for the
purposes of qualifying for a student payment, they must be undertaking
an approved course of study as set out in the Ministerial Determination
of Education Institutions and Courses.

YA, Austudy, and PES students undertaking a course which is not approved
under the Ministerial Determination do not qualify for those payments as
a student. These customers may qualify for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA
as a job seeker while undertaking their study if the course is a
Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP). New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) 12 week
pre-training courses are approved for PES.

Masters courses (including combined masters degrees)

Only masters courses included on the Student Assistance (Education
Institutions and Courses) Determination (the Determination) are
considered approved courses. Students enrolled in a masters course with
a specialisation are approved where the primary masters course is
approved. All other masters courses are not considered approved and
students cannot satisfy the student activity test for YA, Austudy or PES
for those courses.

Students undertaking combined masters degrees can be approved for
student payments if the course(s) are listed in the Determination,
whether as a single (combined) course or as separate courses.

Where only one of the masters degrees is listed on the Determination,
the student may still be eligible for payments while undertaking this
degree if:

-   the units the student is undertaking in the approved masters make up
    a full-time study load, and
-   there is a clear start and end point, that is, a period of time and
    set of units, separating each of the masters qualifications

These requirements are often established from the education provider's
website or handbook. Where this is not clear, ask students to obtain
written confirmation of the above criteria from the provider and proof
of enrolment.

Combined higher education and masters degrees

Some education providers deliver combined higher education
qualifications (for example, bachelor degrees, graduate certificates or
graduate diplomas) with masters degrees. For YA, Austudy and PES, the
bachelor degree, graduate certificate or graduate diploma component will
be an approved course, with some of the masters degrees also being
approved.

Where the bachelor degree, graduate certificate or graduate diploma and
the masters degree are approved courses, treat the course as an approved
combined course for YA, Austudy and PES. The approved masters courses
appear in Schedule 3 of the Course Determination Instrument - the
Ministerial Determination.

Where the masters component is not an approved course for YA, Austudy
and PES purposes, the bachelor's component of the combined course could
be approved if:

-   the units the student is undertaking are accredited or recognised as
    being less than the masters level
-   the units the student is undertaking at less than the masters level
    make up a full-time study load, and
-   there is a clear start and end point, that is, a period of time and
    set of units, for less than the masters qualification

These requirements are often established from the education provider's
website or handbook. Where this is not clear, ask students to obtain
written confirmation of the above criteria from the provider and proof
of enrolment..

Completed masters and doctorate level courses

Preclusions apply to PES and Austudy students due to the activity test
requirements for these payments. YA students are not affected. See
Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or
Activity test for Austudy for further information.

A student does not qualify for PES if they have previously completed
either a masters or doctorate level course.

A student does not qualify for Austudy if they have previously completed
a doctorate level course (for example, Doctor of Philosophy (PhD)).

A student undertaking a doctorate level course is not eligible for
assistance under YA, Austudy and PES.

Note: some courses may appear to be doctoral level courses from the
title, but are in fact masters courses (for example, Juris Doctor). If
in any doubt, check the current approved masters list. The Resources
page contains a link to this list.

Exit points for lower qualifications

Some unapproved masters courses for YA, Austudy and PES contain a
'nested' lower qualification (for example, graduate certificate,
graduate diploma), which are available to the student if they exit the
course early.

Students are not eligible to receive YA, Austudy or PES to undertake the
lower qualification part of this course unless the masters component is
also approved. Students who receive YA, Austudy or PES and who change
their course to an unapproved masters with a lower exit point are no
longer eligible to receive payment for that course.

Nested courses are distinct from combined courses. A nested course is
defined as a single course of study where the student is enrolled in a
higher level award, which has clear exit points for receiving lower
level awards if the student exits the course early. For example, a
student may be enrolled in a two year masters course, but exits the
course after 12 months to receive a graduate diploma.

The Resources page contains a link to the National Course Approvals
sub-site and information about general factors relating to course
approval, including rules allowing for approval of masters by coursework
programmes. It also contains a link to the list of masters courses
approved for student payments and a table showing the course approval
contacts for each state or territory.

Related links

Allowable non-award study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Allowable non-award study for Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Using Centrelink self service

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
