-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer is considered to be satisfying YA
requirements while intending to study.

Continuing/intending students

Continuing/intending students are considered to be satisfying the
full-time study requirements for students. This means, in some
circumstances, they are considered to be a full-time student during
study breaks, such as semester/trimester holidays.

If a customer is not considered a continuing/intending student, they
will not meet the student study requirements until they commence their
course.

Non-intending students

Students not considered to be 'intending students' are those who:

-   did not study in or complete the last available semester or study
    period immediately prior to claiming
-   did not study in an approved course in the previous study period, or
-   deferred their course for a period of time and are now planning to
    continue the course

These customers will not be considered to be a full-time student until
they start their course. Until they qualify for YA (student) they may
need to test their eligibility for another payment, for example,
JobSeeker Payment or YA (job seeker) if they require assistance before
the course commences.

Transfer from job seeking payment

Receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA (job seeker) does not prevent a
customer from being a continuing/intending student. Customers
transferring from JSP or YA (job seeker) who are not
continuing/intending students continue to receive this payment until
they start study, as long as they continue to meet the mutual obligation
requirements. While these customers would normally be expected to look
for all suitable work, for the interim period they may satisfy the
mutual obligation requirements by looking for suitable work that would
not prevent them from starting study (for example, part-time or casual
work).

Notification of cessation of studies

If a YA (student) ceases full-time study, they must notify Services
Australia and register as a job seeker within 14 days. Failure to notify
cessation of study within 14 days will result in cancellation of YA from
the study end date plus 1 day. In these circumstances, payment of YA as
a job seeker may only commence from the date the customer contacts the
agency and lodges a new claim. A debt may be generated for students who
fail to notify cessation of studies. There is no change to policy or
process for customers advising an intention to study.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study

Youth Allowance student full-time study requirements

Lodgement of Youth Allowance (YA) (student) and Australian Apprentice
claims

Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) students

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
