
Suspension of Youth Allowance (YA) (students and trainees) 010-21081343

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the suspension of Youth Allowance
(YA) students and trainees.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment or the payment is not payable because of:

-   changes in their circumstances and the change means they no longer
    qualify
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment,
-   information that has not been provided to ensure payments are
    correct. For example a valid address or bank account details

Before suspending a payment, issue an appropriate request for
information and allow the appropriate time for a response.

A decision to suspend a payment potentially has a great impact on a
customer and must be made in accordance with legislation and the
relevant process.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification.
Payment of arrears may occur after restoring payment.

For:

-   a list of reasons for suspension of YA, see Cancellation, suspension
    and rejection reason codes for Newstart System (NSS)
-   restoring YA after requirements have been met see Restoration of
    Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy for full-time students and
    Australian Apprentices

Reasons for suspension

Reasons for suspension of payment may include:

-   a financial institution returning a direct credit payment
-   the customer failing to reply to letters
-   customer separating from their partner
-   a customer or their partner in prison or psychiatric confinement
-   the customer's mail is returned to Centrelink with 'whereabouts
    unknown'

Other factors

See Suspension of payments (CLK) for information on:

-   Customer contact
-   Date of effect
-   Reviewing suspension - cancellation or restoration of payment
-   Vulnerable or at risk customer

Customer contact

Before suspending a payment, request information from the customer under
the appropriate section of the Social Security (Administration) Act;
section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The Decision Maker (DM) must
be satisfied there is sufficient evidence the customer is either
temporarily not qualified for the payment or the payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information
(CLK).

All decisions to suspend Youth Allowance (YA) are made under section 80
of the Social Security (Administration) Act.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, attempt contact with the
nominee before suspending the payment.

Notification of suspension

Advise customers of the decision to suspend their payment. If an
automatic letter is not issued by the system, see the Process page for
more information.

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension. Provide information about the
required documentation or advise the customer what is required so the
payment can be restored if applicable.

Related links

Restoration of Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy for full-time students
and Australian Apprentices

Cancellation of Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
Apprentices

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Creating a Q134 letter

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

End of course reviews for students

Youth Allowance (YA) annual Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Requesting information (CLK)

Study requirements and the activity test

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
