
Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) payment and coding 010-07030030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines that Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY Living
Allowance and Austudy students undertaking an approved scholarship
course may qualify for a Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS). SSS payment
ceased from 1 July 2017.

This procedure must only be followed if there is a reassessment that
would determine a customer was eligible for SSS as of 1 January 2016
(date grandfathering provisions commenced), and no SSS payments were
paid to the customer in 2016 (two payments) and/or 2017 (single
payment).

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)

The SSS is intended to assist with the up-front costs of tertiary study,
such as textbooks and specialised equipment.

From 1 January 2016

SSS was replaced by a voluntary Student Start-up Loan (SSL) which must
be repaid through the tax system once the recipient’s taxable income
reaches a certain threshold. Grandfathering provisions apply for
students who received an SSS or Commonwealth Education Costs (CECS)
Scholarship before 1 January 2016 and meet the eligibility criteria for
the Scholarship payment. See Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)
eligibility for information about eligibility for this payment.

Students who receive an SSS as a grandfathered customer are not eligible
to apply for a Student Start-up Loan for the same period. If a
previously grandfathered customer returns to a student payment after a
break in eligibility, they may no longer qualify for the scholarship
under these provisions, but they may apply for a Student Start-up Loan/s
for the remainder of their course. See Student Start-up Loan (SSL) for
information about eligibility for this payment.

From 1 July 2017

SSS grandfathering provisions ceased and therefore no SSS will be paid
from 1 July 2017 even if they are grandfathered.

Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship (CECS)

The SSS effectively replaces the university offered CECS. CECSs are now
only offered by universities as a limited program for Indigenous
students.

Students cannot receive CECS and SSS in relation to the same period,
however, a customer may choose to relinquish their existing CECS in
order to receive an SSS.

If the student is paid both CECS and SSS for the same period, the SSS
payment will become an overpayment.

Note: students who qualify for CECS in a particular period but do not
receive their full entitlement due to suspension of the scholarship
(such as due to poor study results) cannot qualify for SSS for the same
period.

Grandfathered SSS recipients

Grandfathering provisions ceased from 1 July 2017. Customers were
grandfathered if they had received an SSS or Commonwealth Education
Costs Scholarship (CECS) before 1 January 2016 and has been continuously
in receipt of a student payment (Youth Allowance (YA) as a student,
Austudy or ABSTUDY Living Allowance) since they received their most
recent SSS/CECS payment. See Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)
eligibility for information on grandfathering.

Payment of SSS

SSS was paid automatically to eligible students twice a year, usually
around the start of each semester, based on a traditional 2 semester
academic year. However, from 1 July 2017 no SSS payment will be made,
including customers who were previously grandfathered.

Receipt of basic benefit is a qualification requirement for Services
Australia Scholarships. This means SSS is not payable if the student's
reported income reduces the person's basic benefit to zero. Receipt of
Rent Assistance (RA) and/or Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) or other
supplements do not qualify the student for Services Australia
Scholarships.

For continuing students who qualify for SSS, the payment was usually
issued in late February or early March for the first period of the year,
and in late July for the second period.

A letter from the agency will be sent to advise customers of the
expected pay date for their scholarship.

Treatment of SSS payments

SSS payments are:

-   a non-taxable payment that is not means tested
-   for income managed customers, income managed at 100%
-   not included when calculating a customer's advance payment
    entitlements
-   not treated as income for Social Security purposes

Overpayments of Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)

An SSS debt may be raised only if a customer had no entitlement to an
SSS during the entire period for which that payment was made (SSS
periods are 1 January to 30 June, and 1 July to 31 December each year).

If a person is found to have been ineligible for SSS in relation to a
particular SSS period, the full amount of SS paid for that period is
raised as a debt. It is not possible to raise an SSS debt for a
proportional amount.

Some debt shells will be automatically raised based on coding on the
Customer Study Details (EDC) screen in Process Direct or on the
Education Course Details (EDC) screen in Customer First. Where a debt
shell has been created due to the student not studying an approved
scholarship course on Day 35, Service Officers must check the
institutions actual start date and the student's actual qualification
before raising an overpayment. For more information, see Scholarship
study requirements.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) eligibility

Student Start up Loan (SSL)

Student Start-up Loan (SSL) Study requirements

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

Scholarship study requirements

Commonwealth Scholarship offers

Assessing scholarship income

Payment of residential costs option for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Rates and thresholds

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
