-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
authorising and booking travel for eligible ABSTUDY students and
approved travellers in advance of their journey.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY FAA

ABSTUDY FAA is payable to eligible ABSTUDY students who are required to
live away from their permanent home to study or are participating in an
approved Away from Base activity. Generally, travel will be pre-booked
for the ABSTUDY student or approved traveller through Services
Australia's Travel Management Company (TMC). Travel can only be
pre-booked for ABSTUDY students and approved travellers who meet the
eligibility requirements for FAA.

Requesting fares to be booked in advance

Requests for fares to be authorised and booked in advance of the
journey, need to be received by Services Australia within the specified
time frames. The exception to this is where unforeseen and exceptional
circumstances impacting travel apply.

Boarding schools or hostels that are organising a group travel request
for ABSTUDY secondary school students and approved travellers must
contact the agency no later than 6 weeks before the travel date.

This allows the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Travel and Away from Base Teams and
the Travel Management Company (TMC) enough time to source travel
providers and finalise bookings, and provide travel itineraries for all
travellers.

Where possible, forward and return travel arrangements should always be
booked for ABSTUDY travellers.

When authorising travel in advance, the TMC will be informed of the ages
of young secondary boarding students so that appropriate travel
arrangements are made. The TMC should ensure, for example, that young
students travel on the most direct route and are scheduled to arrive at
their destination at a reasonable hour. This is particularly important
where students are from remote communities and travelling without a
supervisor.

Safe Travel Plan (STP)

A Safe Travel Plan (STP) is an agreement between the school and/or
boarding provider, and the student and their family and ensures that
options are in place in case of a travel disruption.

Supervisor requirements

Services Australia may determine a secondary school student, or any
student under 18 years of age, needs mandatory supervision when
assessing a pre-booked travel request.

Service Officers must strongly encourage parent/guardian(s) to nominate
a supervisor for all other secondary students under 18 years of age who
are travelling great distances, on multiple carriers or who may be at
risk of a travel disruption.

Note: supervision may be requested after student travel has already been
booked. Treat these requests as individual travel requests and not
variations.

For further information on who can be a supervisor, see Non-student
travellers for ABSTUDY.

Weekend and public holiday travel

For secondary students

Travel Officers can approve weekend and public holiday travel requested
by a school, boarding institution or for a student in private
accommodation.

Travel must not be booked on weekends, public holidays or after hours,
unless the student has a supervisor and a Safe Travel Plan (STP) in
place. If a supervisor is unavailable due to unforeseen and exceptional
circumstances, travel can be approved if the boarding school/provider:

-   understands their responsibility to manage risks, and
-   implements the Safe Travel Plan

Where weekend or public holiday travel for a secondary student is
approved, and a disruption occurs, and the STP fails, the emergency
contact is to phone the CTM after-hours telephone number located on the
travel itinerary.

For tertiary students

There are minimal restrictions in place for tertiary students requesting
weekend travel, after-hours or public holiday.

If weekend, after-hours or public holiday travel is requested by a
tertiary student or approved traveller, the following must be taken into
account:

-   duration of travel
-   flight availability
-   departure and arrival times

Prior to booking weekend or public holiday travel, the tertiary student
or approved traveller must be made aware that if travel is approved and
they experience disrupted travel, they are responsible for managing the
disruption including overnight accommodation. Tertiary students
experiencing a disruption may contact the CTM after-hours telephone
number located on the travel itinerary.

Variations to pre-booked travel

Students, parents/guardians, board providers or education institutions
can make travel variation or cancellation requests to Services
Australia.

Approval of requests to vary pre-booked travel, or travel authorised in
advance, occurs only if the variation or cancellation relates to:

-   unforeseen or exceptional circumstances, or
-   other allowable exceptions. See Determining the appropriate travel
    destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

For further information, see the Process page.

Cancellations to pre-booked travel

Travel cancellation requests can be made to Services Australia by
students, parents/guardians, board providers or education institutions.

Students and approved travellers must carefully consider their
cancellation request because if the journey is cancelled, then another
booking for the same journey may not be accepted. For further
information, see the Process page.

The agency needs a minimum of 24 hours' notice to cancel travel
arrangements on behalf of the traveller without penalty under the
agency's travel contract.

If a student or approved traveller does not request to cancel travel
arrangements at least 24 hours before departure, a No Show - Penalty may
be applied. For further information, see No show for ABSTUDY travel.

Away from home entitlements are to be reassessed when a secondary
boarding school student discontinues study before the end of term.
Eligibility to the 'away from home' rate will cease from the date the
student discontinues study.

Travel not undertaken

If travel is arranged, or a ticket authorised for a student or approved
traveller, and they do not travel as arranged, penalties may apply. For
further information, see No show for ABSTUDY travel.

Excluded students

Excluded students who subsequently re-enrol with the same school, may
have FAA authorised in advance for travel, even where the same journey
was previously cancelled because of the exclusion.

FAA claim processing

The ABSTUDY Smart Centre Travel and Away from Base Teams are responsible
for assessing all FAA claims, including authorising and booking travel.
See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

Accessing travel details

Copies of all travel itineraries are attached to the student's or
approved traveller's travel booking in the Travel Management Application
(TMA).

For further information, see Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA)
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES).

Destinations for advance bookings

FAA authorised in advance is usually booked between the student's or
approved traveller's permanent home and their term address. However, FAA
may be approved to or from an alternate location in some circumstances.
For further information, see Determining the appropriate travel
destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA).

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Non-student travellers for ABSTUDY

Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
