
Commonwealth Scholarships 010-07030060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to action advice received
regarding Commonwealth Scholarships.

On this Page:

Commonwealth Scholarships

From 1 January 2017, universities can offer the following Indigenous
Commonwealth Scholarships under the Indigenous Student Success Program
(ISSP):

-   Indigenous Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship (CECS)
    A scholarship that assists with education costs
-   Indigenous Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS)
    A scholarship that assists with relocation costs, accommodation
    costs, or relocation and accommodation costs
-   Indigenous Commonwealth Reward Scholarship
    A payment that is unlikely to be repeated, not intended to duplicate
    or supplement an Indigenous Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship
    or Indigenous Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship and the
    recipient would not have reasonably expected to receive the payment

Universities can determine the value, purpose, duration and other
conditions of the ISSP scholarship. They must advise students in writing
of the conditions before the student accepts the offer.

Students who were in receipt of earlier Indigenous Commonwealth
Scholarships before 1 January 2017 (known as Preserved Commonwealth
Scholarships) and who still meet all eligibility requirements, can
continue to receive those scholarships until 30 June 2021.

Advice that offers of Commonwealth Scholarship have been made, accepted,
deferred, or terminated is received from the Department of Education.

Preclusions

A student cannot receive a CECS in the six months immediately before or
immediately after their Qualification Test Day (QTD) for Student
Start-up Loan (SSL). If a CECS is granted within this time, the CECS
precludes the payment of SSL. Refer to Student Start-up Loan for more
information.

Prior to the introduction of SSL, receipt of a CECS also precluded
payment of Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) for the same relevant
scholarship period. Refer to Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)
eligibility for more information.

If a student receives an Indigenous CAS, they cannot receive a
Relocation Scholarship (RS) or Residential Costs Option (RCO) for the
same relevant scholarship period. However, if the offer of the place in
a residential college or hostel is received after the qualification date
for Relocation Scholarship or Indigenous CAS, RCO may still be payable.
See Payment of Residential Costs Option (RCO) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) for more information.

The Indigenous Commonwealth Reward Scholarship does not preclude payment
of Student Start-up Loan or Relocation Scholarship.

Note:-The Indigenous Access Scholarship (IAS) paid before 1 January 2017
does not preclude payment of SSS, SSL or RS.

Preserved Commonwealth Scholarships

Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarships (CECS) and Commonwealth
Accommodation Scholarships (CAS) were replaced:

-   in 2010
-   by Student Start-up Scholarships (SSS) and Relocation Scholarship
    (RS) respectively

However, universities continued to offer CECS and CAS after 1 January
2010 under the Commonwealth Scholarship Program (CSP) guidelines as a
limited program for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students only.

To ensure students who received Commonwealth Scholarships under the CSP
guidelines before the introduction of the ISSP were not disadvantaged
under the new arrangements, students can continue to receive the earlier
scholarship up to 30 June 2021 provided they continue to meet all
conditions under the CSP guidelines.

Under CSP guidelines, there are two categories of Indigenous-CECS being:

-   Indigenous CECS - funding for up to eight scholarship periods to
    assist students enrolled in undergraduate courses or a graduate
    diploma (or equivalent post graduate course of study)
-   Indigenous Enabling CECS - funding for up to two scholarship periods
    to assist students to undertake an eligible enabling course

Only the preserved Indigenous CECS continues to be paid as eligibility
conditions for the Indigenous Enabling CECS can no longer be met.

There are three categories of Indigenous-CAS being:

-   Indigenous CAS - funding for up to eight scholarship periods to
    assist students with accommodation costs to undertake an
    undergraduate course or a graduate diploma (or equivalent post
    graduate course of study)
-   Indigenous Enabling CAS - funding for up to two scholarship periods
    to assist students with accommodation costs to undertake an eligible
    enabling course
-   Indigenous Access Scholarship (IAS) - which is a one-off scholarship
    payment, to assist students to undertake an eligible enabling course

Only the preserved Indigenous CAS continues to be paid as eligibility
conditions for Indigenous Enabling CAS and Indigenous Access
Scholarships (IAS) can no longer be met.

Higher education providers

Higher education providers are required under the Commonwealth
Scholarship guidelines to provide details of offers to Department of
Education:

-   22 January for semester one offers
-   15 June for semester two offers

Duplicate scholarship payment prevention

To prevent duplication of scholarship income support, Services Australia
new claim process requires prospective customers to declare income from
scholarships.

Services Australia also liaises with other organisations, such as
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) that disburse scholarships drawn
from Commonwealth Government funds to prevent, detect and recover
overpayments (where appropriate).

Tertiary Collection of Student Information (TCSI)

Through the Tertiary Collection of Student Information (TCSI), Services
Australia will receive accurate and up to date student enrolment details
including Commonwealth Scholarship information from the Department of
Education.

Higher education providers are required to report details of
Commonwealth Scholarships to the Department of Education. There are two
reporting periods that higher education providers must provide
information for:

-   period 1 covering January to June, and
-   period 2 covering July to December each calendar year.

Commonwealth Scholarships are reported as:

Offered – customer has received an offer but is yet to either accept or
decline the offer

Verified – a scholarship was paid for a given period

-   active - the scholarship was active on the last day of the reporting
    period
-   deferred and terminated - the status of the scholarship was either
    deferred or terminated on the last date of the reporting period. In
    these instances, staff need to confirm if the customer received an
    amount greater than $0 to determine qualification for SSL, RS and
    RCO

For more details, see Tertiary Collection of Student Information (TCSI).

The Resources page contains a link to the National Indigenous
Australians Agency (NIAA) Indigenous Student Success Program page.

Related links

Student Start-up Loan

Student Start-up Loan (SSL) study requirements

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) eligibility

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) payment and coding

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

Scholarship study requirements

Assessing scholarship income

Actioning Study Load Interventions

Tertiary Collection of Student Information (TCSI)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
