
Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Austudy 010-04020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processing required when an Austudy claim is
received by Services Australia. Austudy can be paid to customers aged 25
years or over if they are currently undertaking, or intending to
undertake an approved course of education or study, or are undertaking a
full-time Australian Apprenticeship.

Claiming Austudy

Claims for Austudy can be lodged using:

-   [] Centrelink online accounts
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   a Claim for Austudy (SY002) paper claim

Note: customers should only be provided with paper claims if the online
claim transaction is not appropriate and the ACC workflow cannot be
used.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process Austudy student claims automatically if they meet
these criteria:

-   Identity is confirmed
-   Residency requirements met
-   Tax file number recorded
-   Employment status requirements met
-   No change in known relationship details
-   No change in known children details
-   The customer does not identify as having a disability, a medical
    condition which impacts their ability to study or is in a
    bereavement period
-   Accommodation requirements are met
-   Study details are able to be confirmed

If a claim meets the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Rejecting Austudy claims

An applicant who has lodged a claim for Austudy may not be eligible for
payment because they do not meet the basic qualification, payability or
recipient obligation provisions for payment.

Sometimes applicants may lodge an inappropriate or incorrect claim.

In all these circumstances, claims must be rejected. Different
procedures apply if the customer withdraws their claim.

Employer lump sums

Customers claiming Austudy who receive a lump sum from employment, such
as leave or redundancy payments, may have an Income Maintenance Period
(IMP) imposed before they can receive Austudy payments.

Austudy is also subject to a Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP). If
a customer is serving a SWPP and transfers to Austudy, they will be
precluded from Austudy until their SWPP has ended. Note: SWPP was
subject to waiver due to COVID 19 processing, up to 31 March, 2021.

Austudy customers may be entitled to a range of other additional
products and services including Pension Supplement for eligible
customers over Age Pension age, or Rent Assistance (RA).

Reassessments required due to review of decision

If a customer receives a favourable decision after requesting a review,
a new claim is not needed. The previous claim must be reassessed.

Social Online Application (SOA) Shell

When a Claim for Austudy (SY002) paper claim is scanned onto a
customer's record, the system creates a SOA Shell for allocation and
processing in Process Direct.

A claim can be created using the SOA Shell application within Process
Direct, if:

-   a customer is subject to a re-grant or reassessment, and
-   an online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is not available to
    re-index

For example, to implement an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) decision
where no new claim has been lodged.

Note: do not use a SOA Shell in place of re-indexing a determined
Austudy online claim or ACC.

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Austudy is not a qualifying payment for EdEP. However, staff must check
a customer's eligibility for EdEP when they are transferring to Austudy,
or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) from another payment. This check is
part of the Austudy new claim assessment process.

Health Care Card (HCC)

From 1 January 2019, Austudy students and Australian Apprentices are
automatically issued a HCC after their claim is granted.

If the student or Australian Apprentice transfers from a payment that
includes a Pension Concession Card (PCC), the PCC entitlement ceases on
the payment transfer date.

Applications where Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (PLDP) claim has been granted

Customers cannot be granted Austudy, for a period where they have
already been paid PLDP, unless the customer advises otherwise.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
forms, link to the National Course Approvals sub-site, information about
Centrelink online accounts and links to more help by using the Process
Direct sub site. It also includes Q888 letter text when inviting
customers to apply for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Contents

Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), Austudy, PES, and Youth Allowance (YA)

Calculating the start day for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students
and Australian Apprentices claims

Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) for
Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students

Assessing and coding the Study details MOD (ST)

Related links

Activity Test for Austudy

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Eligibility for Austudy

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Straight through processing

Student Start-up Loan (SSL)

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Waiting periods for income support payments

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
