
Generating participation failures for Youth Allowance and Austudy students 010-07020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when a student has not
satisfied the student activity test or the requirements of a Youth
Allowance Activity Agreement.

Youth Allowance activity agreement

A Youth Allowance activity agreement for a student details the steps
they undertake in order to comply with their obligations in meeting the
activity test.

Customers not affected by this procedure

This procedure does not apply to:

-   ABSTUDY customers who are assessed under a specific breach framework
-   Australian Apprentices receiving YA or Austudy because they are
    exempt from the student activity test at all times
-   part-time apprentices who are doing a course which does not qualify
    them for payment as a full-time student or an Australian Apprentice.
    These part-time apprentices are regarded as job seekers and are
    required to comply with activities negotiated in a Job/Participation
    Plan

Qualification and the student activity test

One of the qualifications for both Austudy and YA is that the student
must satisfy the student activity test unless they are exempt.

Austudy students must be undertaking qualifying study to meet the
activity test.

YA students must be undertaking full-time study or an approved
concessional study load and, if at school, meet attendance requirements
to meet the activity test.

All Austudy and YA students are required to attend compulsory
participation appointments with Services Australia (e.g. participation
related Service Profiling appointments.

Failing to satisfy the activity test

Where a YA or Austudy student fails to satisfy the student activity
test, qualification for the payment may be lost and a debt potentially
raised for the period of time the customer was paid but not qualified.

Incurring a participation failure

A participation failure may be incurred by an Austudy or YA student in
certain circumstances where the student has:

-   not met their activity test, including agreed requirements set out
    in a Youth Allowance activity agreement
-   failed to attend a required participation related appointment (e.g.
    a participation related Service Profile appointment)

Generating failures and serious failures

If a student has had three or more failures in a period of 12 months, a
serious failure non-payment period of eight weeks may be considered. See
Determining whether a participation failure is applicable for students.

Gathering evidence in relation to failures

Service Officers gather facts and evidence in relation to the failure to
meet the student activity test then decide if the payment should be
cancelled because the customer is no longer qualified, or generate a
potential participation failure.

If a participation failure is generated, staff in the Participation
Solutions Team (PST) will then determine the validity of the potential
failure, apply or reject the failure and contact the customer to rebook
appointments if required.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

Related links

Study exemptions for ABSTUDY and activity test exemptions for Austudy
and Youth Allowance

Determining whether a participation failure is applicable for students

Determining activity test breaches for unapproved absences for ABSTUDY
secondary students

Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices

Participation Compliance workflow

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
