
Assessing ABSTUDY student in State Care for the away from home rate 010-02060180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for the away from home
rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance when a young person who is a student or
Australian Apprentice is in State Care. It covers the documentation
needed to assess the claim and coding.

Substitute care

ABSTUDY customers are normally expected to live at home while studying.
However, they may sometimes have to live away from home and would
therefore become eligible for a higher rate of assistance. One of these
circumstances is where the customer is in State Care.

Customers are considered to be in State Care if they have been placed in
substitute care through a:

-   State or Territory welfare department, or
-   a legal process, and
-   are not living with a parent

For ABSTUDY, a student or Australian Apprentice who has met the
qualification for State Care and has ceased care only because of their
age can qualify for entitlements available to students or Australian
Apprentices who are still formally in State Care.

How to claim

Away from home rate can be claimed:

-   for new customers, via the ABSTUDY Claim Form B, or
-   for existing customers, via a statement (verbal or written)
    indicating the criteria under which they are seeking approval

Customers placed into care of a person

The following information is required from a customer in State Care when
they have been placed into the care of a person.

Customer under 16 years of age - as the carer is the applicant a signed
claim form or Mod JY must be provided by the applicant to process the
claim. Note: this is not a requirement if they are applying for ABSTUDY
Schooling A and exempt from providing a Customer Declaration Form. See
ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process.

Customer 16 years of age or over - as the student is the applicant, an
ABSTUDY claim may be processed without the carer signing the relevant
claim form or Mod JY. However, the carer's information must be provided
and can be accepted verbally over the phone.

Note: in the Northern Territory, it has been determined Territory
Families (Northern Territory Government) maintain a high level of daily
care and control of children when they are placed into the care of the
CEO. Therefore, even when the child is placed with a foster carer by
Territory Families, they are still considered to be placed into the care
of an organisation.

Students placed in the care of an organisation

In most cases, customers in State Care would be placed into the care of
a person, however, in some cases customers are linked to the department.
For example:

-   a customer is placed directly into a boarding school
-   residential facility
-   only provided with respite care during school holidays, or
-   the state government department maintains a high level of daily care
    and control after the customer has been placed with a foster carer

When this occurs, an organisation can be an applicant under ABSTUDY
Policy 6.1.2 and an officer of that organisation can sign the form.

Where officers or staff of the organisation have not signed the
application form as 'the applicant', Services Australia may accept
formal correspondence returned from the organisation regarding the
child's care as sufficient evidence that the information in the claim
about the customer is correct.

For example, when the State Care organisation returns a letter advising
the student is boarding or planning to commence boarding at a boarding
school or hostel, this is sufficient evidence the child is in the care
of the organisation, and can be accepted in lieu of the completion of
the 'applicant's' signature on the ABSTUDY forms, in this instance.
Where there is insufficient formal correspondence supplied to this
effect, confirmation from the relevant state/territory department
(verbal or written) is sufficient.

Students in State Care

Students and Australian Apprentices will be exempt from the ABSTUDY
parental means test if they are in State Care.

Customers in State Care are entitled to ABSTUDY Living Allowance at the
away from home rate if the carer does not receive a regular foster care
allowance for their upkeep, and are eligible for:

Schooling B Award and they:

-   have reached 15 years of age, or
-   are under 15 years of age, but meet one of the criteria for the away
    from home rate

Tertiary Award or Master and Doctorate Award and they:

-   have reached the minimum school leaving age
-   are under the minimum school leaving age, but meet one of the
    criteria for the away from home rate

A carer is considered to be receiving a regular foster care allowance
when in receipt of another allowance intended directly for the young
person's upkeep or personal use (for example, regular Adolescent
Community Placement or Placement Provider Reimbursement payments made
directly or indirectly by the Victorian Government).

Note: a customer who is in State Care does not automatically qualify for
independent status, but may apply for homeless independent status.

How rates are calculated

Customers aged 15 years or younger and approved for the away from home
rate are paid at the 16-17 year old rate of Living Allowance.

Payment of away from home rate must be made to the customer, unless they
are a student boarding at a school or hostel that is a signatory to the
ABSTUDY Hostel Agreement. A relevant government authority can determine
another payee if it believes exceptional circumstances exist.

Customers in State Care who do not meet the criteria for away from home
rate are paid at the standard rate for their age.

Students turning 18 years of age

A person usually ceases to be in State Care from the age of 18 years. If
a foster care or similar allowance is paid to a carer to support a
person in State Care, the allowance usually ceases from the person in
State Care's 18th birthday. However, a number of State and Territory
governments continue to support people in State Care, including through
payment of an allowance, after their 18th birthday. See the Process page
for further information.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance

ABSTUDY customer in State Care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
