
ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement 010-02060040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for ABSTUDY Standard Hostels
Agreement.

On this Page:

The ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement

Note: the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement is currently under review
by Services Australia and the Department of Social Services. Payments to
hostels that are existing signatories to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels
Agreement will continue unaffected for the period of the review. Any
enquiries from new hostels seeking to be approved to receive ABSTUDY
payments must be referred to the ABSTUDY Portfolio Operations Team.

The ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement determines the conditions for
payment of ABSTUDY away from home rate of Living Allowance, Rent
Assistance and Remote Area Allowance for students residing in the
hostel.

The Agreement also determines the period of entitlement for away from
home rate payable to the hostel for a student who ceases study prior to
the end of a school term.

From 1 July 2015, a hostel who is a signatory to the Agreement is a
qualifying board provider.

Payments made to hostels

ABSTUDY secondary school boarding students residing in hostel
accommodation must have ABSTUDY payments directed to the hostel.

Hostels that are signatories to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement
are paid entitlements as an ABSTUDY boarding instalment lump sum.
Payment of away from home rate will be made fortnight-in-arrears to a
hostel who is not a signatory to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement.

An ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement is valid for a 3 year period and
the hostel must renew the Agreement each period to continue to qualify
for ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments. ABSTUDY Smart Centre
Processing team are responsible for ensuring all hostels that are
seeking payments via the ABSTUDY boarding instalment method, are a
signatory to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement for the relevant 3
year period.

Payments to a hostel should not be commenced while an Agreement is being
negotiated or signed by the hostel. If payments are made
fortnight-in-arrears for a period while the hostel is returning the
signed Agreement, it prevents correct payments of ABSTUDY boarding
instalment payments at a later date for that particular term.

The Resources page contains a list of all current hostel signatories to
the Agreement and its expiry date (including the Aboriginal Hostel
Limited (AHL) hostels that are subject to the national Agreement),
contact details for AHL, a link to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels
Agreement and a Hostel Agreement Checklist to support the Agreement
process.

Related links

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY purposes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
