-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether students meet the minimum and maximum age
requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

AIC qualifications

To qualify for AIC, students must meet all eligibility requirements for
AIC. One of these conditions is that the student must be between the
minimum and maximum ages for AIC.

Minimum age

Students are generally eligible for AIC if they have reached the minimum
primary school entry age for the State or Territory in which they attend
a primary school. However, if a child has a disability or other
health-related condition which requires them to live away from the
family home, the minimum age is 3 years and 6 months.

Maximum age

For primary, secondary or ungraded level studies, maximum age is under
19 years on 1 January in the year of study. However, students receiving
Disability Support Pension or Parenting Payment (single) and studying
full-time at primary or equivalent ungraded level may receive the
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) under AIC until they turn 21.

The maximum age limit may be extended by 1 year (to under 20 as at 1
January) for students undertaking primary, secondary or ungraded level
studies if the student's progress through school has been delayed by
special circumstances such as illness, English language difficulties,
transfer from a different education system or periods of employment or
training.

For tertiary students, the maximum age is the minimum age at which the
state or territory requires the student to participate in education.

Secondary or tertiary students 16 and over may be eligible for Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY Living Allowance in their own right. Students may
choose to receive either one of these payments or their parent may
choose to receive AIC and retain eligibility for Family Tax Benefit.

Family Tax Benefit and AIC

FTB Part A can continue to be paid with AIC for dependent students aged
up to 19. FTB cannot be paid for students aged 16 or over receiving
Youth Allowance, ABSTUDY Living Allowance, or means tested School Fees
Allowance.

In addition, most state and territory governments also provide
assistance to isolated students that in some cases are linked to
eligibility for AIC. This assistance does not affect eligibility for AIC
or FTB. Families should choose the scheme which best suits their needs.

Proof of age requirements

Proof of age is not required if another Centrelink payment has been
claimed for or on behalf of the student where proof of age has already
been provided.

Proof of age is required if it is the first AIC claim for the student
and family assistance has never been paid for the student:

-   original Birth Certificate or Certified Extract
-   passport, Citizenship certificate or evidence of permanent residence
    that show the student's date of birth
-   previous government records that have been verified

Original documents or photocopies that have been certified by a Justice
of the Peace or a Commissioner of Declarations are required. However,
applicants living in isolated areas may have their original documents
photocopied and endorsed by an official of the local court, police
station or other government office. The photocopies must be stamped (if
an office stamp is used), signed and dated by the official viewing the
documents.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing claims and forms for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Australian Government assistance other than Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme received by applicant or student

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students, trainees and
Australian Apprentices (apprentices and trainees)

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES qualifications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
