
Calculating the commencement date of away from home rate for ABSTUDY 010-02060010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess the correct commencement
date for payment of the away from home rate of ABSTUDY for dependent
students and Australian Apprentices.

Commencement date

The commencement date for the away from home rate is determined by
whether the customer is an Australian Apprentice, is undertaking a
tertiary or secondary non-schooling level course, or is a secondary
school student.

The away from home rate is not payable before the customer is eligible
for Living Allowance in a year, however a customer may be approved for
Living Allowance at the standard rate before approval of the away from
home rate.

To determine the last day of eligibility for the away from home rate,
see Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate.

Secondary school students

A secondary school student is entitled to the away from home rate from 1
January, provided the student starts study at the education provider by
the third Friday of the school year. If the student does not start by
the third Friday of the school year, and there are no circumstances
beyond the student's control, the away from home rate is payable from
the date the student starts living away from the permanent home.

There are separate rules for a secondary school student boarding at a
school, an approved ABSTUDY Homestay arrangement, or hostel which is a
signatory to the ABSTUDY hostels agreement, and whose payments are
delivered as ABSTUDY boarding instalments. A student is entitled to the
away from home rate from the first day of the term entitlement period
for the term in which the student starts living away from home, provided
the student startsstudy at the education provider by the third Friday of
the term. If the student does not start by the third Friday of term, the
away from home rate is payable from the date the student starts living
away from the permanent home.

Note: some schools may have term dates that differ from the standard
state-based term dates. This should be taken into account when
calculating the third Friday.

Tertiary or secondary non-schooling students or Australian Apprentices

A tertiary or secondary non-schooling level student, or an Australian
Apprentice is normally entitled to payment of the away from home rate
from the later of:

-   the date they move out of the permanent home
-   the date they start the course or start working as an Australian
    Apprentice

Students living away from home before the start date

Secondary non-school students, tertiary students or Australian
Apprentices who start living away from the permanent home before the
first day of study or work can be entitled to the away from home rate
from the date they start living away from home. They must demonstrate a
reasonable need to live away from home before the first day of study or
work.

Reasons may include:

-   to establish a residence
-   take up a lease, or
-   purchase necessary items for the course or work

Unable to demonstrate a reasonable need to live away from home before the start date

Where a secondary non-school student, tertiary student or Australian
Apprentice cannot demonstrate a reasonable need to start living away
from home before the first day of study or work, the away from home rate
starts from the first day of study or work.

Students living away from home after the start date

A tertiary or secondary non-schooling level student or Australian
Apprentice who starts living away from the permanent home after the
first day of study or work is normally entitled to the away from home
rate from the date they start living away from home. If the customer has
circumstances that prevent them from living away from home earlier, and
they incurred accommodation costs, they are entitled to the away from
home rate from the later of:

-   the first day of the course or work
-   the date the customer began incurring accommodation costs

Further documentary evidence to support their claim

The Service Officer determines whether the reason and period the
customer starts living away from home before the course start date or
first day of work is reasonable, or if there are circumstances beyond
their control that contribute to them living away from home after the
first day of the course or work. A customer may be required to provide
documentary evidence to support their claim.

Secondary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some boarding providers closed and others had reduced capacity due
to social distancing requirements within the board facility.
Additionally, some students were unable to return to their private board
arrangements. Students who returned to their permanent home and did not
return to their boarding arrangements in Terms 2, 3 or 4 in 2020, or
Terms 3 or 4 in 2021, may continue to be entitled to the away from home
rate.

Continuing students

Students remain entitled to the away from home rate in Terms 2, 3 and 4
in 2020 or Terms 3 or 4 of 2021 if:

-   they were approved for boarding entitlements in the term immediately
    prior,
-   their board provider held a boarding place for them,
-   the student intended to return to board as soon as possible, and
-   the school/board provider continued to support the student study
    remotely using other methods, such as online

Students accepted at a new boarding provider after the start of either
Terms 3 or 4 in 2020 or Term 4 of 2021, are only entitled to the away
from home rate where they were physically present at the new boarding
provider.

Continuing students who changed board providers

Entitlement to the away from home rate for continuing students who
started with a new board provider in Term 2 in 2020 or Term 3 of 2021,
was dependant on their study mode and enrolment or acceptance date,
regardless of whether they qualified in Term 1 in 2020 or Term 2 of
2021. The following students remained entitled:

-   students who attended in person, or
-   students studying remotely and were accepted to board before the end
    of Term 1 on 2020 or Term 2 of 2021, to start in Term 2 in 2020 or
    Term 3 in 2021, and
-   continue to meet an away from home criteria for Term 2 in 2020 or
    Term 3 of 2021

Students with a new boarding provider, who were accepted to board after
the start of Term 2 in 2020 or Term 3 of 2021, were not entitled to the
away from home rate for Term 2 in 2020 or Term 3 of 2021,where they did
not attend in person.

Continuing students who started with a new boarding provider in Terms 3
or 4 in 2020 or Term 4 of 2021, were only entitled if they physically
attended the new boarding provider during the term they started.

New Claims

For ABSTUDY boarding claims granted from 1 April 2020, a student is
entitled to the away from home rate in Term 2 if they:

-   accepted to board before the end of Term 1 and study either in
    person or online during Term 2, or
-   accepted to board after the start of Term 2 and physically attend at
    the boarding provider during Term 2

For ABSTUDY boarding claims granted from 1 July 2020 or 2021 for Term 3
or 1 October 2020 or 2021 for Term 4, the student is entitled to the
away from home rate only where they physically attended the boarding
provider during the term they started.

Where students with new claims were entitled to the away from home rate,
claims should be assessed as per Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling
B Award, Tertiary Award and Masters and Doctorate Award. In Term 2, 3
and 4 of 2020, the Payment on Advice process did not occur, these claims
are granted from:

-   1 April 2020 for Term 2,
-   1 July 2020 for Term 3, or
-   1 October 2020 for Term 4

There was no change for students who continued to board and study in
person.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online study, as
face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home rate, and temporarily
transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19, remained
eligible for the away from home rate. Tertiary students must return to
face-to-face study as soon as it becomes available to continue to be
eligible for the away from home rate.

Students who had to move out of education provider accommodation (such
as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their parents,
remain eligible for the away from home rate providing they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who:

-   had their accommodation arrangement cancelled by the education
    provider and moved their belongings out of that accommodation
-   were approved for the Residential Cost Option (RCO)

Note: the away from home rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be paid
for any period that the education provider does not charge a residential
fee, rather than the reduced rate of Living Allowance.

The Resources page contains scenarios to assist with determining when it
is reasonable for the customer to move out of home and the date from
which the away from home rate will be paid.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
