
Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study 010-07010170

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a student needs to provide POE
and acceptable documentation.

When POE is needed

For ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES):

Customers must provide proof of enrolment where they are enrolled in a:

-   tertiary course at a Technical and Further Education (TAFE) or a
    private provider institution
-   secondary course at an institution other than a secondary school.
    This includes, university, TAFE or a private provider

For all other student payments:

Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) (student) customers are not normally
required to provide POE unless specifically requested. This may include
a request, as a result of a Tertiary Collection of Student Information
(TCSI) review, or where the study details provided by the student are
not clear.

Students under the Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme are not
required to supply POE.

Note: study at Open Universities Australia (OUA) should only be coded
for 1 study period or session at a time unless the customer has provided
POE that confirms enrolment for a longer period. See Eligibility for
student payments when enrolled in Open Universities Australia.

Requesting POE

For ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES):

If POE is required, the customer will be asked to provide it within 14
days of the course start date.

The customer's record should be coded as requiring verification (VRR) on
the Education Course Details (EDC) screen. Payment will automatically
suspend if POE has not been received and coded within 28 days.

For all other student payments:

The EDC screen does not need to be updated when POE has been requested.
This is usually because it will be requested as a part of a review, and
payment will automatically stop if the student does not comply with the
request.

POE is not the same as proof of study load

Service Officers should carefully assess documents provided by students
to ensure the specific information required by Services Australia is
included. For example, some enrolment documents may outline the study
load of the student or the units they are enrolled in, but will not
provide the name of the course or enrolment dates. Where proof of study
load has been provided, Service Officers should ensure it is recently
dated, as students are able to vary their study load throughout their
course.

Acceptable POE documents

The format of POE documents varies from one education institution to
another. If a customer makes an enquiry about the enrolment information
they have been asked to provide, Service Officers should check the
reason for the request to determine what evidence is required. For
example, verifying the course name to determine if it is an approved
course, or verifying a non-standard course start or finish date. POE
must include the student's full name to be deemed acceptable evidence.

Acceptable POE documents may include:

-   the institution's enrolment advice to the student
-   an enrolment fee receipt
-   Mainstream Enrolments Via the Internet (MEVI) receipts - (for TAFE
    courses only, and can only be accepted if the nominal course hours
    are on the receipt)
-   a Commonwealth Assistance Notice (this document shows enrolment in
    subjects at census date, subjects may have different census dates
    and customers will receive a separate Commonwealth Assistance Notice
    for each census date)
-   a student identification card (where period of enrolment is
    specified on the card)
-   a statement from the institution advising acceptance into the course
-   proof of registration for Open Learning Students
-   Productivity Places Programme letter of notification
-   electronic confirmation of a placement in Skills for Education and
    Employment (SEE)
-   placement by Workforce Australia in a short course (the Activity and
    Exemption Summary (AEX) screen must have 'SHD' - short course, and
    the course number must be included in the Job Plan)

Note: these documents are acceptable POE, but not proof of study load.

Either the original or a copy (photocopy or fax) of the above POE
documents, including printed versions of online documents, are
acceptable.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the Open Universities Australia
(OUA) website.

Related links

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities
Australia

Coding new study details

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
