-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Explaining the Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY Statement by Young Person (SY015) form

The below provides guidance for Service Officers when assisting a
customer to complete the SY015.

Address

The customer's present address. This is important, as the Service
Officer in the O18 UTLAH Assessment Team may need to contact the
customer.

Nominee

Customer needs to advise of any current nominee in place, and if so, do
they want the arrangement to continue.

Date the customer moved out of the parent(s)/guardian(s)' home

This is the date the customer left home. If the customer has left home
previously, the previous date or an estimated date can be used.

Customers' current living arrangements

The customer needs to provide details of where they are currently living
and if they are living with anyone else.

Parent(s)/guardian(s) details and living arrangements

Customer needs to provide the details for each parent/guardian, whether
they are living separately or apart and the customer's relationship to
each of them.

Third party confirmation

Contact information for someone who can provide details of the
customer's circumstances, for example, a counsellor, teacher, doctor,
relative or family friend.

Permission to contact

If the customer will not provide permission to contact their
parent(s)/guardian(s), complete a warm transfer to the Over 18 UTLAH
team.

Incident(s) and/or problem(s) that made the customer leave

The customer needs to explain what the problems are and include details
and examples where possible, including:

-   how long the problems have been occurring
-   whether there has been any attempt to sort out the difficulties and
    if so, what was attempted or reasons why no attempts have been made
-   the sort of contact they currently have with their parents
-   whether the customer is allowed to return home and if not, why not
-   whether the customer wants to return home and if not, why not

Suitability to live with either parent/guardian

If the parent(s)/guardian(s) are not living together, the customer needs
to advise if there has been any contact with the 'other parent/guardian'
(the parent/guardian the customer did not normally live with).

If they:

-   have not had contact with the 'other parent/guardian', why and
    whether any attempts were made to contact them
-   have had contact with the 'other parent/guardian', the customer
    needs to indicate if they get on with them, and if they would allow
    the customer to live with them. This should include any conditions
    on such living arrangements, or indications as to why they cannot
    live with the 'other parent/guardian'

Any other information that will help Centrelink decide if it is
unreasonable for the customer to live at home with the
parent(s)/guardian(s)

The customer can add any extra information they feel may help with the
application. This can include:

-   additional paper where there is insufficient room on the form
-   reports
-   any other supporting documents

Declaration

The customer needs to sign the declaration. By signing the declaration,
the customer is saying:

-   all the information they have provided is correct, and
-   they are aware there are penalties for giving false information, and
-   they acknowledge their personal information is protected by law

Services Australia links

Youth Allowance

Forms

Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY Statement by Young Person (SY015)

Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY Statement by Parents (SY016)

Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY Statement by Independent Third Party (SY017)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
