-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines travel for ABSTUDY. The purpose of compassionate
travel is to enable students to return from their term address to their
permanent home for compassionate reasons. In certain circumstances, a
close family member or community member with significant ties to the
student may instead visit an ill or injured student at the term address.

Eligibility for compassionate travel

The student must:

-   be eligible for Fares Allowance
-   meet one of the circumstances justifying travel for compassionate
    reasons, or
-   be an excluded (expelled) ABSTUDY student who meets certain criteria
    (see below)

Students who have been suspended or students attending an Away from Base
activity do not have access to compassionate travel.

The following non-student travellers have access to compassionate
travel:

-   Family member
-   Community member with significant ties to the student
-   Supervisor
-   Dependents of the student

Eligibility for excluded ABSTUDY students

Compassionate travel for an excluded student to return to their
permanent home can be granted if the school confirms the following:

-   The student is considered to be at harm to themselves or others as
    defined in the respective state/territory requirements
-   The school has followed necessary steps outlined in the
    state/territory legislative requirements, including contacting
    parent(s)/guardian(s) and the respective authorities, like the
    Police, Department of Child Safety/Children services
-   Alternative local solutions, such as relocating the young person
    with family members, have been exhausted
-   There is no other source of funding available
-   The school confirms all these steps have been taken

Limits

There is a maximum of 2 return trips allowed per student per year. A
family or community member may use one of these trips to visit the
student at the term address.

Under exceptional circumstances, the Department of Social Services (DSS)
may approve compassionate travel beyond these limits.

There are no limits to compassionate travel for excluded students.

Payment and claiming

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) for the journey can be authorised in
advance or reimbursed after the journey has taken place. See the
Resources page in ABSTUDY Fares Allowance for FAA claiming options.

Rate

Where eligibility is met, the student or non-student traveller is
entitled to a return journey between the:

-   student’s term address and home community, or
-   approved non-student traveller’s home community and the term address

If an approved non-student traveller has incurred accommodation and meal
costs during their stay, these costs may also be met.

The Resources page contains the ABSTUDY expulsion checklist, links to
the Indigenous Funeral Notices homepage, examples of FAA for
compassionate reasons and Q999 text.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
