
This document outlines information relevant to students who change their
study details. It assists Service Officers with coding these changes,
deciding whether or not further proof of enrolment is required, and if
the change will affect the student's entitlement to Youth Allowance
(YA).

Changes to study

Youth Allowance (YA) students are required to be undertaking full-time
study (or a concessional load) in an approved course.

The student may change their course details throughout the year for a
variety of reasons including:

-   changing their study loads
-   changing courses
-   changing educational institution
-   altering the course start or end date
-   studying overseas (if the overseas study is part of the current
    Australian approved course then the approved course details are not
    changed on the customer’s record).

Ceasing full-time study

If a YA (student) ceases full time study and they wish to retain
eligibility for YA as a jobseeker, they must notify Services Australia
and register as a job seeker within 14 days. Failure to notify cessation
of study within 14 days will result in cancellation of YA from Study End
Date plus one day. Payment of YA as a job seeker may only commence from
the date Services Australia was contacted and the First Contact Service
Offer (FCSO) has been initiated. A debt may be generated for students
who fail to notify cessation of studies. There is no change to policy or
process for customers advising an intention to study.

Activity Test

A customer receiving YA as an Australian Apprentice is not subject to an
activity test. However, their Commonwealth registration number must
remain current.

Effect on Family Tax Benefit

Changes in study details can also affect eligibility for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) for young persons aged 16-20.

Contact details

Customer's addresses (including postal address) and telephone details
(including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every contact, and
updated if required. Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves
via IVR, address details do not need to be confirmed.

Contents

Changing or correcting course of study or educational institution for
Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Effect of end of course on payments for students

Payment of Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy when a student is deferring
or discontinuing study before the end of the course

Increasing study load for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Student studying outside Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
