
Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018) 010-02010070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete a Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A
(SY018).

On this Page:

When to use this claim form

Customers who already have a Centrelink record (including a CHIld
record) can claim Schooling A by lodging a claim using the ABSTUDY
Claiming Tool process instead of a paper claim. This process must only
be used by the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Call and ABSTUDY Smart Centre
Processing.

Customers completing a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool can be
offered a verbal declaration. Customers who do not accept a verbal
declaration are required to return a signed CDF.

A customer’s acceptance to the verbal declaration is recorded in the
Verbal Declaration DOC, and in the Progress of ABSTUDY claim DOC.

Note: on 28 November 2016, a verbal declaration replaced the requirement
for the customer to return a signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF).
Customers who completed a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool prior
to 28 November 2016 are may still be required to return their signed
CDF. See ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process for more information. The
student's parent/guardian(s) is normally the applicant for Schooling A.

Customers who are unable to complete a claim through the ABSTUDY
Claiming Tool will need to complete the ABSTUDY Schooling A claim
(SY018) claim form.

A new claim must be lodged where there is a change of applicant, that
is, if the original applicant no longer has care and custody of the
student.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY Schooling A

ABSTUDY Schooling A is available for dependent students who are:

-   secondary students aged under 16 years old and living at home, or
-   primary students aged under 16 years old and living at home and are
    aged 14 years at 1 January of the year for which they are claiming.

Other assistance if not eligible for ABSTUDY Schooling A

Where the student is independent, boarding away from home, or aged 16
years and over, the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019) should be used.

Where the student is a secondary school student from a remote community
who needs to live away from home to attend school, or a student who
needs to repeat their final year of primary at another school and has to
live away from home, the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092) should
be used.

How to lodge a claim or supporting documents

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

-   [] Online - registered customers can upload their claim and any
    supporting documents online. For information about how to lodge
    online see Submitting your documents online on the Resources page
-   Fax - claims and supporting documents may be accepted by fax. The
    date the fax is received is considered the date of receipt for
    processing purposes.
-   Post - claims and supporting documents may be posted using the
    appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
    Processing team.
-   In Person - claims and supporting documents may be lodged in person
    at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a Services
    Australia field officer

The Resources page contains a link to the SY018.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A award

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)

Aboriginality or Torres Strait Islander status for ABSTUDY purposes

Residence requirements for ABSTUDY

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
