-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing a claim for ABSTUDY
Allowances and Part-time Award.

Claiming ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award

For information to assist customers or their correspondence nominee
claim ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award, see Claiming ABSTUDY.

ABSTUDY current customers do not have to lodge a new claim to apply for
allowances for additional courses or Australian Apprenticeships.
However, in some cases this may occur. The information provided in the
claim must be recorded on the customer's record.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing Teams process ABSTUDY claims. For more
information, see Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and
enquiries.

Claim and document lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged using any of the
following options:

-   [] Online - using the Upload documents service
-   Faxed - see Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post - via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services
    Australia. See Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
    PES
-   In person - at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a
    Centrelink field officer

Simplified claim assessment from 23 March 2020 for COVID-19 processing

Reduced evidence

ABSTUDY student and Australian Apprentice claims can be submitted and
assessed with reduced evidence.

If the applicant has provided evidence not requested in their claim, use
it to verify the claim information. Staff must not request documents
that are not required.

Assets test

The assets test is waived for ABSTUDY student and Australian Apprentice
claims from 23 March 2020 to 24 September 2020 inclusive. The applicant
is still asked to give details about their assets and provide evidence
with their claim. Use this evidence to verify the asset details. Staff
must not request documents that are not required.

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for ABSTUDY Allowances
and Part-time Award (SY021), to the Services Australia website about
uploading Centrelink documents online and a link to Office Locator.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Processing ABSTUDY claims in Process Direct

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Testing and Assessment Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Part-time Award

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Tax File Number (TFN) for ABSTUDY

Coding ABSTUDY education details

Startup Year Courses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
