
Completing the ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053) 010-02010180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines each section of the ABSTUDY Change of
Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053).

On this Page:

When to use this form

The ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquires Sheet (SY053) is issued to
customers who wish to advise Services Australia of a change of
circumstance. Although many changes in circumstance can be advised
verbally (for example, over the phone) and by using self service
portals, there may be times when a customer knows in advance of a change
(for example. change of address) but are not sure of the exact details.
In these cases they may prefer to be given this form that they can
complete and lodge when the details become known. It may also be issued
to customers who prefer to notify of changes in writing rather than
verbally or via self service.

Note: the form can also be issued to third parties such as partners,
parents, or others who wish to supply information Services Australia
about the student's circumstances.

Changing study details

[]Where customers wish to advise of a change in their study details
only, they can view and update them by using the Manage study details
online service or the Study Details section of the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app if they are registered for Online Account and are
authenticated.

Customers who are issued with the form need to complete the first two
questions, but the rest of the questions are optional, and filled out
only as required.

The SY053 has been divided into sections:

-   Personal details
-   Enquirer details
-   Change of address
-   Change of bank account details
-   Change of student or Australian Apprentice's income
-   Change of institution
-   Discontinuation of full-time studies
-   Tax details
-   Other
-   Declaration.

When assisting customers to complete a form that is used to assess their
eligibility for payment, Service Officers must not make any notations,
underlines or comments of any sort on a form that is to be signed by a
customer and lodged with Services Australia. Instead, any notations or
explanations to questions on the form should be made on a separate sheet
of paper and attached to the customer's file.

How to lodge this form

ABSTUDY claims and forms may be lodged via the following methods:

-   In person at a Services Australia service centre, Centrelink agency
    or with a remote services officer
-   Posted to the nearest service or processing centre
-   Faxed
-   [] Online via the Upload documents service

ABSTUDY processing has been consolidated across sites nationally. See
Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries for more
information about the responsibilities that each section of the agency
has when dealing with ABSTUDY related matters.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Change of
Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053).

Related links

Assessing the ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053)

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
