-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances when certain student payments
are paid to the student, parents, guardians or third parties.

Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY

YA and ABSTUDY is generally paid to the customer. There are, however,
circumstances when the payment is made to the parents, guardians or
third parties. The customer may also request the payment be made to a
nominee. If the customer is under 18 years of age, the payment is made
to the parent or guardian unless it is inappropriate, for example, if it
is unreasonable for the customer to live at home or the student is
independent (YA or ABSTUDY) .

If the customer is at boarding school, ABSTUDY may be paid directly to
the school/hostel or private board provider. There are certain 'payees'
for customers in receipt of ABSTUDY Living Allowance, see Living
Allowance for ABSTUDY.

Note: only one payment destination can be nominated. Any disagreement
between two parent(s)/guardian(s) as to the payment destination must be
resolved. If the student is dependent on only one parent then Services
Australia will comply with that parent/guardian's request.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

AIC payments are generally made to the applicant. However, at the
applicant’s request, payments can be made to a third party. These are
usually a private board provider, educational institution (for example,
boarding school) or a student accommodation provider (for example,
school term hostel).

Payment of AIC to an organisation can also occur where a non-government
organisation is an approved applicant for an eligible student.

YA and ABSTUDY payments directed to customer aged under 18

Dependent customers receiving YA or ABSTUDY as secondary school students
who are under 18 years of age have their payments directed to their
parent/guardian(s). In some circumstances, the payments can be directed
to the YA or ABSTUDY customer.

Payment can be paid directly to a dependent aged under 18 years old
customer, if:

-   the young person is not benefiting from the allowance because the
    parent(s) are using it for other purposes, or
-   the parents choose to have payments paid to the young person and
    authorises the change

Independent students must have payments directed to their own account
unless they appoint a Payment Nominee.

Note: where the parent has requested that payments be made to their
under 18 year old child they can also request that payments revert back
to their own account - no explanation or reason is needed.

ABSTUDY payments directed to customer aged under 18

ABSTUDY payments are paid directly to a dependent 16 or 17-year-old
when:

-   studying at a secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and
    Doctorate level, or
-   undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship

Payments must be made to the ABSTUDY customer in these cases as they are
considered to be the 'payee'. They have the option of appointing a
Payment Nominee.

In general, an ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice who are in State
Care receiving Living Allowance receives their allowances direct.
However, the authority may request that payment be made direct to the
care giver or a person nominated by the student or Australian
Apprentice, if:

-   the relevant government authority or an organisation approved by
    that authority believes that payment of allowances direct to younger
    students or Australian Apprentices could jeopardise the
    student-carer or Australian Apprentice-carer relationship, or
-   it is determined that the student or Australian Apprentice is unable
    to manage his/her own finances, for example. a student in a special
    school

Note: where the parent has requested that payments be made to their
under 18 year old child they can also request that payments revert back
to their own account - no explanation or reason is needed.

When a YA or ABSTUDY dependent customer turns 18 years

Once a dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer has turned 18 years of age, the
payment must either be paid to an account held by the customer (or
parents if the customer has a joint bank account with them) or a Payment
Nominee arrangement must be made.

ABSTUDY Payments made to a third party

ABSTUDY Students approved for away from home entitlements have strict
rules governing the payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY. This
includes boarding organisations receiving full student entitlements.
While payments may be made to a third party they remain the taxable
income of the student. See Payments to third parties and institutions
for ABSTUDY.

Note: Some students who are boarding may have their payments directed to
a Boarding School or Hostel that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Hostel
Agreement. However, bank details still need to be recorded for the carer
or student on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS) screen so that
residue/supplementary payments are paid correctly.

ABSTUDY and AIC Overpayments

Debts that may be incurred due to an overpayment are the responsibility
of the person who received the payment.

For AIC, funds paid incorrectly to a Third Party Organisation may be
recovered in some circumstances

SS313 form

The Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on your
behalf (SS313) form, is not required by ABSTUDY customers or AIC
applicants to direct payments to a third party where this is part of the
normal payment arrangements or options for these payments. As AIC does
not have a provision for nominee arrangements, payments to a third party
on that basis cannot be made.

The Resources page contains a link to the SS313 form.

Contents

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) purposes

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Payments to third parties and institutions for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC)

Related links

Nominees

Nominee organisations

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Protection of customer payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
