
Completing the Claim form for Austudy (SY002) 010-04010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete a Claim for Austudy (SY002).
Austudy is a payment for full-time students and Australian Apprentices
who are 25 years of age or over.

On this Page:

Paper claim (SY002)

This form is only used to claim Austudy if the customer is unable to
submit an online claim and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) cannot be used.

The SY002 is not available for download on the Services Australia
website. It can only be issued to a customer by a Service Officer.

Online claim

[] Full-time students and Australian Apprentices who are claiming
Austudy are required to claim online.

If a full-time student or Australian Apprentice customer contacts about
an Austudy new claim transaction they must be referred to make their
claim online unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU),
    or
-   a Service Officer determines the customer is unable or unsuitable to
    complete an online claim, or
-   they indicate they are unable to claim as they are in a remote area

In these situations, Service Officers can use Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) to record the customer’s details and register a new claim to be
processed.

Current Austudy customers

Customers currently receiving Austudy as a student are not required to
lodge a new claim to receive Austudy as an Australian Apprentice.
Services Australia will obtain the Australian Apprenticeship details
from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

If there is a gap between ceasing study and commencing the Australian
Apprenticeship and the customer wishes to access income support during
this gap, they must claim JobSeeker Payment as a job seeker.

Completing the claim

Points to note when completing the claim:

-   All relevant questions on the claim should be answered. Many
    questions only need a Yes or No tick and, depending on the answer,
    some questions may be skipped
-   The claim must be signed by the customer. If the customer has a
    correspondence nominee, the correspondence nominee can sign the
    claim form on behalf of the customer
-   Identity confirmation is required
-   Proof of student status is not required for students unless there is
    doubt as to the enrolment status of the student (for example, a
    customer is not sure of the exact course details). See Proof of
    enrolment (POE) in a course of study for examples of acceptable
    evidence
-   If a customer indicates they are a full-time Australian Apprentice,
    the Services Australia will obtain the Australian Apprenticeship
    details from the Department of Education, Skills and Employment
-   Other documentation may need to be provided, including proof of
    income. A checklist at the back of the claim indicates which
    documents are required. Other forms may need to be completed before
    the claim can be assessed. The claim indicates when these forms may
    be needed. Service Officers can issue forms
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) questions have been removed as
    Austudy customers are entitled to an automatically issued Health
    Care Card (HCC) from 1 January 2019

Helping customers complete forms

Service Officers must not make any notations, comments or underline
claim forms signed by a customer and lodged with Services Australia. Any
notations or explanations to questions should be made on a separate
sheet of paper and attached to claim.

Lodgement of claim

Customers using the SY002 form to claim Austudy can post their claim to
Services Australia or lodge it online.

Note: for paper claims scanned onto the customer’s record, the system
will auto-create a Social Online Application (SOA) shell in Process
Direct.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website and
links to forms.

Related links

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

Austudy qualifications

Nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
