
Assessing satisfactory progress and allowable time for tertiary students for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-05110050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess satisfactory progress and allowable
time for tertiary students for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Satisfactory progress

PES is a payment that can be made to eligible customers while they are
studying but it is not paid indefinitely. A student must be making
satisfactory progress in their course for payments to continue.

A student is generally making satisfactory progress if the amount of
time spent studying in the course (together with the time spent studying
in other courses at the same level) is not greater than the allowable
time for that course.

A student in receipt of Austudy or PES who is undertaking a Vocational
Education and Training (VET) course with a full-time duration of 1 year
or less and whose tertiary study has only ever been in VET courses with
a full-time duration of 1 year or less, will never reach their allowable
time for their course as all of their previous study is disregarded.
This may mean that both full-time and 25 per cent concessional students
in this situation can continue to receive Austudy or PES for these
courses, subject to meeting all other requirements. These VET courses
are generally Certificate level courses offered through a VET provider.

Allowable time

Allowable time is measured against the time allowed to study a course
based on the normal duration of that course (sometimes called minimum
time). Time already spent in study at the same level is then deducted
from this limit to determine whether the customer is still undertaking
qualifying study. Study load concessions may further extend the duration
for which payment can be made.

Customers can study a second course at the same level within the
allowable study time rules. That is, they can use any additional time
available to them to commence a second course at the same level, but
will lose qualification once they reach the allowable time for one
course.

A determination of the student's progress can be made at the relevant
date. If on this day, the total of the student's previous study in the
current course and other courses at the same level does not exceed the
allowable time for the current course, the student is making
satisfactory progress. Payment of PES can continue until the student
exceeds the allowable time for the course.

If the time already spent on the course of the same level as the current
course exceeds the allowable time for the course on the relevant date,
consideration should be given whether some or all of the earlier study
can be disregarded.

Previous study

Current full-time students

If the previous study was undertaken as a full time study load, then,
only the normal minimum duration of a completed course is taken into
account, whether or not the student studied for longer than that.

Where study load aggregation has been applied to satisfy full-time study
requirements, all study periods included in the aggregation assessment
are counted as full-time.

If the previous study was undertaken as a 25% concessional study-load
student, then the previous study is treated as equal to the minimum
amount of time that a full-time student would have taken to complete the
previous study. For example, a student completed 4 years as a 25%
concessional study-load student and is now a full-time student. Their
previous study is counted as one year because this is how long a
full-time student would have taken to complete the same study.

Current 25% concessional study-load students - measuring previous study

If the previous study was undertaken as:

-   a 25% concessional study-load student, or
-   a full-time student, or
-   a 66% concessional study-load student,

then the previous study is treated the same. It is counted as full
years, regardless of whether study was 25% concessional or full-time or
whether PES was paid.

For 25% concessional study-load students, PES is payable for twice the
length of time it would take a full-time student to complete the current
course being studied. This means where the current course is 3 years
full-time, then PES is payable for 6 years. Any study previously
undertaken at the same level is subtracted from the 6 years. It is not
relevant whether the previous study was full-time or 25% concessional or
whether PES was paid.

For example, a 25% concessional study-load student beginning a 3 year
course had previously undertaken 3 years study at the same level, some
as a 25% concessional study-load student, some as a full-time student.
PES was paid only for one year. Those 3 past years of study are counted
as 3 years so the student can be paid PES for a further 3 years if they
continue as a 25% concessional study-load student.

Masters or Doctorate course previously completed

A customer who has completed a Masters or Doctorate level course in
Australia or an overseas qualification of the same standing cannot
qualify for PES.

The Resources page contains scenarios to assist with determining
satisfactory progress, a link to the Student Programme Resource Tool,
plus an attachment relating to measuring time spent for tertiary
students.

Related links

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Defining levels of tertiary study

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress for secondary students for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
