-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains Thesis Allowance for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study. It is paid to ABSTUDY students undertaking or have
completed Masters or Doctorate studies. It is to help with the costs
related to the presentation of a thesis or other similar course
requirements. This may include the costs of printing, publishing and
binding the thesis. This allowance is a contribution to the costs of
production of the thesis and does not include costs such as a purchase
of computer equipment.

Eligibility

The student must:

meet the eligibility criteria for the Masters and Doctorate Award, and

be receiving or have received at least $1.00 of entitlement (during the
academic period they are claiming) of one of the following:

-   Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, or
-   before 1 January 2022, a Defence Force Income Support-like
    (DFISA-like) payment under the Veterans' Entitlement Act 1986

Claiming

The customer must provide:

-   a detailed letter outlining the costs to be incurred and any quotes
    received
-   the original payment accounts details or receipts

If the customer only has copies and cannot get originals from the
service provider, they can provide a statutory declaration. The customer
must verify they are 'true copies' of the originals.

The customer must claim within 2 years of the expiry of the Masters and
Doctorate Award.

Rate

Customers, where reasonable, may receive up to the maximum amount of the
Thesis Allowance payable.

Thesis Allowance rates depend on whether the customer is completing a
Masters or Doctorate.

Payment

Students will receive a one-off payment when they provide the required
documents.

The Resources page contains Q999 text.

Contents

Completing an ABSTUDY claim

Processing an ABSTUDY claim

Related links

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study

ABSTUDY Relocation Allowance

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
