-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures for negotiating an Activity
Agreement with Youth Allowance students who are starting a new tertiary
course, after not completing a previous tertiary course.

When an Activity Agreement is necessary

A Youth Allowance (YA) student who is returning to study full time in a
new tertiary course after previously starting, but not completing a
different tertiary course, is required to enter into an Activity
Agreement. The exception to this is when the person withdrew from or
failed the previous tertiary course due to exceptional circumstances.
This means the student will have to complete the second (or subsequent)
course within the time allowed for that course, unless there are special
circumstances preventing them from doing so.

An Activity Agreement is usually required where the new course and the
discontinued course are at the same level of study.

Note: if a student returns to study in the same type of course (for
example, Bachelor of Arts) at a different education provider, it is
considered to be a new course.

Activity Agreement automatically generated in the online claim

YA tertiary students will be subject to a YA Activity Agreement (within
the online claim) if they advise in their online claim:

-   they have only attempted one previous incomplete tertiary course,
    and
-   they have not withdrawn or failed due to exceptional circumstances

The YA Activity Agreement will display a personalised agreement with a
declaration and allow the customer to agree/disagree.

In the following circumstances, the Activity Agreement will need to be
negotiated manually:

-   the study information provided in the online claim is incorrect
-   there are multiple incomplete tertiary courses at the same level of
    study

Do not hold claims awaiting the return of or agreement to a YA Activity
Agreement:

finalise the claim

issue the activity agreement, and

set a review for 22 days to:

-   check that the activity agreement has been returned or uploaded by
    the student, or
-   undertake an allowable time assessment

Manually completing an Activity Agreement

When it is determined that an Activity Agreement is required, or the
customer has not agreed to the terms of the agreement within the online
claim, complete and issue a SY103 - Youth Allowance tertiary student -
Activity Agreement.

Note: these forms can be pre-filled with the customer's details before
printing.

The Manage Activity Agreements for Students screen in the Student
Activity Agreement workflow in Customer First is used to record or view
information contained in an Activity Agreement, unless the Activity
Agreement was automatically generated in an online claim. In these
circumstances, view the Activity Agreement within the Process Direct
claim Slider. 'YAAA' will display on the Claim DOC Summary Line in the
customer's document list.

Satisfactory progress

To remain eligible for YA, a student must be making satisfactory
progress in their course.

The Resources page contains the Activity Agreement template for tertiary
YA students.

Related links

Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) students

General course requirements for Centrelink administered payments for
students

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Participation and serious failures for students, trainees and Australian
Apprentices

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
