
Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online claims and Assisted Customer Claims 010-04010060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers make an online claim for
Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy and when to use Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC).

Customer contacts about claiming YA or Austudy

Students and Australian Apprentices 15 years and over wishing to apply
for YA or Austudy are required to claim online. If they contact about a
YA or Austudy new claim transaction, refer them to make their claim
online unless:

-   self-service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU)
-   the Service Officer determines the customer is unable or unsuitable
    to complete an online claim, or
-   the customer indicates they are unable to claim as they are in a
    remote area

In these situations, Service Officers can use ACC to record the
customer's details and register a new claim to be processed.

Students and Australian Apprentices under 15 years will need to lodge a
Claim for Youth Allowance (SY001).

Starting the online claim

Customers must submit claims for YA or Austudy online. Customers must
have an active Centrelink online account before they can submit their
claim. See How customers create a myGov account and link services.
Before referring a customer to register, check if their identification
has been confirmed. Customers who have not confirmed their
identification must attend a service centre with original identification
documents.

After a customer accesses the Make a Claim page in their online account,
they must answer streaming questions on the Check your eligibility
screen to determine if the student or Australian Apprentice is claiming
the most suitable income support payment. If the customer would not be
eligible for a particular payment type based on their answers to these
questions, the screen flow will advise of the reason they are ineligible
and refer them to the Payment and Service Finder to explore alternative
options.

Completing and submitting the online claim

Students and Australian Apprentices claiming YA or Austudy are required
to complete the online claim question sets and provide all required
documents before they can submit their claim.

Students can submit the claim through their Centrelink online account or
the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app once all the required documents
have been provided

Eligible students will receive payments from the date they actually
submit a complete claim

From 1 January 2019, the system will issue students and Australian
Apprentices claiming YA or Austudy a Health Care Card (HCC). They will
receive their card after their claim has been granted. The system will
determine the best type of concession card based on concession hierarchy
rules

Students who have not submitted their claim within 14 days will still be
able to access their started claim for up to 13 weeks before it expires,
but payments will only commence from the claim submission date, unless
they are identified as vulnerable. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers before returning to this process

Once a claim has expired, the customer must start the claim process
again if they wish to continue claiming an income support payment.
Additionally, the customer may not qualify to be paid from their
original contact date

When a claim expires, as no claim submission or decision made, the claim
expiry has no review and appeal rights. See Circumstance Change Monitor
(CCM)

A customer may be selected for a reduced question set claim if they are:

-   in receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment Partnered
    or Single (PPP/PPS). For more information, see Transfer to Austudy
    or Youth Allowance (YA) (Student) from another payment
-   in receipt of Austudy or YA (if over 22 years or with a
    non-reviewable independence reason) and have a status of cancel next
    pay (CNP)
-   were cancelled (CAN) off JSP, PPP, PPS, Austudy or YA (if over 22
    years or with a non-reviewable independence reason) within the last
    52 weeks

Note: customers identified as being vulnerable will still be able to
submit their claim without providing additional documents, advise them
to provide this information as soon as possible.

The online claim does not have to be completed in the 1 session.
Customers can save their responses and continue with their claim later.
Advise customers payment can only commence from the date they submit
their claim.

Customers must accept a declaration before they can submit their claim.
This is a legal declaration and removes the need for a signed claim
form.

If it is determined a customer must enter into a YA Activity Agreement
based on their online claim responses, a personalised Activity Agreement
displays both in the online claim and in the ACC. The customer must
agree/disagree to the terms of the Activity Agreement. If they disagree
to the terms, a warning message displays. Whether they agree or disagree
to the terms, they can still submit their online claim for assessment.

Customers also have the option to voluntarily cancel or withdraw an
online claim.

Completing Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

If the customer cannot claim online, use ACC. Do this in the channel the
customer contacts, that is, service centre or Smart Centre.

Wherever possible, the customer must submit an online claim online or
through the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. This allows customers to
have access to full functionality of the claim tracker and associated
services.

ACC also allows a customer to 'channel hop' where required because:

-   the customer can start a claim online and have it continued by a
    Service Officer, and
-   a Service Officer can assist a customer with starting a claim, which
    the customer can then complete online (an active Centrelink online
    account is required)

Note: do not run the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow for
these claims.

Read the verbal declaration script to customers at the end of the ACC.

By ticking the Declaration box on the Review your claim page, the
Service Officer is confirming they have read the declaration script and
the customer has accepted it.

Once a verbal declaration is completed and the ACC submitted,
confirmation of the acceptance of the verbal declaration will display
automatically in the following places:

-   the Notes section of Process Direct
-   Super Case (notes) of customer First
-   the Customer Claim Summary

There is no need to print or sign a CDF if the verbal declaration is
accepted. If the Service Officer completes ACC in person with the
customer, the customer can choose to have a copy of the Review and
Confirm page printed for their records by the Service Officer. The
customer does not need to return this, the declaration will be accepted
verbally. The customer can log onto their Centrelink online account at
any time to review the details of their circumstances.

Supplying additional documents required for claim

Customers can supply further information or documents for their claim by
uploading information via Upload documents on Next Steps. If a customer
has started a claim and they open the standalone Upload documents from
the landing page in their Centrelink online account, there will be a
link to Next Steps.

Customers can supply documents for their claim by uploading in the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. Once the customer provides all
required documents, they can submit the claim in the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app.

When customers provide documents in person to support their online
claim, accept and scan the documents. Record the receipt of these
documents using the Request and Manage Customer Tasks guided procedure.
See Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM).

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process YA or Austudy student claims automatically if
they meet these criteria:

-   Identity is confirmed
-   Residency requirements met
-   Tax file number recorded
-   Employment status requirements met
-   No change in known relationship details
-   No change in known children details
-   The customer does not identify as having a disability, a medical
    condition which impacts their ability to study or is in a
    bereavement period
-   Accommodation requirements are met
-   Study details are able to be confirmed

The system may process YA student claims automatically where the above
criteria is met in addition to the following:

-   Parental Income requirements met
-   Independence requirements met

If a claim meets the criteria for an automated assessment, DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created
these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the Digital Support Resources page. It also contains FAQs for generic
online claims and Student and Apprentice online claims.

Related links

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA) (Student) from another
payment

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Using Centrelink self service

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Withdrawal of claims

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Upload documents service

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
