-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance is paid to
meet expenses associated with study/training in an approved course, such
as general purpose education institution fees, textbooks, equipment and
stationery.

Eligibility criteria

A student or Australian Apprentice is eligible for Incidentals Allowance
if they meet the eligibility criteria for the:

-   Schooling B Award
-   Tertiary Award
-   Part-time Award, or
-   Masters and Doctorate Award

The above Awards include student recipients of ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES).

Claiming Incidentals and other non means tested allowances

The customer's initial Incidentals Allowance entitlement is
automatically calculated and paid as part of their new claim for ABSTUDY
or ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement.

Students or Australian Apprentices claiming Incidentals Allowance (and
other non-means-tested allowances, depending on their circumstances),
can submit:

-   an online claim (tertiary students and Australian Apprentices only)
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) (tertiary students and Australian
    Apprentices only)
-   ABSTUDY Claiming Tool (secondary students only), or
-   a paper claim form, ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021)

This includes customers who are receiving another Centrelink payment,
such as Parenting Payment Partnered, who wish to remain on that payment
and claim ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance only.

Note: customers who lodge any claim for ABSTUDY by the relevant closing
date, and Incidentals Allowance can be assessed, they are not required
to lodge another claim. See Claiming ABSTUDY for examples of when an
ABSTUDY claim is or is not required.

Concurrent Awards

Where a Student or Australian Apprentice is studying 2 or more courses,
they can receive multiple Incidentals Allowance payments for the same
period if receiving concurrent Awards, providing that only one of the
Awards pays ABSTUDY Living Allowance or the Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES).

Therefore, they may be able to receive Incidentals Allowance for each of
the activities in the examples below:

-   A customer is studying a full-time course under the Tertiary Award
    and a part-time course under the Part-time Award simultaneously, so
    Incidentals Allowance may be paid for each course
-   A customer is studying a full-time course under the Tertiary Award
    and a second full-time course under another Tertiary Award
    simultaneously. Incidentals Allowance may be paid for each full-time
    course
-   A customer is studying 4 part-time courses simultaneously, each
    course under a Part-time Award (so 4 concurrent). Incidentals
    Allowance may be paid for the 4 courses
-   A customer is studying a part-time course in addition to undertaking
    an Australian Apprenticeship, so they may be able to receive
    Incidentals Allowance for each of these activities

Note: there is no limit to how many ABSTUDY awards a customer can study
at one time.

How the rate of Incidentals Allowance is calculated

The initial rate of entitlement to Incidentals Allowance is determined
by the period of enrolment in the course, or period as an Australian
Apprentice, during the year of assistance. Entitlement is established by
commencement in that course or Australian Apprenticeship, and is not
affected by early discontinuation. The Process page contains information
on how the rate of Incidentals Allowance is calculated.

Incidentals Allowance payment information

Incidentals Allowance is paid to the student or Australian Apprentice.
Incidentals Allowance is not taxable, it is not means-tested, and
entitlement is not affected by study load.

Where essential course costs are high, students may also qualify for
Additional Incidentals Allowance Note: Additional Incidentals Allowance
is not available for Australian Apprentices.

The Resources page contains examples of how much Incidentals Allowance
can be paid where customers have changed their study circumstances.

Related links

Rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
