-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of the rate of YA payable to a
young person placed under the care of a State or Territory Government
department. This usually means that the young person will be placed in a
government funded home or with foster parents.

Eligibility requirements

For a customer to be considered independent under State care criterion,
they must:

-   be in the guardianship, care or custody of a court, a Minister or a
    Department, of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or
-   be under a current direction from a court (including the Family
    Court), Minister or Department placing them in the guardianship,
    care or custody of someone who is not their natural or adoptive
    parent (Note: this may include care from other family members, for
    example grandparents, aunts and uncles), or
-   have been in one of the situations above, and only ceased to be in
    that situation because of their age

Voluntary placements

Some young people in voluntary placements do not have a direction from a
court, Minister or Department nor are they in the guardianship, care or
custody of a court, Minister or Department. These young people do not
meet the criteria to be considered independent on the basis of being in
State care.

State or Territory paid allowance

If the young person is under 16 years of age, the State or Territory
Government may pay an allowance for their upkeep of the young person.
From age 16 to 17 this allowance may or may not continue to be paid. The
State or Territory authorities determine this. Once a young person
reaches 18 years of age this allowance will usually cease.

There is no requirement for the payment to be ongoing. For example, a
young person who has been placed in a youth refuge by their Department
of Community Services (DOCS) case manager is in supported State or
Territory care (upkeep) unless the organisation providing the care
receives no government funding from any agency of the government.

Rate of YA

The rate of YA that can be paid to a young person who is or was in State
care depends on whether or not the State or Territory Government is
currently paying an allowance for their support. That is, they will be
entitled to the rate applicable to either a young person in:

-   supported State care when the State or Territory Government is
    paying an allowance for their support. YA is paid at the equivalent
    of the at home rate of YA, or
-   unsupported State care when an allowance is not paid for their
    support. YA is paid at the equivalent of the away from home rate of
    YA

The young person is considered to be independent on the grounds they are
in State care, (if they are not living with a parent) and, as such,
their rate of YA is not affected by the parental means tests. There may
be circumstances where a customer in supported State care can receive
Rent Assistance. If the customer is paying rent and not living with
their foster parent this person is not accommodated Independent. Rent
Assistance can be added to their rate because they have a rent
liability.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
current YA rates.

Related links

Assessing independence when a customer is in State care

Rate chart for maximum payment of Youth Allowance (YA)

Making an unfavourable decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
