-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Basic Boarding Allowance (BA) and Additional
Boarding Allowance (ABA) can be paid under the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme for students who need to live away from home to
undertake approved study.

General eligibility

General AIC eligibility criteria must be met for the applicant and
student.

BA is payable for eligible students who need to live away from the
principal family home in an approved board arrangement during school
term to have daily access to appropriate schooling.

If a student needs to board for short periods during the year, for
example, to undertaking diagnostic testing and/or receive support for a
learning disability, or when access from the principal family home to
the school is cut off due to special weather conditions, short-term BA
is available.

BA is payable for eligible students living in a special institution
catering for students with disabilities or health-related conditions
where they are residing there for a period of at least 20 continuous
school days.

BA is not payable for students who have been formally placed in
full-time residential care at a special institution by a state/territory
authority which provides foster care allowance to the institution for
the upkeep of the student.

DSP and PPS customers

If the student receives Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting
Payment Single (PPS), and is undertaking primary or equivalent ungraded
study and qualifies for BA, AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) is
the appropriate payment.

Rate of Boarding Allowance

Maximum rate Boarding Allowance (BA) is payable for students boarding
full-time - at least 4 nights per week. Otherwise, the rate is based on
the number of nights per week boarding, or the short-term boarding
period.

Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA)

ABA is the only AIC allowance that is means tested. It is payable for
students:

-   who qualify for BA
-   whose parental income complies with the Parental Means Test
-   whose annual boarding costs (made up of the actual boarding charges
    plus $250 for incidentals) exceed the maximum annual Basic Boarding
    Allowance rate

The rate of ABA is calculated as a combination of PIT income and the
amount of Actual boarding charges paid/to be paid.

The actual boarding charges paid, is the amount of boarding fees levied
by the institution, less any boarding reductions, scholarships, refunds
or subsidies. This includes state or territory boarding subsidies such
as WA's Boarding Away from Home Allowance (BAHA). See Resources for an
example on how to calculate boarding fees paid.

Other arrangements to pay boarding fees (that is, contributions by
private sources such as friends or relatives) do not affect the level of
actual boarding charges and are considered as the equivalent as paid by
the applicant.

The Resources page has contact details for the ABSTUDY and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) - AIC Level 2 helpdesk, letter templates and
examples for determining Boarding Allowance eligibility.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second
Home Allowance (SHA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
