
Exemptions from study for ABSTUDY 010-02080090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if an ABSTUDY student will be
exempt from the requirement to undertake full-time study.

Approved absences

One of the general eligibility criteria for ABSTUDY is that students
must be undertaking approved study. However, if a student is not able to
undertake full-time study due to circumstances beyond his/her control
the student may be granted a concession from studying for a period.
These absences from study may be regarded as approved absences.
Generally, these absences are approved by the school.

An absence of up to 10 days may be disregarded where it results from a
transfer between schools for secondary schooling students.

Extended Period of approved absence

Secondary student - Full-time secondary school students will retain
their entitlement to ABSTUDY during extended periods of approved
absence, unless they discontinue study.

Tertiary student - a tertiary or secondary non schooling student can
remain entitled to payment for up to eight weeks for a medical condition
for which the student supplies a medical certificate.

A tertiary or secondary non schooling student may also receive one
additional period of extension if a further medical certificate is
provided. For further details, see Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or
Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated.

Youth Disability Supplement

Full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt of ABSTUDY who
are 21 years of age and under may be entitled to Youth Disability
Supplement (YDS). The customer must have been assessed by an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) as having a
partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week.

Living Allowance

Where an approved absence extends into an end of year vacation period
and the student intends to continue with full time education in the
following year, Living Allowance can continue to be paid until the day
before commencement of study in the following year. Subsequent year
entitlement will be assessed on the student's circumstances in that
year.

Note: a secondary school student has no entitlement to Living Allowance,
Rent Assistance, Remote Area Allowance or Pharmaceutical Allowance for a
period during which s/he is expelled, suspended or excluded from school.

Related links

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Determining Activity Test breaches for unapproved absences - ABSTUDY
secondary students

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
