
Scholarships paid under Social Security Law 010-07030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Student Start-up Scholarship
(SSS) and the Relocation Scholarship (RS). Note: SSS payments ceased
from 1 July 2017 to all grandfathered customers. The following
information about SSS is for reference purposes only.

Scholarship administration

SSS and RS payments are made under the Social Security Act 1991.
Services Australia administers the payment of SSS and RS to eligible
students receiving:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Austudy (SSS only) or
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) administers the payment of SSS
and RS to eligible students receiving payments under the Veterans'
Children's Entitlement Scheme (VCES) or Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme (MRCEATS).

Note: a person cannot qualify for the same type of scholarship from both
Services Australia and DVA for the same period.

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS)

From 1 January 2016, SSS was replaced by a voluntary Student Start up
Loan (SSL), which must be repaid through the tax systems once the
recipient's taxable income reaches a certain threshold. Grandfathering
provisions apply for students who received a SSS before 1 January 2016
ad meet the eligibility criteria for the Scholarship payment.

The SSS payment ceased from 1 July 2017 and no customer will be paid SSS
from that day even if they are grandfathered.

If a customer is deemed eligible to be grandfathered as of 1 January
2016, and no SSS was paid in 2016 or 2017, they may get back paid
automatically.

Relocation Scholarship (RS)

RS is intended to assist higher education students with the costs of
moving away from home to undertake study.

RS can be paid to students:

-   relocating from regional areas to study an approved scholarship
    course
-   relocating from city areas to study an approved scholarship course
    at a regional campus
-   undertaking approved oversea study where the overseas study
    contributes to and can be credited towards a full time course in
    Australia

Students relocating from regional areas are paid automatically when the
agency receives their family home address and campus details. All other
eligible students need to provide verification of their campus location
to the agency before RS can be paid. The Campus Verification Form
(SY101) can be submitted through [] ExpressPlus, [] Online account or
over the counter. For students undertaking approved overseas study,
their portability verification documents are sufficient evidence.

Students undertaking online courses and Austudy customers cannot qualify
for a Relocation Scholarship.

Note: ABSTUDY students in state care (not receiving Foster Care
Allowance) are to be assessed the same way as ABSTUDY dependent students
who are living away from home for the purposes of Relocation
Scholarship.

Students undertaking an approved scholarship course and receiving an
eligible payment may qualify for RS unless they receive a Commonwealth
Accommodation Scholarship (CAS) for the same period.

The rate an individual is eligible for depends on:

-   the regional classification of the student's family home under the
    Australian Standard Geographical Classification (ASGC), and
-   the number of previous RS qualifying year(s) the student has
    undertaken

There are three different rates of RS.

See

R-Y Rates and Thresholds for the current amounts of SSS and RS.

Precluding payments

A person cannot qualify for:

-   More than one SSS in the same period. This includes SSS paid under
    any scheme, whether paid by Services Australia or by DVA
-   SSS and a Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship (CECS) in
    relation to the same period. This includes where the person
    qualifies for a CECS but does not receive a CECS payment because
    their CECS has been suspended
-   More than one RS in the same period. This includes RS paid under any
    scheme, whether paid by Services Australia or by DVA
-   RS and a Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS) in relation to
    the same period. This includes where the person qualifies for a CAS
    but does not receive a CAS payment because their CAS has been
    suspended

Qualification for, or receipt of any other scholarship (that is, equity
or merit-based scholarships, or Indigenous scholarships - unless they
include a CECS or CAS component) does not preclude a person from
qualifying for a RS or SSS in relation to the same period.

A customer may qualify for SSS and RS at the same time.

Scholarship income

SSS and RS paid by Services Australia are entirely exempt from the
Income Test.

Income from other scholarships (for example, equity or merit-based
scholarships) may be regarded as income.

Contents

Assessing scholarship income

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) eligibility

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) payment and coding

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

Scholarship study requirements

Commonwealth Scholarships

Student Start-up Loan (SSL)

Student Start-up Loan (SSL) Study requirements

Related links

Rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
