-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria, payment and coding for
SSL.

SSL replaced the Student Start-Up Scholarship

The Student Start up Loan (SSL) replaced the Student Start-Up
Scholarship (SSS) from 1 January 2016. The SSS ceased from 1 July 2017.
Payments are no longer issued to any customers including those who were
previously grandfathered.

From 1 January 2016 a customers may qualify for a voluntary SSL when
they are:

-   studying an approved scholarship course, and
-   receiving a qualifying student income support payment

SSL is optional, eligible customers may apply for, or decline the loan.
SSL must be repaid through the tax system once the recipient's taxable
income reaches a threshold determined by the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO). (A similar repayment arrangement currently applies to HECS-HELP
loans).

Note: SSL is not subject to Income Management (IM).

Loan period

SSL payments are made in 2 relevant loan periods each year respectively
from:

-   1 January to 30 June, and
-   1 July to 31 December

Eligible customers are entitled to one loan per loan period (up to two
loan payments each calendar year). Each loan is paid as a tax-free lump
sum.

Note: a customer cannot apply for a partial loan.

See Rates and thresholds for the current amount of the loan.

Eligibility requirements

Customers may qualify for the SSL if they are eligible for and receiving
any of the following payments:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) as a student
-   Austudy
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

To be eligible, they must also:

be undertaking full-time study (or an approved concessional workload) in
an approved scholarship course

submit their claim:

-   before the end of the loan period, or
-   at least 35 days before their course end date if it ends in the loan
    period

not be eligible for, or receiving a Commonwealth Education Costs
Scholarship (CECS) for the same period

not received a SSS from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) under the
Veterans' Children's Education Scheme (VCES) or Military Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme (MRCAETS) in the
previous 6 months

provide a valid Tax File Number (TFN) which is verified by the ATO, and

be receiving at least $1 of YA, Austudy, ABSTUDY Living Allowance, Youth
Disability Supplement (YDS) or Energy Supplement

Customers who only receive ABSTUDY Incidentals, Rent Assistance (RA)
and/or Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) (or other supplements) in the loan
period will not qualify because they are not receiving a student
payment.

Time limit for SSL claims

The following time limits and conditions apply:

There are 2 loan periods each year

-   1 January to 30 June, and
-   1 July to 31 December

The SSL claims must be submitted before the end of the relevant loan
period. Applications can be submitted up until midnight through online
services

If the course ends within the loan period, the SSL claim must be
submitted at least 35 days before the course end date

Customers can apply in advance for one or more future loan periods.
Where a customer applies before the start of the relevant loan period,
the SSL application is deemed to have been submitted on the first day of
that loan period, not the submission date. Note: this may affect a
customer's eligibility for the loan period in which their course ends

Customers cannot apply for the SSL for a loan period that has ended

How to claim SSL

The application and payment of the SSL is an automated process.
Customers can use the following channels to claim SSL:

[A self service option is available for customers: Placed under section
headings or general content where self service options are available.]
as part of the online claim for YA (student), Austudy or ABSTUDY Living
Allowance for tertiary students

[A self service option is available for customers: Placed under section
headings or general content where self service options are available.]
using the 'Apply for/Manage Student Start-up Loan' service via their
Centrelink online account through myGov
Note: this service is only available to customers who are currently
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or ABSTUDY Living Allowance. The
service is not available where:

-   Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or ABSTUDY Living Allowance claim has
    not yet been granted, or
-   Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or ABSTUDY Living Allowance payment is
    cancelled

by phone in limited circumstances. Self service options are the
preferred channels. Customers can apply by phone when:

-   they are not eligible to register for self service, or
-   a service officer deems self service is not appropriate

[A self service option is available for customers: Placed under section
headings or general content where self service options are available.] A
correspondence nominee will be able to access this service on behalf of
their principal.

Eligible customers applying for a student income support payment are
presented with the SSL claim option if they indicate they will be
studying an approved scholarship course.

Customers have the option to accept or decline the loan offered. The
loan periods offered are based on the start and end dates of their
course and their student payment.

[A self service option is available for customers: Placed under section
headings or general content where self service options are
available.]Customers who add or edit an approved scholarship course
using the Manage study details online service can claim SSL during the
update.

Before a loan can be issued, the customer must:

-   accept the Terms and Conditions for the loan
-   acknowledge they must repay the loan, and
-   have their Tax File Number verified by the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO)

If a customer declines the SSL in their claim or new course update, they
cannot use the 'Apply for/Manage Student Start-up Loan' online service
until their claim or update is processed and their course has started.

Customers can use the 'Apply for/Manage Student Start-up Loan' service
at any time to change their decision as long as a loan has not already
been paid for the period.

For more information about self service for customers, see How users
create a myGov account and link services.

Qualification Test Day (QTD)

Each SSL payment has a 'qualification test day' (QTD).

Note: the QTD for SSL is not the same as the 'qualification date' used
for other types of payment.

For each SSL payment, the QTD is the earliest of the following dates:

-   the day the claim for SSL for the loan period was determined
-   the last day of the approved scholarship course if the approved
    scholarship course ends in the loan period
-   the last day of the loan period

The customer must meet all the eligibility criteria for SSL on their
QTD.

For each loan, the QTD type will be A, B, or C, depending on which of
the three options above applies to the QTD date for that loan.

For each loan, the system will record both the QTD:

-   date for that loan, and
-   type for that loan

The QTD date and QTD type (QTT) are displayed on the Student Start-Up
Loan Summary (!SSLS) screen.

The QTD type may affect the SSL study requirement that applies to a
customer in a loan period. If two QTD types have the same date, the QTD
type that is most beneficial under the SSL study requirements will
apply:

-   If the QTD type is 'A' and 'B' then QTT type is 'A'
-   If the QTD type is 'A' and 'C' then QTT type is 'A'
-   If the QTD type is 'B' and 'C' then QTT type is 'B'

The Resources page contains examples to assist with determining the QTD
type and QTD date. See Student Start-up Loan (SSL) Study requirements
for more information.

Preclusions

Customers will not qualify for the SSL if they:

-   receive/are entitled to receive Commonwealth Education Costs
    Scholarship (CECS) for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
    students in the six months before or after the QTD for SSL
-   received a Student Start-Up Scholarship (SSS) from Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA) under the Veterans' Children's Education
    Scheme (VCES) and Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
    Education and Training Scheme (MRCAETS) in the 6 months before or
    after the QTD for SSL

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander customers should be advised to
apply for CECS prior to claiming SSL, as CECS is more beneficial. If
they investigate CECS and still wish to claim SSL, they can record their
preference using the [] Apply for/Manage Student Start-up Loan online
service.

Note: customers who qualify for CECS in a particular loan period but who
do not receive their full CECS entitlement because that scholarship is
suspended (e.g. due to poor study results), cannot qualify for SSL for
that loan period.

Providing Tax File Number (TFN) details

A SSL cannot be paid until the customer has provided their TFN and it
has been verified by the ATO. TFN verification is done automatically by
the system.

If a customer applies for SSL as part of a new claim for a student
income support payment, their payment may be paid pending the provision
of a TFN at a later time. The SSL will not be paid until a validated TFN
is supplied.

If a customer does not provide a valid TFN with their claim for SSL, or
the TFN is not verified by the ATO, their SSL claim will be rejected. A
letter will be issued explaining that they must supply a valid TFN
before SSL can be paid.

If within 13 weeks of their SSL claim being rejected for this reason, a
valid TFN is provided and verified by the ATO, eligibility for SSL is
automatically reassessed. The customer does not need to reapply for SSL.

If the customer provides a valid (and verified) TFN more than 13 weeks
after their loan application is rejected their eligibility for SSL will
not be reassessed automatically. They must apply again.

[] They can apply using the 'Apply for/Manage Student Start-up Loan'
online service if the loan period has not ended.

If the loan period has ended, the customer cannot reapply for that loan
period even though their original loan application was submitted before
the loan period ended.

If a customer provides a TFN and it is not verified by the ATO, staff
should advise the customer to either:

-   provide Services Australia with a written letter from the ATO
    showing their TFN, or
-   visit the ATO website for information on how to obtain their TFN

If a customer provides proof of their TFN, staff should check the TFN is
coded correctly on the customer's record and then verify the TFN number
on the SSL Australian Taxation Office (ATO) Summary (!SSLATO) screen by
selecting 'generate matching' button.

Repayment of SSL

Each SSL must be repaid to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) when the
recipient's taxable income reaches the threshold at which Higher
Education Loan Program (HELP) debts become payable.

The accumulated balance of SSL owed to the ATO is subject to indexation
based on the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increases.

Loans are transferred automatically to the ATO 6 months after they are
paid, unless the SSL has been raised as an overpayment because the
customer was not eligible.

Customers who have questions about how the CPI adjustments are applied,
how much they owe, or repayment arrangements must contact the ATO. The
customer can visit the ATO website for more information.

Overpayments

If a customer receives a Student Start-up Loan (SSL) and is found to
have been ineligible for it, the loan amount must be raised as an
overpayment. These overpayments must be repaid to the department like
any other debt.

An overpayment of SSL for a Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy customer
becomes a Social Security debt. An overpayment of SSL for an ABSTUDY
customer becomes an ABSTUDY debt.

If a SSL payment is raised as a debt, it will be repaid to Services
Australia, not through the tax system.

SSL debts cannot be offset against any other payment type.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples of how to determine a QTD date and
QTD type, and SSL eligibility scenarios.

Related Links

Student Start-up Loan (SSL) study requirements

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Commonwealth Scholarship offers

Rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
