
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) cancellations, suspensions and restorations 010-03070000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures relating to the cancellation,
suspension and restoration of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

On this Page:

Suspension of AIC payments

It may be necessary to suspend AIC payments for one of the following
reasons:

-   the applicant's or student's circumstances have changed
-   the applicant failed to comply with the requirements for payment
-   further information is required to ensure that payments are directed
    correctly

Suspension of (AIC) Scheme payments can only be actioned by AIC Smart
Centre staff.

Restoration of AIC payments

If an applicant continues to be entitled to AIC payments after a period
of suspension or cancellation, the payment will need to be restored.

Care should be taken to establish that all the information required is
met for eligibility, before restoring an applicant's payment.

If the decision to restore payment is made, an advice/letter must be
sent to the applicant.

Restoration of (AIC) Scheme payments can only be actioned by AIC Smart
Centre staff.

Cancellation of AIC payments

An applicant may no longer be entitled to AIC Scheme payment(s) due to
the following:

-   result of a change in their circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment
-   because they transfer to another payment

If the decision to cancel payment is made by Services Australia, an
advice must be sent to the applicant with the cancellation reasons and
rights of review and appeal.

Cancellation of AIC payments can only be performed by AIC Smart Centre
staff.

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for AIC

When making a decision to cancel, suspend or reject an AIC claim or
payment a specific code must be entered on the Centrelink system.

A description of the code is used in correspondence with applicants.

Contents

Suspension of payments of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Restoration of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

Cancellation and debt raising of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme payments

Codes for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme cancellation,
suspension and rejection reasons

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
