
Assessing scholarship income 010-07030070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information regarding scholarships and
how amounts received are coded on the system. Scholarships are
assistance, usually in the form of money, granted to people to pursue
study.

Types of scholarships

Scholarships that waive or reduce fees are not assessed as income for
social security purposes. Commonwealth Scholarships are also not
assessed as income for social security purposes, however may impact
entitlement to some supplementary payments. These include scholarships
introduced in 2004 to assist students from low socio-economic
backgrounds, particularly Indigenous students and those from rural or
regional areas who have to move away to undertake higher education
studies.

Generally, all scholarships assessed as income would be treated as
equity or merit based scholarships. For equity and merit scholarships, a
portion of this income is exempt from being treated as income under the
personal and partner income tests, see Exempt scholarship income.
However some products, such as those offered by the Australian
Scholarships Group are not, as they are a financial product rather than
a grant or awarded scholarship.

For the purposes of the Paid Parental Leave (PPL) Work Test, most
scholarships will not be considered as paid work.

The Resources page contains a list of common scholarships and how they
are treated.

A variety of scholarships are awarded within Australia and paid, at
least in part, to assist students with living expenses. These
scholarships cannot be exempted and are assessed as income under the
personal/partner income tests for the assessable period of the
scholarship.

Bursaries, stipends and grants (such as Arts Council grants) have the
same income test treatment as scholarships. These type of scholarships
are available to assist recipients to complete an academic
qualification, obtain specialised training or to complete a special
project.

If an allowance is paid as part of the scholarship to reimburse out of
pocket expenses (such as photocopying, postage, printing and similar
expenses), the reimbursement amount is not assessed as income. The
recipient is usually required to provide an itemised claim, along with
receipts in order to obtain the allowance.

Application of scholarships

Scholarships could be granted to either an adult or a child and can be
taxable or non-taxable. There are significant differences in the way
income from scholarships is applied to social security payments and to
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)/Child Care Subsidy (CCS). Some non-taxable
scholarships that are not included as income for FTB or CCS may be
considered income for social security payments. In broad terms, these
would be non-taxable scholarships awarded in Australia that have not
been approved by the Minister for Social Services.

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

A taxable scholarship is included in the customer's income estimate as
taxable income.

A non-taxable scholarship is not included in the customer's income
estimate. It is not to be recorded as non-taxable pensions or benefits.

If the income is received by a:

child aged under 16, the scholarship has no effect on eligibility

child aged 16 or over:

-   a taxable scholarship counts as income for the child
-   a scholarship granted under a Post-Graduate Award Scheme is treated
    as a prescribed educational scheme payment and precludes payment of
    FTB for the child

The onus is on the customer to advise if the scholarship is taxable or
non-taxable.

See Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person and Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) child income.

For ABSTUDY

In general, receipt of a scholarship does not preclude ABSTUDY
eligibility.

There are exceptions to this general rule. Students who are employees of
a government agency and who are awarded a scholarship by that agency to
undertake:

-   tertiary studies are eligible to access the part time award only
-   secondary level studies are ineligible for ABSTUDY

A student is not considered an employee of a government agency if they
are an employee for work experience purposes only.

The treatment of scholarships under the personal income test for
ABSTUDY, and the exemption of certain types of scholarships from this
test, is discussed in section 59 of the ABSTUDY Policy Manual.

Exempt scholarship income

From 1 April 2010, for Equity or Merit based Scholarships, customers
have a portion of the scholarship exempted from being treated as income
under the personal and partner income tests.

In 2022, the amount is $8,647. The exempted component amount is indexed
annually. The Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship (CECS) and
Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS) are exempt income under
subsection 8(8)(zja) of the Social Security Act 1991. Receiving CECS
precludes the Student Start-up Loan (SSL) for the same period. Receiving
CAS precludes the Relocation Scholarship (RS) for the same period. Take
care when identifying scholarships. Written evidence may not identify
the scholarship as CECS or CAS and may only refer to the category (for
example, National Priority Scholarship, National Accommodation
Scholarship). The Resources page lists categories for these
scholarships. The exempt income amount is applied to the whole calendar
year; however, exempt income is also applied to scholarships that cover
a period of less than a year.

Key the full amount of the equity or merit based scholarship. The system
deducts the exempt amount and calculates how much is taken into account
for the personal and partner income tests.

SSL and RS paid by Services Australia are entirely exempt from the
income test.

Student scholarships and Rent Assistance (RA)

For further information about how a scholarship affects RA, see the
Student scholarship section in Qualification for payment of Rent
Assistance (RA).

Automatic reviews created to check scholarship income coding

Customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (student or apprentice), Austudy
or ABSTUDY online who advise they have received an Equity or Merit based
scholarship with a one off, or annual frequency, in their claim will
have a review auto-coded via the Review Registration (RVR) screen as a
part of the online claim. The review of the scholarship income coded on
their file is to review, and cease if necessary. If scholarship income
is not removed from the Other Income Summary (OINS) screen at the
appropriate time, the customer may receive an incorrect rate of payment
into the future.

The Resources page contains more information about common types of
scholarships and an example of exempt income application for equity or
merit based scholarships.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Assessing scholarships and mobility provisions for secondary students
for ABSTUDY away from home rate

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other assistance to study or as
an Australian Apprentice

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Student Start-up Scholarship (SSS) eligibility

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Verifying and recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
