
Completing the Claim for Fares Allowance (tertiary students only) (SY005) for Youth Allowance, Austudy, Pensioner Education Supplement 010-04060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete the Claim for Fares Allowance -
tertiary students only (SY005) form.

On this Page:

SY005 form

This form is to be used by tertiary students receiving Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) to claim Fares
Allowance (FAA).

Note: students receiving payments under the ABSTUDY Scheme who wish to
claim Fares Allowance should complete an ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
(SY032). Refer to Completing Form (SY032) for the ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance Claim.

Eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA)

Fares Allowance (FAA) is payable to eligible full-time tertiary students
receiving Youth Allowance (YA) (student), Austudy or Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) who have to live away from their permanent home to
study, and whose permanent home is in Australia and who are:

-   considered dependent and receive the higher rate of YA when living
    away from home
-   considered independent and have a partner who they live away from
    because they are studying
-   living away from their dependent children because they are studying
-   living away from home and have become independent through work or
    age and they were dependent and living away from home in the study
    year before becoming independent, or
-   studying an approved distance, external or online course at an
    Australian institution in Australia and they have to travel to the
    institution for a compulsory residential component of their course

For the purposes of FAA a student must be undertaking an approved
tertiary course at an Australian institution, within Australia. FAA
cannot be paid to students who are travelling overseas to undertake
approved study.

Eligible journeys for FAA

Eligible students can claim FAA for up to three eligible journeys in a
study year. Eligible journeys are:

For external students

-   one return journey during the study year, between the student’s
    permanent home and the educational institution, to attend the
    institution for a period that is a compulsory component of the
    course

For other tertiary students

-   travel from the student’s permanent home to their institution to
    commence studies
-   travel from their institution back to their permanent home after
    study ceases for the year, and
-   if the student has received YA, Austudy or PES for a period of 3
    months (or 6 months if the journey was completed before 1
    January 2021) or more during the study year (whether continuous or
    not), one return trip during the period of the course in the study
    year

FAA is normally paid as a reimbursement after the journey has been
completed. However, Services Australia may arrange pre-booked travel on
behalf of a student.

Claims for FAA

Claims for FAA must be lodged with the agency before 1 April in the year
following the year of study when the journey was undertaken.

Claims for pre-booked FAA should generally be lodged at least 7 days in
advance of the planned journey to allow the agency to book the student’s
travel. However, subject to availability, the agency will attempt to
fulfil any travel requests lodged within 7 days of travel.

Amount of FAA

The amount of FAA paid depends on the mode of transport available to the
student and whether the student is eligible for a concessional fare.
Generally FAA is paid for the cheapest type of public transport
available for the journey using a reasonable route.

If public transport is not available for all or part of the route, FAA
may be paid for other forms of transport (including private car or
taxis).

Where pre-booked FAA is approved by the agency, the payment will be made
directly to the transport operator, not to the student.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) after a customer has
died

Fares Allowance (FAA) paid in advance of travel for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
