
Completing Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) online reviews 010-21032517

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process and grant a TAP payment. It
includes how to complete a TAP review and Manual Follow Ups (MFU).

Payment

Customers generally do not get the TAP payment immediately upon
assessment of their claim. They get the payment when their circumstances
are confirmed after the relevant assessment dates via a TAP review. The
TAP review confirms they are still eligible for the payment.

Reviews

Customers will get:

one review if their family home is in an inner regional area

2 reviews (one for each instalment) if their home is in:

-   an outer regional area
-   a remote area
-   a very remote area

Customers who lodge a claim 42 days, or more after starting study will
not get the first review. Customers will only get a second review if
they:

-   are from an outer regional or remote area, and
-   lodge the claim before their second assessment date

If the claim is lodged after the second assessment date, the customer
will not receive any reviews.

Services Australia send customers a letter, asking them to complete a
TAP review via their online services. They have 28 days after Services
Australia issues the letter to complete the review.

Services Australia will send a notification 21 days later. It will
remind the customer to complete the review. The customer needs to
confirm or update their study details, and provide documents to verify
their circumstances.

Online review

Encourage customers to complete the TAP online review. They will need to
provide documents depending on their circumstances. They can submit the
review without uploading the requested documents. The activity will be
placed on hold until:

-   they upload the documents, or
-   day 29, if the customer doesn’t upload the documents within 28 days

If they fail to complete their review within 42 days, the review will
mature and automatically:

-   reject the payment POE - Proof of Enrolment not supplied, or
-   cancel POE if they have already got the first instalment

If the customer provides proof of enrolment within 13 weeks of the
rejection or cancellation review the original decision.

Eligibility when student changes course or ceases studies

A customer may be eligible for TAP if they meet all the eligibility
criteria and they:

-   change their TAP approved course at any time throughout the year, or
-   cease studies after their first assessment date

If a customer does not complete the first and or second semester of
studies, they may still be eligible if they:

-   withdraw after their first assessment date
-   enrol in a new course in the second semester, and
-   meet all the eligibility criteria

Relocation from Family Home Address

The first assessment online review, asks customers to confirm their
address details. They must have moved from their family home address to
be eligible for TAP. Customers must give either a:

-   term address,
-   temporary address, or
-   home address that differs from the Family home address given on
    their original claim

Change in circumstances TAP Manual Follow Up (MFU)

Where the system, or a Service Officer makes a change to the TAP course
recorded on the Education Details (EDC) screen, the system creates an
MFU for review.

It is to ensure any change in study is re-assessed for the purposes of
TAP.

The work items are allocated to TAP trained Service Officers. They check
that the student remains eligible for the TAP.

The Resources page contains intranet links, examples and scenarios of
acceptable and not acceptable POE documents.

Related links

Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing and finalising claims for the Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
