
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when when an ABSTUDY tertiary student may be
eligible for a higher rate if they live away from home due to compulsory
residence.

ABSTUDY Away from home eligibility

ABSTUDY students are normally expected to live at home while studying.
Under certain circumstances, however, they may have to live away from
home and so become eligible for a higher rate of assistance. One of
these circumstances is when their tertiary course of study requires
compulsory residence away from home. This residence must be compulsory
for all students studying that course, or that particular stage of the
course, in order for approval to be given.

Courses which have compulsory residency requirements will usually
advertise this fact in published material about the course. Students
claiming the higher rate would need to provide this material as proof of
their entitlement.

Approval for the away from home rate cannot be made where a tertiary
institution only advises that it would be beneficial for a student to
reside on-campus in order to access facilities such as the library,
additional tutoring, sporting facilities or extra curricula activities
offered by the institution.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online study as
face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home rate, and temporarily
transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19, remain eligible
for the away from home rate. Tertiary students must return to
face-to-face study as soon as it becomes available to continue to be
eligible for the away from home rate.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, will remain eligible for the away from home rate providing
they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who:

-   had their accommodation arrangement cancelled by the education
    provider and have moved their belongings out of that accommodation
-   were approved for the Residential Cost Option (RCO)

Note: the away from home rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be paid
for any period that the education provider does not charge a residential
fee, rather than the reduced rate of Living Allowance.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
