-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a student on ABSTUDY Schooling A Award may
qualify for a School Term Allowance to assist with expenses associated
with equipping the student for school, for example, uniforms, textbooks
and materials.

Qualifying for School Term Allowance

School Term Allowance is available for secondary students under 16
living at home or not eligible for the away from home, independent or
pensioner rates, and primary school students aged 14 or 15 at 1 January
in the year of study. Home schooled and distance education students also
qualify for School Term Allowance even though they do not physically
attend at an education institution.

School Term Allowance is not taxable, and is not indexed.

Criteria for entitlement to School Term Allowance

Entitlement is established when on any one day during that school term
the student meets the Schooling A Award criteria, and one of the
following applies:

The applicant or the applicant's partner qualifies for one of the
prescribed forms of Commonwealth Government assistance

The applicant is taken to be receiving their Income support payment
during an employment income nil rate period

The student would, but for age (that is, under the minimum school
leaving age), qualify for independent status as an orphan, a student
whose parent(s) cannot exercise parental responsibilities, or as a
homeless student

Student is in State care, under the minimum school leaving age and not
eligible for away from home entitlements, or

The applicant or applicant's partner is the holder of a current Low
Income Health Care Card (LIC) or an automatic issue Health Care Card
(HCC). This includes a HCC issued on the basis of receipt of maximum
rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A or an extension HCC.
If an applicant is a holder of a Foster Child HCC for an ABSTUDY
student, the student/applicant may be eligible under the state care
criteria.
If the applicant holds a LIC, HCC or Foster Child HCC and any of the
following applies, an ABSTUDY student is not entitled to School Term
Allowance:

-   for a period after the expiry date on the card
-   where an applicant holds a HCC because they receive a social
    security Mobility Allowance, or Carer Allowance (in respect of a
    disabled child)
-   where a Foster Child HCC (FST) has been issued to an applicant in
    respect of another child in their care, that is, not the ABSTUDY
    student, or
-   if they are not in receipt of an Income support payment, and hold
    only a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) or a Commonwealth Seniors
    Health Card (CSHC)

Students who are eligible based on meeting one of the above criteria

For the applicable term for which the payment is being claimed, they
must also meet the following criteria in each calendar year:

-   for Term 1, the student is enrolled in and attending a secondary
    school, and
-   for Term 2 and subsequent terms, the student is enrolled in and
    attending secondary school for at least 85 per cent of each school
    term, prior to that term for which the allowance in being claimed

The qualification requirements for School Term Allowance are assessed
against the relevant term entitlement period. Therefore, it is possible
a student who loses qualification for School Term Allowance prior to the
actual commencement of a school term in a State or Territory, but within
the term entitlement period, may still be eligible for payment of the
term School Term Allowance payment for that term.

Coronavirus (COVID-19)

Due to COVID-19 disrupting normal study arrangements for many students
during 2020, the Department of Social Services implemented a temporary
policy change for assessment of STA for the Term 3 and 4 payments in
2020 only. Payment of STA in Term 3 and 4 requires a student to have
attendance of 85% or more in Term 1 of 2020.

Meeting attendance requirements

ABSTUDY students who are enrolled in study that does not have formal
attendance requirements, for example:

-   Home Schooling
-   Distance Education, or
-   Undertaking secondary schooling at a vocational education and
    training institution

Are considered to have met the 85 per cent attendance requirement where
the education authority appropriate to their method of study that is, a
state or territory education authority, a distance education provider or
vocational education and training provider certify they have met the
requirements of the course for the previous term.

Note: students undertaking Home Schooling in NSW, TAS, or WA are
required to confirm a current registration in order to meet the 85%
attendance requirement for payment of ABSTUDY School Term Allowance in
the relevant term.

Timeframe of when School Term Allowance is paid

A portion of the annual entitlement of School Term Allowance is paid
each term to the applicant (parent/guardian/carer). There are different
school term dates for each State.

The School Term Allowance payment for Term 1 is paid automatically for
eligible, enrolled students where a claim has been lodged. Subsequent
term payments can be paid after Centrelink receives evidence that
attendance of 85 per cent or more has been achieved by the student in
the previous school term.

Parent queries

If parents contact Services Australia with attendance queries, they are
to be referred to the child's educational institution, as the agency has
no involvement in individual school policy regarding attendance.

Change in circumstances

Changes to a student's circumstances throughout a term may affect the
rate of School Term Allowance paid in respect of that term.

For instructions on checking or processing attendance results for
ABSTUDY School Term Allowance, see Processing ABSTUDY School Term
Allowance payments.

The Resources page contains some School Term Allowance questions and
answers, the School Term Allowance release dates and a link to the
ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payment rates.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Processing ABSTUDY School Term Allowance payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
