
Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base enh1ments for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-20081210

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for coding Away from Base
entitlements and reimbursement of Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) in the Process Direct
Travel Management Application (TMA). All activity and information
relating to FAA reimbursements and Away from Base for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY PES, must be recorded within the TMA.

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) claims

An ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES student, and any associated non-student
travellers, can lodge a claim to be reimbursed for FAA costs after a
journey has been undertaken and completed. Services Australia will
assess eligibility for ABSTUDY FAA and reimburse travel costs after the
journey.

The details of the journey for the reimbursement must be entered into
TMA. The student and/or non-student traveller's claim form or travel
request will be assessed for eligibility and the outcome recorded in
TMA. A letter, where required, will be sent advising of the outcome of
their claim for FAA.

Payment of meals and accommodation for Away from Base

In addition to covering the student's travel costs to attend an approved
activity, Away from Base assistance is also intended to cover the
reasonable costs of accommodation and meals while away from the normal
place of residence.

Costs associated with accommodation and meals can be approved for
payment either as part of a residential expenses package or travel
allowance.

Away from Base allowances can be payable to either an education
institution conducting an approved activity, or to a student
participating in an approved activity. Allowances can be paid either in
advance or as a reimbursement.

The student’s eligibility to attend the Away from Base activity and the
rate of entitlement, payment of meals and accommodation is recorded in
TMA on the student's record. A letter will then be sent advising of the
outcome of the claim for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances.

Away from Base entitlements paid in advance must be acquitted within 1
month of the approved activity taking place. Results of the acquittal
are also recorded in TMA. No future activities will be funded until the
previous activity has been acquitted.

The Resources page contains links to Q999 letter templates, ABSTUDY
Reimbursement and Away from Base attachments, forms and Office Locator.

Related links

Acquittal of funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances

Approval of residential expenses package for ABSTUDY Away from Base
assistance

Approval of travel allowance for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY

Travel Management Application (TMA)

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Creating a Q999 or Q888 letter

Determining the appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Reimbursing ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA) after the customer has died

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
