
Activity Test for Austudy 010-04050000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the specific Austudy activity test requirements
for payment. Austudy is available to students and Australian Apprentices
aged 25 years or more.

Student requirements

In addition to meeting an income and assets test, Austudy students must
also be enrolled in and undertaking an approved course of study at an
approved educational institution on a full-time basis. These
requirements constitute the Austudy activity test. The only exception to
this activity test requirement is that Services Australia may grant a
concession allowing the student to study less than a full-time workload
and still receive payment.

A person who is studying full-time in an approved course still may not
qualify for Austudy payment. They also have to meet the satisfactory
progress and allowable time requirements, which limit the period for
which a student may be paid Austudy (that is, they cannot study
indefinitely). See Assessing satisfactory progress for tertiary students
for Austudy.

Furthermore, a student cannot be eligible for Austudy if they:

-   have completed a Doctorate level course, or
-   are employed on a full-time basis as an apprentice or trainee and
    are not considered an Australian Apprentice. Note: Australian
    Apprentices will have a current Commonwealth Registration Number

Australian Apprentice requirements

A full-time Australian Apprentice may be eligible for Austudy. There is
no activity test for Australian Apprentices. An Australian Apprentice
must have a current Commonwealth registration number in relation to
their full-time Australian Apprenticeship.

Contents

Allowable non-award study for Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Satisfying the activity test for Austudy

Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study
for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing secondary students satisfactory progress for Austudy

Assessing satisfactory progress for tertiary students for Austudy

Related links

Eligibility for Austudy

Effect of articulated short courses of study on continuing payment

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
