-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the two thirds study load
concession for ABSTUDY.

Eligible payments for students and study load requirements

A student will normally only be eligible for one of the Services
Australia administered payments for students if they are studying at
least 75% of the accredited full-time study load. However, in certain
circumstances they may be paid as a full-time student even though they
are studying less than the required minimum 75%. These students are said
to be subject to a study load concession. The two-thirds (66%) study
load concession is one such concession.

Eligibility requirements for the two-thirds study load concession

If a student who is not undertaking a full-time study load meets all the
other eligibility criteria for the ABSTUDY Tertiary award, the Masters
and Doctorate Award, the ABSTUDY Schooling A Award or the ABSTUDY
Schooling B Award, they may actually be eligible for a two-thirds study
load concession. The student may be eligible for this concession, and be
considered a full-time student, if:

they are undertaking at least two-thirds (66%) of the normal full-time
study load, and

the reason it is not possible to study 75% of the normal study load is
because of:

-   The institution's normal requirements for the course
-   There is a specific direction in writing from the deputy Principal,
    an academic registrar or an equivalent officer, or
-   There is a recommendation in writing from the academic registrar or
    equivalent officer, for academic or vocational reasons. Study load
    requirements cannot be reduced for academic or vocational reasons
    for more than half of the academic year. Note: The institution does
    not have to specify the reasons on which the recommendation is based

Youth Disability Supplement

Full-time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt of ABSTUDY and
21 years of age and under may be entitled to Youth Disability Supplement
(YDS). The customer must have been assessed by an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) as having a partial
capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Claiming ABSTUDY

Assessing ABSTUDY claims and forms

Assessing the disability study load concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
