[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since June 2008 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans (FSL)
have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines information regarding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) and the rates of payment.

On this Page:

Student Financial Supplement Loan

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) was a voluntary loan
scheme which gave eligible tertiary students the option of borrowing
money to help cover their expenses while they studied. This was called a
Financial Supplement Loan (FSL).

Tertiary students in receipt of one of the following payments may have
been eligible for the FSL:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Austudy
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) - full-time students only

Note: PES has formerly been known as Family and Community Services
(FaHCSIA) PES

and Department of Education PES.

Types of Financial Supplement Loan

There were two types of FSL, known as Category 1 and Category 2 loans.
The category of FSL determined the amount of the FSL available.

Note: secondary level students could not receive FSL. This was
irrespective of their age or whether they were undertaking a secondary
level course at a TAFE college.

Rate of Financial Supplement Loan

The daily rate of Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) to which a student may
have been entitled was calculated by dividing the amount of FSL accepted
(or the maximum amount of FSL available if the amount accepted was more
than this) by the number of days for which FSL was payable.

Non-taxable payment

FSL payments are not taxable and therefore are not included in the
taxable income figure shown on the customer's Payment Summary. This is
the case whether the FSL was paid to a Category 1 student or a Category
2 student.

Category One students

For customers paid as Category 1 students, the amount they traded in to
receive FSL forms part of their FSL. Therefore, the trade-in amount is
not included in the customer's taxable income either. This also applies
to any trade back transactions that have been made.

Customers were advised automatically of their taxable income for the
financial year via a Payment Summary.

Note: trade in rules do not apply to Category 2 students as there was no
basic benefit/living allowance payments to trade in.

Related links

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

Factors affecting repayment of Student Financial Supplement Scheme
(SFSS) loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
