
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the roles and responsibilities of Service
Australia officers, and employees from the Australian Taxation Office in
the administration of the Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS).

On this Page:

Student Financial Supplement Loan

The SFSS was a voluntary loan scheme which gave eligible tertiary
students the option of borrowing money to help cover their expenses
while they studied. The voluntary loan was known as a Financial
Supplement Loan (FSL).

Funding and recovery

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by the Services Australia until the end of the contract
period.

At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan was transferred
to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then became a debt to
the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation system.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
the agency's system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed
off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for
recovery through the taxation system.

Commonwealth Bank involvement

All outstanding loans were bought back by the Commonwealth Government on
1 December 2005. Since that date the Commonwealth Bank no longer has any
role to play in the Financial Supplement Loan process.

Related links

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

Rates of Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)

Factors affecting repayment of Student Financial Supplement Scheme
(SFSS) loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
