
Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA) 010-06030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers on how to
determine the minimum and maximum age for customers claiming YA.

Qualification for YA

To qualify for YA, customers must be within the minimum and maximum ages
for YA.

Maximum age for YA

The maximum age for YA varies depending on the young person's
circumstances and whether they are a job seeker, full-time student or an
Australian Apprentice.

Maximum age is considered to have been reached for YA if a:

YA job seeker has reached 22 years of age, or

young person is:

-   at least 22 years old
-   receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) just before starting the course,
    and
-   undertaking a full-time course that is to last for less than one
    academic year

YA full-time or concessional study load student or Australian Apprentice
is at least 25 years old.
Students who were getting YA just before turning 25 remain qualified for
YA if they:

-   have continued to study full time, or an approved concessional study
    load since turning 25, and
-   are studying any course they started before turning 25, even if it
    is not the same course they were getting YA for. See the Resources
    page for examples

YA Australian Apprentice will retain qualification until the end of
their continuous Australian Apprenticeship, even though this may occur
after they turn 25. The young person must be undertaking an Australian
Apprenticeship and getting YA when they turn 25 to continue to be
entitled to YA

A student or apprentice getting YA on or after their 25th birthday will
no longer qualify for YA if they need to make a new claim due to:

-   taking a break from full-time study or their Australian
    Apprenticeship, and
-   their YA cancels because of this break

Students and apprentices who take a break from study or training after
their 25th birthday have met the maximum age for YA.

Minimum age for YA

Minimum age is defined as:

16 years, or

15 years if the customer is:

-   independent, and
-   either above the minimum school leaving age for the state or
    territory in which they live, or formally exempt from attending
    school

Independent customers under 15 should claim Special Benefit if they are
below the minimum school leaving age and do not have a formal exemption
from attending school.

If the customer is under 18, they must also satisfy one of the
following:

-   completed Year 12 or attained an equivalent qualification
    (Certificate III or above)
-   in full-time tertiary study or training
-   a full-time Australian Apprentice
-   exempt from the requirement to be in full-time tertiary study or
    training
-   agree to enter into a Job Plan

Customers 15 years of age

For a customer to have met the minimum age requirements for YA at 15
years of age, they must be:

-   independent, and
-   above the minimum school leaving age in the state or territory in
    which they live, or
-   have a formal exemption from attending school granted by the
    education authority for that state or territory. This should be
    supported by a letter from the state or territory education
    authority. Note: Australian Apprentices do not need a letter and
    should be considered to have a formal exemption

Many of the states and territories have a minimum school leaving age for
completing Year 10. This means that the minimum school leaving age will
be the age that the customer completes Year 10 secondary studies.

Customers who are 15 years old and do not meet these eligibility
criteria should claim Special Benefit.

Secondary students aged 16-17 years

Full time secondary students aged 16-17 years cannot be granted YA,
unless they:

-   were receiving YA just before starting a full-time secondary course
    and transferred straight from YA (Other) or YA (Australian
    Apprentice) to YA (Student)
-   are a full-time student who meets the independence criteria for YA
-   are a full-time student who is eligible for the away from home rate
    of YA, or
-   are not benefiting from Family Tax Benefit (FTB) that is being paid
    to the young person's parents (as determined by a Services Australia
    social worker)

Note: customers claiming they are not benefiting from FTB payments made
to their parents will need to lodge a statement outlining the reasons
for this. Details of the statement are to be placed as a DOC with the
claim, and unless the FTB recipient has agreed that the child is not
benefiting from the FTB payments, a Service Officer consultation with a
social worker is required to assist with the determination.

Early claims for secondary students under 18 years of age

Secondary students who would not qualify for YA (student) as a 16 or 17
year old, are able to lodge a claim for YA up to 13 weeks before they
finish year 12 (or equivalent), or turn 18 years of age.

Identifying the most beneficial payment for families

A young person aged 16 or over may be an eligible FTB child but may have
the option to claim a more beneficial payment in their own right such as
YA. [] To identify the best option for the family, customers can use
Payment and Service Finder. See Resources for a link.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) decision

Dependent full-time secondary students who are not benefiting from FTB
being paid to their parents for them may be able to apply for YA. The
Secretary must determine that the parent/guardian's use of money for
purposes other than providing support to the young person is likely to
result in them disengaging from education.

A social worker must make a determination about whether a young person
is not benefiting from FTB being paid to the parents. The social worker
will decide whether the circumstances experienced by the young person
place them at risk if they do not receive YA directly.

If the parent/guardian does not qualify for FTB due to residence rules,
Services Australia may be able to consider that the young person could
not benefit from FTB, as it cannot be paid to the parents. These cases
should be referred to the appropriate Level 2 Helpdesk.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains age qualification scenarios and a link to
Payment and Service Finder.

Related links

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) trainees

Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services
Australia social worker

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
