-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility for ABSTUDY Living Allowance.

Purpose of Living Allowance

Living Allowance is paid to assist in meeting the day-to-day living
costs of the student or Australian Apprentice (apprentice).

Students on the following award may claim for Living Allowance:

-   Schooling B Award
-   Tertiary Award, or
-   Masters and Doctorate Award

Australian Apprentices may qualify for Living Allowance under the
Tertiary award only.

A customer cannot receive Living Allowance and other Australian
Government income support payments at the same time.

Payment methods

ABSTUDY Living Allowance is calculated on a daily rate, and made
fortnightly in arrears. This payment method may change, depending on
whether the customer is:

boarding at a boarding school including an approved ABSTUDY homestay
arrangement or at a hostel that is a signatory to the Standard Hostels
Agreement

-   Living Allowance is calculated on a daily rate. Payments are made in
    a combination of ABSTUDY boarding instalments and fortnightly in
    arrears, depending on the student's entitlement and the board amount
    charged by the school/hostel.

boarding at a hostel that is not signatory to the Standard Hostels
Agreement

-   Living Allowance is calculated on a daily rate. Payments are made
    fortnightly in arrears to the hostel, and in some circumstances also
    to the payee depending on the student's entitlement and the board
    amount charged by the hostel

boarding in a private boarding arrangement

-   A student is considered to board in a private board arrangement if a
    provider other than a boarding school or hostel, provides the
    student with board and lodgings during the school term. Payments are
    made fortnightly in arrears and can be directed to the private board
    provider where requested by the parent/guardian, and in some
    circumstances the payee. This will also depend on the student's
    entitlement and the board amount charged.

payee for Living Allowance

-   See table in the Resources page which outlines correct entitlements
    for the payee of Living Allowance

eligible for Living Allowance but chooses not to receive it

-   A customer may be eligible for Living Allowance but can choose not
    to receive it. They will remain eligible for ABSTUDY, and other
    allowances or benefits under the particular ABSTUDY award they have
    been granted. Other coding information relating to Incidentals
    Allowance is not contained in this procedure

The Resources page outlines correct entitlements for the payee of Living
Allowance.

Related links

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

Rates of ABSTUDY

Payments for students under 18 years paid to student, parent or a third
party

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
