
Satisfying the activity test for customers who are intending to study for Austudy 010-04050020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the expected activity test requirements for
Austudy students who are intending to study.

Continuing/intending student

Continuing/intending students are considered to be satisfying the
activity test for full-time students. This means, in some circumstances,
they are considered to be a full-time student during study breaks, such
as semester/trimester holidays.

If a customer is not a continuing/intending student, they will not meet
student activity test requirements until they commence their course.

Non-intending students

Students not considered to be 'intending students' are those who:

-   did not study in or complete the last available semester or study
    period immediately prior to claiming
-   did not study in an approved course in the last available study
    period, or
-   deferred their course for a period of time and are now planning to
    continue the course, or

These customers will not be considered to be a full-time student until
they start their course. Until they qualify for Austudy they may need to
test their eligibility for another payment, for example, JobSeeker
Payment if they require assistance before the course commences.

Transfer from JobSeeker Payment

Receipt of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) does not prevent a customer from
being a continuing/intending student. Customers transferring from JSP
who are not continuing/intending students continue to receive this
payment until they start study, as long as they continue to meet the JSP
mutual obligation requirements. While these customers would normally be
expected to look for all suitable work, for the interim period they may
satisfy the mutual obligation requirements by looking for suitable work
that would not prevent them from starting study (for example, part-time
or casual work).

Transfer from a Social Security pension

Customers transferring from a Social Security pension to Austudy may be
considered eligible for Austudy up to 14 days before starting study. For
this brief period they are considered to be satisfying the Austudy
activity test.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
a scenario that assists with clarifying policy on mutual obligation
requirements.

Related Links

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Assessing Austudy claims

Satisfying the activity test for Austudy

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
