-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the levels of tertiary study as it applies to
assessing allowable time or satisfactory progress for student payments
administered by Services Australia.

Tertiary study

Tertiary study is any study at a level above secondary (or high school
equivalent) study. This study may range from courses lasting a few weeks
to courses lasting several years, and include:

-   pre-vocational courses
-   English as a Second Language courses at a Registered Training
    Organisation (RTO) or Higher Education Institution
-   vocational education and training courses
-   undergraduate courses
-   postgraduate courses

Levels of tertiary courses

Tertiary courses are classified into 5 levels: M, A, B, C and D. The
levels are broadly based on the type of qualification obtained by
completing a course at that level. A detailed description of each of
these levels of study can be found on the Process page.

When a course of study is approved for assistance, it is assigned to one
of these 5 levels.

If, when considering a claim for assistance, the level of the proposed
course of study is not clear, use local procedures to check with Course
Assessment and Liaison Officers.

Levels of study and satisfactory progress/reasonable time

Student payments are not intended to be paid indefinitely and a limit is
placed on how long a student may continue to receive payment at each
level of study. These limits are outlined in the satisfactory progress
and reasonable time rules. Generally, time spent undertaking study at
one level will determine if a student payment can be made for another
course at the same level.

Level of study determined by enrolment practices

Some universities are now offering places in their graduate entry
courses to high performing secondary school students, and students who
have completed some diplomas. In these cases, the student’s entry
pathway into the course must be taken into consideration when
determining if the course is a Level A or Level B course.

If a student is admitted into a graduate entry course on the basis of:

-   them having previously completed study at the undergraduate level,
    they are considered to be undertaking a Level A course
-   their ATAR and it is their first undergraduate course, they are
    considered to be undertaking a Level B course
-   them having completed a diploma and it is their first undergraduate
    course, they are considered to be undertaking a Level B course

Secondary courses

All preparatory and similar courses at higher education institutions
(including universities) are regarded as secondary courses. This
includes a bridging course that provides an opportunity for future entry
to a higher level course at a university.

Secondary studies at high school that have a Vocational Education and
Training (VET) component to the studies are becoming more common. These
studies are vocationally oriented, to provide the student with an
opportunity to gain their schooling qualification and a VET
qualification. These students are enrolled as full time secondary
students under their State Education system

Students undertaking this level of study could qualify, depending on
their circumstances, for their appropriate student payment, such as:

-   Youth Allowance
-   Austudy
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC). Indigenous students could be
eligible for the ABSTUDY Schooling B award payments. Their status should
be confirmed to ensure that Schooling B award is appropriate. It is
possible that the Tertiary award may apply in some cases.

The Resources page contains information about determining the level of
postgraduate and graduate courses and information about approved Level M
Masters programmes. It also contains a link to the National Course
Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining progress and duration of assistance for ABSTUDY

Assessing satisfactory progress for tertiary students for Austudy

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Defining level of study for special schools

Approved non-high school secondary study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
