-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers who are
responsible for processing ABSTUDY secondary boarding claims.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY processing is undertaken in ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing
Teams. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries.

Requirement to lodge a claim

Customers who meet the ABSTUDY eligibility criteria and one of the
following, should lodge a claim for ABSTUDY.

-   A customer wishing to claim ABSTUDY Schooling B Award on behalf of a
    secondary student who is under 16 and living away from home
-   A secondary student who is 16 years or over and wants to claim
    ABSTUDY Schooling B Award to live away from home

Claims for ABSTUDY lodged by the relevant closing date, do not require
lodgement of another claim:

-   if the wrong ABSTUDY claim was completed, or
-   circumstances have changed

Customers need to supply additional information relevant to the ABSTUDY
Award or allowance to be assessed.

Note: students aged 16 years and under, boarding or intending to board,
must lodge a new claim where there is a change of applicant.

See Claiming ABSTUDY for examples and a table listing scenarios for
whether a customer needs to lodge a new ABSTUDY claim.

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool

Customers can provide details verbally to a Services Australia Service
Officer, via the ABSTUDY claiming tool, instead of completing a paper
claim form.

A verbal declaration from the customer that the information is true and
correct replaces the requirement to return a signed Customer Declaration
Form (CDF). Applicants who do not accept or have not been offered a
verbal declaration will be required to return a signed CDF.

Claim Lodgement

Customers can lodge ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents by:

-   Phone - claims can be lodged by phone using the ABSTUDY Claiming
    Tool
-   Fax - the date the fax is received is the date of receipt for
    processing purposes
-   Post - using the appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY
    Smart Centre Processing Team, or
-   In person - at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with
    a Centrelink Field Officer

Claim lodged to attend an interview

Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel is available if a secondary
school or boarding facility requires prospective students to attend
interviews or other selection procedures prior to acceptance.

To claim this type of travel a full ABSTUDY assessment is required for
the period the student is intending to study.

A secondary boarding facility may need to conduct an interview or
selection exercise. It may not be possible at the time of claiming, to
confirm the school the customer will be attending. In these cases,
special coding instructions are required.

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for ABSTUDY form (SY019),
Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas form (SY092), Q888 letter text,
information about how to lodge documents online, access to shared
mailboxes and examples.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY)

Coding ABSTUDY education details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
