
Effect of school-based apprenticeships on student payments 010-07010160

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect of school-based apprenticeships on
Services Australia administered payments for students.

On this Page:

School-based apprenticeship

In some cases a young person will, as part of their secondary schooling,
be undertaking some components of an apprenticeship. These school-based
apprenticeships do not prevent a person from receiving one of the
Services Australia administered payments for students unless the
apprenticeship is full-time (that is, 35 hours or more per week).

Note: a full-time Australian Apprentice is not considered a student.
Australian Apprentices may be eligible for ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance
(YA) as an Australian Apprentice.

Requirement to maintain a sufficient study load

The young person would remain eligible for assistance while they are
still undertaking a sufficient study load in their secondary studies. It
would be up to the school to determine whether or not they are still
considered to be a full time student.

School-based apprenticeships and Aboriginal School Based Traineeships
(ASBT) are part of a federally funded scheme which is handled by
Australian Apprenticeship Support Network providers.

Aboriginal School Based Training (ASBT)

Students involved in the Western Australian (WA) ASBT are eligible for
ABSTUDY assistance. ASBT is considered to be a part-time traineeship and
the wage received is for employment and not education purposes. The wage
received is counted as income under the personal income test where the
student is 16 years or more.

ASBT is co-ordinated through the WA Department of Training and Workforce
Development with assistance from the WA Department of Education. A
central element of ASBT is the involvement of the Aboriginal community
through parents and Aboriginal Student Support and Parent Awareness
(ASSPA) committees.

ASBT objectives

The ASBT programme was developed to achieve 4 objectives for young
Aboriginal people:

-   improve the school to work transition rates
-   provide post-compulsory students with access to a broad range of
    vocational competencies
-   increase the relevance of education and training to Aboriginal young
    people
-   develop a co-ordinated, strategic program through interagency
    collaboration

Elements of ASBT

-   The minimum age of participation is 15 years
-   Eligibility for ASBT is not dependent on eligibility for ABSTUDY
-   Students participate in 15 hours of paid work per week

Indigenous Youth Careers Pathways (IYCP) Programme

The Indigenous Youth Careers Pathways (ICYP) Programme is administered
through contracted service providers and facilitates school-based
traineeships for Indigenous students to support their transition to
work. The IYCP provides school-based traineeships to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander students in Years 11 and 12 (and in some cases,
Year 10) through contracted service providers.

The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is responsible for the
program.

Related links

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network providers

Study requirements and the activity test

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Claiming ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
