
Assessing a Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020) 010-05030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) claims. Customers receiving certain income support
payments and who are undertaking qualifying study, may qualify for
ABSTUDY PES in addition to the qualifying income support payment.

On this page:

Eligibility and qualification for ABSTUDY PES

Qualification for ABSTUDY PES mainly relies on meeting the general
ABSTUDY eligibility criteria and receiving a qualifying payment for PES.
Receipt of the qualifying payment must be verified before the assessment
can proceed. ABSTUDY PES is paid fortnightly. The amount payable depends
on the qualifying payment the applicant is receiving and their study
load. Customers must also satisfy basic qualifications in respect of
minimum age, qualifying study, citizenship and Aboriginality.

Note: full-time Australian Apprentices are not entitled to ABSTUDY PES.
Part-time Australian Apprentices who are undertaking qualifying study
may qualify for ABSTUDY PES based on their course, as they can be
assessed as a student and not an Australian Apprentice.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY claim processing is done in ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing
Teams. See Office Locator > ABSTUDY Smart Centre - National Processing >
Office Messages > Office Notes.

Claiming ABSTUDY

Applicants completing a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool are
offered a verbal declaration. A verbal declaration from the claimant
that the information is true and correct will replace the requirement to
return a signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF). Applicants who do not
accept or have not been offered a verbal declaration are required to
return a signed CDF where they are in receipt of a Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) qualifying pension.

Before 28 November 2016, all applicants who completed a claim through
the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool were required to return their CDF when they
were in receipt of a DVA qualifying pension.

When a claim is not required

Customers in receipt of ABSTUDY (for example, Living Allowance) who have
just recently started to receive an income support payment that attracts
ABSTUDY PES, may not need to lodge an ABSTUDY PES claim. See Claiming
ABSTUDY to determine if a new claim is required.

ABSTUDY PES payments can be restored for customers transferred to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) who:

-   were in the Disability Support Pension (DSP) transition group and
    assessed as having partial capacity to work (PCW), or
-   are no longer receiving Parenting Payment Single (PPS) due to their
    youngest child turning 8 years of age, and
-   were in receipt of ABSTUDY PES immediately before transferring to
    JSP or YA

These customers will only remain eligible for ABSTUDY PES while they:

-   remain in the same category (for instance, have a partial capacity
    to work or single principal carer), and
-   are still completing the same course of education or study for which
    they were receiving PES while receiving DSP or PPS

Claim lodgement rules

The closing dates for PES claims differ from other benefits administered
by Services Australia:

-   31 March if the course is a full year course starting before 1 April
-   31 July if the course starts on or after 1 July, or
-   28 days from the date of qualification if the course is less than 1
    year

To ensure the student is paid from the earliest date possible, they
should lodge their claim by the closing dates above.

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (SY020).

Contents

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Completing the claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Claiming ABSTUDY

Rejecting an ABSTUDY claim

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
