-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of the away from home rate of YA
where a customer who lives or intends to live away from the parental
home claims excessive travelling time.

Excessive travel time

Dependent YA customers may be eligible for the higher away from home
rate of YA if they live or intend to live away from the parental home
due to excessive travelling time.

Travelling time is taken to be excessive if the journey from the
parental home to the approved activity or place of work by public
transport exceeds 90 minutes. This includes walking time and waiting
times between different modes of transport or legs of a journey.
Restrictions due to lack of, or limited public transport should be
considered.

In some cases this will be clear, for example, a customer leaves the
parental home in Brisbane to attend university in Melbourne. However, in
many cases it will not, especially in metropolitan areas. If a Service
Officer cannot determine the journey exceeds 90 minutes, the customer
will need to provide a detailed schedule of the journey.

A YA customer is considered eligible for the away from home rate if they
only have a single journey exceed 90 minutes within a study period. For
example, a customer may have lectures on one evening for a semester. The
public transport timetable has reduced transport availability during the
evening, resulting in a longer journey to travel home. If the customer
can provide evidence to indicate that at least one journey takes more
than 90 minutes, the customer may be eligible for the away from home
rate for the period they are undertaking that evening lecture. In this
case, the away from home rate would cease at the end of the relevant
study period. If the customer wishes to continue receiving the away from
home rate, they will need to re-establish their eligibility.

Relevant location for assessment

Assessment of the away from home rate due to excessive travelling time
is based entirely on the location of the parental home.

Travelling time from the customer's away from home residence to the
approved activity or place of work is not relevant to the assessment.

When parent(s) are overseas, care needs to be taken to determine if the
parent(s) have only left the country temporarily. If so, the travelling
time should be calculated from the parental home in Australia.

Note: If the parent(s) are permanently overseas, further investigation
may be required. If the customer is wholly or substantially dependent on
someone other than a parent, this person may be considered to be the
parent for the PIT and away from home purposes. See Applying the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA) for
further information.

Secondary students

Secondary students attending a non-government secondary school, who
claim they have to live away from home due to excessive travelling time,
will require a check to be made to determine if there is an appropriate
government secondary school less than 90 minutes travelling time from
the student's parental home. If so, the secondary student can only
bypass the government school and qualify for the away from home rate if
exceptional reasons apply or the away from home rate if the parental
home is isolated.

Tertiary students and Apprentices

Tertiary students and apprentices are not subject to the same rule as
secondary students regarding their choice of tertiary education provider
or employer. If tertiary students or Australian Apprentices have
excessive travel time between their parental home and the education
provider or place of employment, and they live away from home, the away
from home rate can be granted.

Note: students undertaking online study are not eligible for the away
from home rate under this criterion, as there is no requirement to
attend a campus. The exception to this is where a student was impacted
by COVID-19.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some tertiary students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many tertiary students also transitioned to online study,
as face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home rate, and transitioned to
online learning as a result of COVID-19 remain eligible for the away
from home rate. Students must return to face-to-face study once
available to continue to be eligible for the away from home rate.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, will remain eligible for the AFH rate providing they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who had their accommodation arrangement cancelled
by the education provider and moved their belongings out of that
accommodation.

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains examples, exceptions to the 90 minute rule,
and manual reviews.

Related links

Assessing parents moving frequently for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing parental home isolated for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing a customer with a disability when the parental home is
isolated from required facilities for Youth Allowance (YA) at the away
from home rate

Assessing equivalent activity not available locally for Youth Allowance
(YA) at the away from home rate

Updating address details

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
