
Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel for ABSTUDY 010-02100200

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details of Orientation and Special Purpose Visit
travel for ABSTUDY.

ABSTUDY Fares Allowance (FAA)

Orientation or Special Purpose Visit travel is available to assist
eligible secondary or tertiary ABSTUDY students who have been approved
to live away from home and are moving to their new boarding or term
location for the first time.

Travel assistance in the form of FAA may be given to the student and/or
their parent or guardian or a representative from their home community
with significant ties to the student, for the entry, orientation or
adjustment of the student so that the boarding/away from home placement
may be effective.

Eligibility criteria for Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel

Students who are eligible for FAA may have access to Orientation or
Special Purpose Visit travel if:

-   a secondary school or boarding facility requires prospective
    students to attend interviews or other selection procedures prior to
    acceptance
-   the student is going away to board for the first time, and is from:
-   a remote Aboriginal community, or
-   a town in a remote location and it is likely that the student would
    experience serious problems of adjustment
-   the student is intending to study in an approved tertiary course of
    at least 1 year's duration at the study location, and has completed
    secondary studies in the previous year
-   a student in a boarding placement is under threat of expulsion
    because of serious problems of adjustment or similar circumstances
    and a visit (sometimes known as pastoral care) is expected to
    stabilise the situation, or
-   a secondary school student will be participating in a school event,
    such as but not limited to a graduation, school play, award
    ceremony, teacher/parent interview or sporting event

If a student or non-student traveller has incurred accommodation costs
during their stay, these costs may also be met.

Access to Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel

Students are able to access both Orientation and Special Purpose Visit
travel where entitlement for each journey has been met.

Where approval has been given for Special Purpose Visit travel,
entitlement is limited to 3 return journeys, per student per year,
between the home community and term address. These can be used by either
the student, family member or community member.

There are no limits on Orientation travel.

Note: where a student is already attending school and requires FAA to
attend an interview or other selection criteria at a different school or
boarding facility, FAA can be approved from their current study
location, not just from the home community.

A secondary school may require prospective students to attend
interviews, or other selection procedures, in the year prior to the
student commencing. These procedures can include screening or selection
interviews as part of the offer of a scholarship, for example The
Sporting Chance Programme. This is acceptable and the student can be
approved as long as:

-   the secondary school or boarding facility provides a reasonable
    explanation as to why the selection procedure needs to occur so
    early, and
-   the student would qualify for FAA to study at the secondary school
    if accepted

Note: an Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel journey for this
purpose is counted towards FAA entitlements in the year that the student
commences at the boarding school or hostel.

FAA for the journey can be authorised in advance or reimbursed after the
journey has taken place.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

Boarding facilities

A secondary boarding facility may need to conduct an interview or
selection exercise in their own right and it may not be possible at the
time of claiming to confirm the school the student will be attending. If
this is the case, the claim can be accepted without study details. They
must advise their study details as soon as possible, otherwise their
ABSTUDY may be rejected after 14 days of the interview taking place.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim
form (SY032).

Related links

Additional costs associated with travel for ABSTUDY

Completing the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance Claim (SY032)

Reimbursing fares and additional costs after travel has been undertaken
for ABSTUDY

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
