
Assessing enh1ment to Youth Allowance (YA) special rate for Long Term Income Support Student or migrants studying English language courses 010-06040030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing a customer's eligibility for the Long
Term Income Support (LTIS) rate of Youth Allowance (YA).

Eligibility requirements for LTIS

The LTIS rate of YA may be paid to YA customers aged 22 years or over
who:

commenced:

-   or recommenced full-time study after turning 22 years of age in an
    approved course, that has a duration of at least 12 months, or
-   an Australian Apprenticeship after turning 22 years of age, and

do not have a dependent child, and

have been on certain income support payment (other than YA received
while the person was undertaking full-time study or a full-time
Australian Apprenticeship), for at least 26 weeks out of the 39 weeks
immediately prior to commencing the course of study or Australian
Apprenticeship

Each time a student commences a new course or returns to a course
following a break in study, they must satisfy the eligibility criteria
in order to be considered for the LTIS rate.

The LTIS rate may also be paid to YA customers aged 22 years or over
who:

-   do not have a dependent child, and
-   does not have English as a first language, and
-   are undertaking an English language course which they commence or
    recommence after turning 22 years of age

For these customers, the time on income support is not relevant.

English as a second language

The LTIS rate may also be paid to customers who do not have English as a
first language and are undertaking an approved English language course.
In these cases, the period of time on income support is not relevant.

Grandfathering provisions

Under grandfathering provisions, customers aged 21 and over who received
the LTIS rate of Youth Allowance prior to 1 July 2012 will continue to
receive the LTIS rate whilst they qualify for YA in relation to the same
course (including an English language course) or Australian
Apprenticeship.

Intent of the LTIS rate of Youth Allowance

The basic rates of payment for customers aged 22 in receipt of YA are
normally lower than the rates payable to people of the same age on other
income support payments such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP). Despite the
compensation of a higher income free area, the lower YA basic payment
rate is often a disincentive for some customers who may be considering a
course of study or undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship. This is
particularly the case for customers who have been in receipt of a
benefit such as JSP for a significant period.

The LTIS rate of YA is intended to ease the transition for customers who
have been in receipt of relevant income support payments for some time
and who decide to commence or recommence either study or an Australian
Apprenticeship after they turn 22.

Purpose of LTIS rate of Youth Allowance

A person who has been on income support for a lengthy period will
probably have an increased need for further training and/or education to
be competitive in the labour market. Additionally, they are less likely
to have any financial reserves to help support this need and will have
adapted to living on the rate of payment they are already receiving.
This combination of greater need for education, with less ability to
finance it, is the reason for the higher rate of payment for long term
income support customers.

To achieve this, YA customers who meet the LTIS criteria, may maintain a
similar rate of basic benefit to JSP if they return to study or commence
an Australian Apprenticeship after turning 22. This rate is known as the
LTIS rate of YA.

Factors affecting the basic rate

The customer's actual rate of YA may not remain at the higher LTIS level
in some cases. A customer transferring to YA may experience a reduction
in actual entitlement due to:

-   being paid at the accommodated independent rate if they are
    independent customers who live with their parents, and/or
-   the effect of the personal or partner income test on their
    fortnightly entitlement

Australian Apprenticeship or approved course qualifications

Customers undertaking an approved course or Australian Apprenticeship
can only qualify for the LTIS rate of Youth Allowance if they have been
in receipt of one or more of the relevant income support payments (YA
rules) for at least 26 weeks during the 39 weeks immediately prior to
commencing or recommencing the approved course or Australian
Apprenticeship.

The 39 weeks is counted back from the day immediately before the day
they commenced or recommenced the approved course or Australian
Apprenticeship.

Determining income support received for 26 out of 39 weeks

A customer in receipt of income support for exactly 26 weeks in the 39
weeks prior to commencing or recommencing their course or apprenticeship
meets the requirement for LTIS, as does a customer who received income
support for more than 26 weeks in the 39-week period.

A quick method for calculating the 26 weeks in the last 39 weeks
requirement when assessing a customer's eligibility for the LTIS rate of
YA can be found in the Resources page of Assessing entitlement to the
Long Term Income Support rate of Austudy for students or migrants
studying English language courses.

The customer is not required to have been continuously on income support
for the whole period, as this could discourage a prospective student
from taking on short-term employment. However, the total time on income
support must add up to at least 26 weeks (182 days) in the 39 weeks
immediately before starting the course or apprenticeship.

The legislation requires the person to have received income support for
at least 26 weeks, and does not allow leeway for periods less than 26
weeks. For example, 26 weeks is not 25 weeks and 6 days; similarly, 39
weeks is not 39 weeks and 4 days.

Periods when the customer is on an employment income nil rate period do
not count towards time on income support.

Related links

Assessing entitlement to the Long Term Income Support rate of Austudy
for students or migrants studying English language courses

Rate chart for maximum payment of Youth Allowance (YA)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
