
This document outlines procedures relating to the cancellation,
suspension and restoration of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES),
ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES.

Suspension of PES

It may be necessary to suspend a customer's PES, ABSTUDY PES or AIC PES
payment when it is unclear whether they are still eligible for their PES
and/or their income support payment. Generally, payments should only be
suspended if:

-   a determination has been made that the customer is not qualified, or
    the payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period, as
    a result of changes to circumstances, or
-   the customers has not complied with a request that was reasonable.
    For example, a request to provide information

Before suspending a customer's PES, care should be taken to establish
that:

the information required cannot be obtained by phone or other means

an appropriate request for information/action has been issued to the
customer, which includes:

-   the information or action required
-   a timeframe for the customer to respond
-   consequence of non-compliance, and
-   reference to the relevant Act the request has been made under

the customers is temporarily not eligible for payment

there is a legislative basis to suspend the payment, and

all appropriate action has been taken

If a decision is made to suspend PES, a manual advice is to be issued.
This advice needs to clearly outline the reason the customer's payment
was suspended, and must include the date of effect of the suspension,
the payment type, the relevant section of the Act and the customers
review and appeal rights.

For more information, see Suspension of payments (CLK).

Restoration of PES

PES, ABSTUDY PES and AIC PES cannot be restored unless the customer is
receiving one of the qualifying income support payments that attract
PES.

When a student has a continuing entitlement to payment of PES, ABSTUDY
PES or AIC PES, and their PES attracting payment is current, their PES
payment may be restored.

Cancellation of PES

PES, ABSTUDY PES and AIC PES payments may be cancelled if the student
has had a change in their circumstances, they fail to comply with the
requirements for payment, another type of payment is more beneficial or
they voluntarily cease payment.

Payments can be cancelled either automatically or manually.

PES cancellation, suspension and rejection codes

When making a decision to cancel, suspend or reject a PES, ABSTUDY PES
or AIC PES payment a specific code must be entered on the Benefit Action
(BA) screen to describe the reason.

A description of the code is used in correspondence with customers.

Contents

Suspension of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Suspension of payments of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Restoration of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) ABSTUDY PES and Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) PES cancellation, suspension and rejection codes

Related links

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Qualifying payments for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
