
Completing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Tax Year Assessment (SY042) 010-03010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to complete the Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Tax Year Assessment (SY042).

On this Page:

SY042 form

The Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Tax Year Assessment
(SY042) only applies to assessing eligibility for Additional Boarding
Allowance (ABA). The SY042 is completed if the income of the AIC
applicant or their partner has either dropped substantially from the
base tax year or has increased by more than 25% over the base tax year
and is also more than 25% higher than the parental income free area.

Current financial year

The current financial year is the year following the base tax year. The
base tax year is the financial year ending on 30 June in the calendar
year prior to the year of study.

If exact current year income figures are not known, an estimate can be
used. Actual income is checked with the Australian Taxation Office after
the end of the year and an AIC debt can result if actual income is
higher than the estimate used.

Income decreased

A current income assessment can be applied if the income is reduced for
at least two years because of any of the following:

-   permanent invalidity or retirement
-   natural disasters such as drought, bush fire or other circumstances
    beyond the control of the parent or guardian
-   unemployment for an extended period or retrenchment
-   any other circumstances causing hardship

The death or separation of a parent or guardian does not normally
require assessment using the current tax year, unless the remaining
parent (applicant) also suffers a significant and sustained fall in
income. Where the death or separation of a parent or guardian occurs
after 1 January of the year of study, only the income of the remaining
parent or guardian for the base tax year is taken into account.

Seasonal variations where income normally fluctuates (e.g. in the case
of primary producers) are not a basis for current income assessment
unless the reduction in income is likely to last for at least two years.

The assessment applies from the later of 1 January in the year of study
or the date of the drop in income.

Income increased

If a reverse current income assessment is necessary, entitlement is
reassessed from 1 October of the year of study.

Completing the form

The form must be signed by both the applicant and their partner, if
applicable. If they are applying for a reverse current income
assessment, they should lodge the form within 14 days of becoming aware
of the increase in their income.

The Resources page contains a link to the SY042.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining the appropriate tax year for the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme

Assessing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Current Tax Year
Assessment (SY042)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
