
ABSTUDY Additional Assistance 010-02050130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Additional Assistance for students and Australian
Apprentices in receipt of ABSTUDY.

Intent of ABSTUDY entitlements

ABSTUDY entitlements are to assist with costs related to the
student/Australian Apprentice's education and training. They are not to
relieve the customer of all expenses related to study, or an Australian
Apprenticeship and day-to-day living expenses.

Purpose of ABSTUDY Additional Assistance

The purpose of Additional Assistance is to support ABSTUDY students or
Australian Apprentices, who are experiencing severe financial
difficulties meeting costs associated with their education and training.

The intent of Additional Assistance is to reduce the risk of ABSTUDY
students or Australian Apprentices withdrawing from education or
training.

Eligibility for Additional Assistance

A student or an Australian Apprentice may be eligible for Additional
Assistance if

-   eligible for ABSTUDY Living Allowance, and
-   financial cost of study/training has caused the customer or the
    customer's family hardship which payment of ABSTUDY entitlement is
    not enough

Students who meet Independence criteria, Unreasonable to Live At Home
(UTLAH), or other criteria for students without parental support, or
disadvantaged students, may be eligible for Additional Assistance where
ABSTUDY entitlements are paid direct to a board provider. ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, Rent Assistance, and in some cases Remote Area Allowance, are
paid via ABSTUDY boarding instalment directly to the board provider
(boarding school or school term hostel). These entitlements normally
cover the period 1 January to 31 December of the study year. Therefore,
students may have no access to financial support during school vacations
as would normally be provided by parent(s)/guardian(s) or other family
members.

Boarding students who meet the Independence criteria for students
without parental support, or are disadvantaged, are identified by
ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing Services.

Eligibility for Additional Assistance (Emergency)

In the event of an emergency or disaster, a student or an Australian
Apprentice may be eligible for Additional Assistance if:

-   the student or Australian Apprentice is qualified for Away From
    Home, or Away From Base entitlements, and
-   the student’s or Australian Apprentice’s participation in, or access
    to, education or training is adversely impacted, either directly or
    indirectly, by an emergency or disaster

When lodging a claim due to emergency or disaster, it is acceptable for
the claim to be lodged by the:

-   Student/Apprentice
-   Education Provider
-   Residential Facility
-   Parent/Guardian

Exclusions for Additional Assistance

Additional Assistance is not to be granted to subsidise the general
living costs of a family. It is expected that the Additional Assistance
provision will be used sparingly.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
