
Acquittal of funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances 010-02070120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to acquit Away from Base allowances
paid in advance for an activity.

Payment in advance

Payment in advance can be made for an Away from Base activity based on
estimated costs provided in an ABSTUDY Submission for away from base
activity funding (SY034) form. Payments made in advance are recorded in
the Process Direct Travel Management Application (TMA).

These payments are recorded in the Process Direct Travel Management
Application (TMA).

Acquittal requirements

The claimant must provide acquittal of an advance payment within one
calendar month of the completion of the approved activity. No funding of
future activities will occur until all previous funding has been
acquitted.

Attached to the ABSTUDY Submission for away from base activity funding
(SY034) is a Single Activity Acquittal Report form for the acquittal of
payments made as a residential expenses package.

An acquittal does not have to be completed on the attached acquittal
form. However, it must have enough detail to reflect the original
submission. Evidence provided as part of the acquittal requires original
receipts or audited financial statements be attached.

Note: if the student has travelled to the activity, but due to ill
health or another similar reason was absent for one or more days, as
long as the education institution states that the student has fully
participated, the student is deemed eligible.

Bulk funded education institutions

Acquittal of bulk funding requires:

-   the lodgement of an independently audited financial statement, and
-   a declaration certifying the funds have been expended in accordance
    with the agreement

The audited acquittal statement is due by 31 January in the following
year. If not provided, funding of individual or bulk activities will
cease.

Unacquitted portions of an advanced payment will result in an overpaid
amount. Repayment of this amount must occur prior to further approval of
Away from Base funding.

The Resources page contains ABSTUDY Away from Base Acquittal Q999 letter
templates.

Related links

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
