
Eligibility for student payments when enrolled in Open Universities Australia 010-07010130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding Open Universities Australia
(OUA) including enrolment practices, study loads and course approvals.

Open Universities Australia

Open Universities Australia (OUA) courses may be undertaken with one or
more of approximately 30 higher education providers.

The Open Learning Agency of Australia was formed in 1991, becoming Open
Universities Australia in 2005. OUA acts as a broker of distance
education in conjunction with a number of universities. Prior to 2014,
OUA also delivered Vocational Education and Training (VET) courses,
however these courses are now conducted by the Open Training Institute.

Students must be recorded as an OUA student on their Centrelink record,
even though they receive the qualification from the host education
provider. This is particularly important for Tertiary Collection of
Student Information (TCSI) reviews.

All OUA courses have various study options and their study materials can
be delivered in 4 ways:

-   Online Only - all content, activities, assessments and support
    services are provided online
-   Web dependent - most of their materials are provided online, with
    some supplementary materials delivered in other modes, such as print
    or CD. There could also be some face-to-face involvement
-   Web supplemented - most of their materials are available in print,
    on CD or DVD, or on audio and video tapes. However, internet access
    is still required to communication and research
-   Print only - all content, activities and assessments are provided
    using printed materials, however support services can be contacted
    by email

Note: Open Universities Australia should not be confused with the
generic term 'open learning', which simply means external study. Open
Universities Australia is a form of open learning.

Eligibility for student payments

To be eligible for Austudy, Youth Allowance (YA) (student), ABSTUDY or
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), a student must be enrolled in and
undertaking a sufficient workload in an approved course at an approved
institution. OUA is an approved institution for student payment
purposes, but not all of its courses are approved. Whilst all of their
undergraduate courses are approved, not all Masters level courses
offered are approved. If the student is undertaking a Masters course,
the National Course Approvals sub-site should be checked to determine of
the course is approved.

ABSTUDY

There are specific closing dates for ABSTUDY claims for students
studying with OUA.

If a student first applies for ABSTUDY in a particular OUA study period,
the closing date for the ABSTUDY claim is the last day of that study
period, unless extenuating circumstances apply. See Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

For details of the study period dates, see the National Course Approvals
sub-site. A link can be found on the Resources page.

Enrolment structure and course selection

From 1 July 2021 to qualify for student payments the customer must be
enrolled in units of study which:

-   equal a full time, or approved concessional, study load, and
-   contribute to a single approved course of study

Customers must nominate a single course of study to be eligible for a
student payment. The course details are required to determine:

-   satisfactory progress or allowable time for the course
-   if the student activity test or study requirements are being met

Prior to 1 July 2021, OUA students did not need to be enrolled in units
of study that contributed to a single approved course of study.
Providing students were enrolled full-time (or in an approved
concessional study load), customers could qualify for a student payment.

Note: students enrolled through OUA are assessed as studying at OUA and
not the partner education provider. Rare exceptions may occur and these
will be identified on the National Course Approvals sub-site under Open
Universities Australia. Only units that form part of their nominated
award can be included for workload purposes.

Study periods and coding education details

Many OUA students do not undertake their entire course at OUA and a
significant number only complete one study period. For this reason, only
one study period at a time should be recorded on the Customer Study
Details (EDC) screen in Process Direct or Education Course Details (EDC)
screen in Customer First, unless the student has provided proof of
enrolment indicating enrolment in more than one consecutive study
period.

OUA students will be issued a Course End Date review letter 28 days
prior to their Student End Date. This review will provide the customer
the opportunity to extend their studies to the end of the next study
period if required. See End of course reviews for students.

Note: a 'study period' at OUA can be any single period of enrolment
including a semester or session, which OUA refers to broadly as 'study
terms'. Terminology differs due to the various dates and names for study
periods across education providers.

If a student does not supply proof of enrolment in more than one study
period, the student must only be recorded as being enrolled in one study
period at a time. This is to minimise any potential overpayments for
students who decide not to continue. Students who are recorded as
studying one period at any time will receive a course end date letter 28
days prior to the end of the study period. If the student is studying in
the next study period, they must respond to the course end date letter
so their payments can be assessed appropriately for the subsequent study
period. Students should be encouraged to use the Manage study details
online option to provide further enrolment details to the agency.

Determining study load

The enrolment structure will determine whether a student is considered
full time for student payment purposes. A student who enrols in a course
which is offered over 4 standard study periods per year is considered
full time if they are enrolled in at least 2 units per study period.
This is equal to 0.250 Equivalent Full Time Study Load (EFTSL) in each
study period.

Customers studying at OUA may be eligible for an assessment under
aggregation requirements, where the student is enrolled in 2 or more
consecutive study periods. See Assessing study load requirements.

Note: a 'study period' at OUA can be any single period of enrolment
including a semester or session, which OUA refers to broadly as 'study
terms'. Terminology differs due to the various dates and names for study
periods across education providers.

Some courses are offered over 3 study periods. Where the third study
period is optional, care must be taken to ensure customers continue to
meet the student activity test. Unless a concessional study load
applies, to meet the activity test customers must be enrolled, and
undertaking study with an EFTSL of at least:

-   0.750 over the year, or
-   0.375 each study period

Masters courses

Masters courses delivered by OUA are not automatically approved courses
for Services Australia payments for students. Service Officers must
check the National Course Approvals sub-site in all cases. If any doubt
exists about the subjects being undertaken in the course, check details
with the customer or check the OUA website. A link can be found on the
Resources page.

Approved Masters degrees delivered through OUA will be displayed under
the University awarding the Master's degree.

Concurrent study

Study with OUA may sometimes be used by a student as part of the
requirements for a course at another education provider and vice versa.
See Effect on student payments of enrolment in more than one course or
at more than one educational institution, for further information.

Continuing/intending students

There is no break, or holiday, between OUA study periods offered at some
universities. Staff will need to check the study period dates for
students who are on a break to ensure there are no current study periods
available for enrolment. In order to be considered a
continuing/intending student during a break, the student must be
enrolled in the next available study period in which a unit is offered
that can contribute to their award.

If a student is studying via study periods where there is a break
between periods, they may be considered a continuing student during
their break.

Relocation Scholarship

As OUA standard study periods are broken down into 4, Relocation
Scholarship may still be payable if the student meets all scholarship
qualification requirements and remains in full-time study in the
approved scholarship course 35 days after the course commenced.

The Resources page contains a link to the Open Universities Australia
website, a list of OUA partner and codes and information about study
load when enrolled at Open Universities Australia. It also contains a
link to the National Course Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Approved correspondence/external study

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
