
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process regarding participation and serious
failures for students and Australian Apprentices.

Activity Test and participation requirements for students

Customers receiving payments as a student are subject to an assessment
regarding their enrolment details, attendance and appropriate study
load.

They are also required to attend certain participation related
appointments, including participation related Service Profiling or
Service Update appointments.

Youth Allowance students who have not met their participation
requirements, and continue to be a student may be asked to sign a
Student Activity Agreement. If they fail to comply with the terms of the
Student Activity Agreement, it may be determined that a participation
failure has been committed and a penalty may apply.

Where student's full-time study requirements are not met, for Youth
Allowance or Austudy, Services Australia may determine that
qualification for payment has been lost for a period of time and cancel
the payment and/or raise a debt.

In certain circumstances, a continuing Youth Allowance student may be
required to enter into a Student Activity Agreement. This will confirm
that they understand and agree to meet their future participation
requirements which may include their attendance and study load. The
automated Job Plan is not applicable to students and the Student
Activity Agreement is a manual process.

Where student Activity Test requirements are not met for ABSTUDY, the
agency may determine that qualification for payment has been lost for a
period of time and cancel the payment and/or raise a debt.

In certain circumstances, an ABSTUDY secondary student may be required
to enter into an ABSTUDY Activity Agreement.

Participation failures and penalties

When a Youth Allowance student does not comply with the requirements of
their Activity Agreement, it may be determined that an assessment for a
potential participation failure is required.

Austudy customers who have not met their participation requirements, may
incur a participation failure and a penalty may apply.

Additionally, if a Youth Allowance or Austudy student fails to attend a
Service Profile or Service Update appointment and has committed a
participation failure, the initial focus is on ensuring re-engagement
with their full-time study requirements. For students, it is assumed
that they have reconnected with Services Australia when they attend a
Service Profile appointment and the service update is completed.

If a student has had three or more failures in a period of 12 months, an
eight week non-payment period may be considered.

When an ABSTUDY secondary student does not comply with the requirements
of their Activity Agreement it will result in an ABSTUDY breach penalty
being applied.

Process for different student and Australian Apprentice groups

Customers receiving payment of Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy as
full-time students are subject to full-time study requirements and may
incur a participation failure for not meeting their requirements.

The following groups are not subject to potential participation failures
related to full-time study requirements.

-   Customers receiving ABSTUDY are not paid under the Social Security
    Act. However, they are subject to a breach regime for not meeting
    attendance requirements
-   Customers receiving YA or Austudy as a full-time Australian
    Apprentice are not required to meet full-time study requirements and
    are excluded from the relevant legislation. However they may, be
    subject to compliance action if they voluntarily left employment or
    were dismissed for misconduct whilst they were an apprentice and
    subsequently claimed YA as a job seeker, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), or
    Parenting Payment (PP) (with mutual obligation requirements)
-   Trainees who are doing a course which does not qualify them for
    payment as a full-time student or an Australian Apprentice, are
    regarded as job seekers and will have mutual obligation requirements
    even if there is no job search component in their requirements. They
    are required to comply with activities negotiated in a Job Plan

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Contents

Determining whether a participation failure is applicable for Youth
Allowance or Austudy students

Generating participation failures for Youth Allowance and Austudy
students

Determining unapproved absence participation failures for Youth
Allowance (YA) secondary students

Action to be taken when full-time students fail to notify they have
ceased full-time study

Related links

Determining Activity Test breaches for unapproved absences for ABSTUDY
secondary students

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Recovery fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
