
Assessing the ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053) 010-02120010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purpose and application of the ABSTUDY Change
of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053) that is issued to ABSTUDY
customers who wish to advise Services Australia of a change of
circumstance.

On this Page:

When to issue SY053

Although many changes in circumstance can be advised verbally (for
example, over the phone), and by using the self service facilities,
there may be times when a customer knows in advance of a change (for
example, change of address) but are not sure of the exact details. In
these cases they may prefer to be given the SY053 that they can complete
and lodge when sure of the details. It may also be issued to customers
who prefer to notify of changes in writing rather than verbally or via
self service. Note: the form can also be issued to third parties such as
partners, parents, or others who wish to supply information about the
customer's circumstances.

Change to study details only

[]Where customers wish to advise of a change in their study details
only, they can view and update them using Manage study details online or
via the study details section of the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
if they are registered for Online Accounts and are authenticated.

Form completion

Customers who are issued the SY053 need to complete the first two
questions and ensure that the declaration is signed, the rest of the
questions are optional, and can be filled out as required.

Lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and forms may be lodged via the following methods:

-   In person at a Services Australia service centre, Centrelink agency
    or with a remote services officer
-   Posted to the nearest service or processing centre
-   Faxed
-   [] Online via the Upload document service

Processing

ABSTUDY Smart Centre processing has been consolidated across sites
nationally. Processing is now undertaken in one of the ABSTUDY Smart
Centre Processing team sites. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY
claims and enquiries for more information.

The Resources page contains links to the online version of the ABSTUDY
Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053) and the Tax Deduction
Authority form (SU066).

Related links

Completing the ABSTUDY Change of Circumstances/Enquiries Sheet (SY053)

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
