
Eligibility for Austudy 010-04030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualification criteria for Austudy.

On this Page:

Austudy

Austudy is a payment for full-time students and Australian Apprentices
25 years of age or over.

Services Australia administers and delivers Austudy payments on behalf
of the Department of Social Services (DSS). The agency's agreement with
DSS requires that Austudy claims are processed accurately, with
particular attention paid to verification of the customer's age,
residence (where applicable) and enrolment with an approved education
institution or as an Australian Apprentice. Austudy is an income support
payment and cannot be paid concurrently with another income support
payment.

Qualifying for Austudy

To qualify for Austudy, a customer must meet all of the following
criteria:

-   be of Austudy payment age, and
-   satisfy the residence requirements, and
-   for students, satisfy the Activity test for Austudy, or
-   for Australian Apprentices, undertake a full-time Australian
    Apprenticeship and have a current Commonwealth Registration Number.
    Note: an Activity Test does not apply to Australian Apprentices

Austudy payment age criteria

Generally, a student or Australian Apprentice is of Austudy age if they
are 25 years of age or more when they apply.

A person is not considered to be Austudy payment age if, at turning 25:

-   they are still undertaking a course which they commenced before they
    turned 25, and
-   they were receiving Youth Allowance (YA) immediately before their
    birthday

Or

-   they were undertaking a full-time Australian Apprenticeship (and
    receiving YA) immediately before their 25th birthday, and
-   they are still undertaking a full-time Australian Apprenticeship

Note: these students/full-time Australian Apprentices remain on YA until
the completion of their course/Australian Apprenticeship.

There is no maximum age for Austudy.

Australian Apprentices

To qualify for Austudy as an Australian Apprentice, a person must have a
current (not suspended) Commonwealth Registration Number in relation to
a full-time apprenticeship, traineeship or trainee apprenticeship under
the scheme 'Australian Apprenticeships'.

The person does not need to provide proof of their status as an
Australian Apprentice. Services Australia will confirm the Australian
Apprenticeship details with the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

Note: Austudy is not payable for any period for which the Australian
Apprentice has been paid the Living Away From Home Allowance (LAFHA).

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
eligibility and payment rates information for Austudy.

Related links

Activity test for Austudy

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Payment rates and thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
