
Approved courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) 010-07010200

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

National information

For a page containing links to course listings, TAFE, University and
Private Provider links, and other course approval information, see
National Course Approvals sub-site.

Approved masters courses

ABSTUDY customers are able to undertake any Masters Course offered by an
approved higher education provider, in accordance with the ABSTUDY
eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate award.

Universities and other Higher Education Providers

The  National Course Approvals sub-site contains links to all
universities in Australia and other higher education providers
including:

-   all University and higher education provider codes
-   links to provider websites where semester and term dates are located
-   specific course information on each provider’s page
-   details of approved or unapproved courses, and
-   course with unusual characteristics

Most universities are self-accrediting and can approve their own
courses. Most other higher education providers are accredited by the
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) and must submit
their courses for accreditation. In addition to being self-accredited or
with TEQSA, all courses must also meet the policy guidelines for
Services Australia student payments.

Some universities and higher education providers are also TAFEs and/or
Registered Training Organisations (RTOs, also known as private
providers). Make sure to select the correct provider code for these
combined providers, so the correct scholarship payment and level of
study is applied.

TAFE/VET course approval procedures

See Resources page of Assessing study load requirements for a list of
how many hours are considered full-time for TAFE courses in each state.
The full time load varies from state to state.

The National Course Approvals sub-site lists:

-   all TAFE provider and education provider codes
-   details of approved and unapproved courses, and
-   courses with unusual characteristics

It does not list all approved TAFE courses as there are too many to list
individually.

Approval requirements

Approval can be given for a TAFE course:

leading to accredited award (other than a TAFE Statement of Attainment)

listed under their scope of registration on the National Register of VET
in Australia, and

starts with:

-   Certificate I
-   Certificate II
-   Certificate III
-   Certificate IV

Approval for courses leading to a TAFE Statement of Attainment

For approval, all units of the course must be accredited.

Non-approved courses

Non-Award or Statement of Attendance are non-approved courses for
student payments.

Diploma level courses

To be an approved course of study for  YA student, Austudy and PES:

Vocational Educational Training (VET)  courses at diploma level or
higher  must  be:

-   a course approved for the VET Student Loan (VSL), and
-   provided by an approved VSL provider

Higher education diploma  courses  must  be:

-   undertaken with an approved/authorised provider offering the Higher
    Education Loan Program (HELP)

AIC, Indigenous special courses and the ABSTUDY Lawful Custody award are
excluded from the VSL and HELP requirement.

Course no longer approved after 1 January 2018 but commenced prior

If the customer started a Diploma course before 1 January 2018 that is
no longer approved under the above requirements and they receive a
payment, the payment will continue until:

-   the end of the course, or
-   there is a break in the customers entitlement including a break in
    study

Private Providers course approval procedures

Private providers are listed in the National Tertiary Institution
Directory in the A-Z Index at top of each page of the  National Course
Approvals sub-site.

Most private providers are Registered Training Organisations and must
maintain their registration on the official National Register on VET in
Australia,  Training.gov.au.

Both the provider and course must be listed to ensure it is approved and
being delivered in such a way to enable the student to qualify for a
student payment.

Create a CALO referral where the student is attending their course, if
unable to find:

-   the provider on the listing, or
-   the course on the private provider page

See Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

Secondary and primary schools course approval procedures

Not all secondary and primary schools are listed on the National Course
Approvals sub-site because of the large number of schools.

To find a secondary or primary school institution code you need to
access the CODES screen in Customer First and undertake a search in the
Educational Institutions Summary.

In Process Direct search codes in [Data Search Prompt] left of the
Education Institution ID in EDS field.

If the school is listed, it is approved. If it is not listed, create a
referral to a Course Assessment and Liaison Officer. See Referrals to
Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

Secondary and primary schooling is state based in Australia and may
differ considerably. Check the National Course Approvals subsite for
local education & training structures in Australia.

If a student is studying an alternative secondary or primary education
not at the secondary or primary school premises, create a referral to a
Course Assessment and Liaison Officer. See Referrals to Course
Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs)..

General information about approved courses

To be eligible to receive a student payment customers must be
undertaking an approved course of study with an approved provider.

An approved course can be of any duration, as specified for the course.

The mode of the study is not important as long as it is approved.
Courses can be taken internally, externally, online and through home
schooling.

Differences between course and provider

The link between course and provider is important. For example,
Technical and Further Education (TAFE) institutions are generally
approved education providers but this does not mean that all TAFE
courses are approved. A TAFE usually offers a wide variety of courses
from hobby courses for example, belly dancing which is not an approved
course to vocational courses for example, Certificate IV in Information
Technology which is an approved course.

Some courses will only be approved for certain payment types:

-   Courses which are not offered on a full-time basis may be approved
    for students eligible for a study load concession or under the
    ABSTUDY Part-time Award but will not be approved for full-time
    students
-   Doctoral courses are not approved for any payment type other than
    ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES
-   Study at primary school level is approved only for ABSTUDY Schooling
    A (School Term Allowance and School Fees Allowance), for ABSTUDY
    Schooling B Award in certain cases, or the Assistance for Isolated
    Children (AIC) Scheme

Some courses that are not otherwise approved may still be approved for
ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES. This type of course is known as an Indigenous
special course. Some courses that are not otherwise approved may still
be approved for AIC.

Services Australia staff seeking assistance

If seeking assistance from a CALO, see Referrals to Course Assessment
and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

If the CALO has to request course details from an external provider,
they must allow the provider 14 days to respond. Student claims should
be streamed to allow for this 14 day turn around. The CALO will try to
obtain the course details as soon as possible to assist claim
timeliness.

In the interim, if a student contacts Services Australia about the
progress of their claim, document the record and advise them:

'Your course has not yet been assessed as meeting eligibility
requirements for a student payment. The provider has been asked to
provide information to Services Australia to determine if the course
meets these requirements. We will be able to progress your claim once we
have received this information.'

Education providers seeking assistance

Where an education provider seeks assistance from a CALO Services
Australia staff should follow processes to make a query on the education
provider’s behalf. See Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison
Officers (CALOs). CALOs provide a service to education providers and
Service Officers to determine if a provider and course meets the
eligibility requirements for payments administered by Services
Australia.

The CALO:

-   investigates the course details and provides advice to the staff
    member initiating the enquiry
-   assesses and lists courses by approved private providers

If unable to find a provider in the A-Z directory in the  National
Course Approvals  sub-site, and/or the course is not yet listed with
that provider, create a referral to a CALO. See Referrals to Course
Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

Advice about ABSTUDY and AIC specific course approval criteria

Advice about whether a course is approved for a student payment
(including ABSTUDY and AIC) should be initially directed to the relevant
Course Assessment and Liaison Officer (CALO) in accordance with the
Contact protocols, above. Where a customer has claimed ABSTUDY or AIC,
the CALO will contact the Level 2 ABSTUDY Policy helpdesk to get their
advice about whether the course meets the ABSTUDY or AIC specific course
approval criteria (that are either additional to, or instead of, the
criteria in the Course Determination Instrument).

Services Australia links

Useful Internet links contains a section on Education and training
information

Level 2 ABSTUDY Policy Helpdesk

External links

Training.gov.au

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
