-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines interim claim and interim applicant provisions
for ABSTUDY.

When to use an interim claim

An interim claim can be used when a student, or the person who would
normally apply on behalf of the student cannot due to exceptional
circumstances such as serious illness, floods or remote locality.
Services Australia must believe, by accepting an interim claim, it is
following the wishes of the student or parent/guardian in respect of the
student's schooling. The 'interim applicant' is the person who is
completing the interim claim.

The interim applicant must:

-   have temporary care of the student
-   be able to make an informed declaration about the student's
    Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander status, and
-   be prepared to accept ABSTUDY conditions as outlined in the ABSTUDY
    Policy Manual

An interim applicant can be a person, an institution or a boarding
school.

Institutions may be considered applicants for the purposes of:

-   Away from Base submissions, and
-   interim claims for boarding school students

Interim claims can only be accepted from boarding schools if all the
following circumstances apply:

-   the student or person who would normally apply on behalf of the
    student is cannot submit a claim because of exceptional
    circumstances, such as serious illness or remote locality
-   the claim is lodged in the student's first term at the school
-   the boarding school accepts responsibility for obtaining a full
    claim from the applicant
-   the institution accepts responsibility for the student's boarding
    and tuition fees where a complete claim is not subsequently lodged
    by the applicant
-   the agency has no reason to believe, by accepting an interim claim
    it is not following the wishes of the applicant in respect of the
    student's schooling

Where the above circumstances are met, only ABSTUDY non-income tested
allowances and Fares Allowance (FAA) for Terms 1 and 2 can be approved.
Where a full claim from the student's parent/guardian has not been
received by the end of Term 2, no further FAA is to be approved.

The ABSTUDY interim claim provisions do not apply to Australian
Apprentices.

Claim form

There is no specific claim form for interim claims. The interim
applicant must complete the paper claim form relevant to the payment
being claimed. If the student is likely to be eligible for:

-   Schooling A, the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)
-   Schooling B, the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019) or the Claim for ABSTUDY
    Remote Areas form (SY092)

Completing an interim claim

Points to note in completing the claim:

The minimum information acceptable for an interim claim is both the:

-   student details
-   parent/guardian details

The claim must be completed in blue or black pen

All relevant questions on the claim form should be answered. Many
questions only require a 'Yes' or 'No' tick

The claim must be signed by the interim applicant

If helping interim applicants to complete a claim, do not underline or
make any comments on the claim that is to be signed by the interim
applicant and lodged with Centrelink. Always use a separate sheet of
paper to capture any notations or explanations to questions and attach
this to the claim.

Lodgement

ABSTUDY paper claims and supporting documents can be lodged using any of
the following options:

-   [] Online - using the Upload documents service
-   Fax - see Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   Post - via a reply paid envelope or by posting to Services
    Australia. See Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
    PES
-   In person - at a service centre, or in remote areas, with a
    Centrelink field officer

Claim assessment

Where an interim claim is accepted, the delegate may, based on available
information, approve only ABSTUDY non-income tested allowances. A full
application must be received from the original applicant as soon as
possible.

Allowances not subject to income testing are:

-   non-means tested portion of Group 2 School Fees Allowance
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Incidentals Allowance
-   Additional Incidentals Allowance
-   Fares Allowance
-   Lawful Custody Allowance
-   Away-from-base entitlements
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)

The Resources page contains a link to the agency's website and ABSTUDY
claim forms.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Determining who should be the ABSTUDY applicant

Early claims

Rates and Thresholds

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
