-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a student or Australian
Apprentice is eligible for the away from home rate due to travel time
and access.

On this Page:

Eligibility for away from home rate

Students and Australian Apprentices may be eligible for the ABSTUDY away
from home rate if they need to live away from home due to reasonable
travelling time or distance. The Process page contains more on assessing
eligibility.

Dependent students studying by distance education or correspondence are
not eligible for the away from home rate under the travel time and
access provision. This excludes mixed mode courses with a combination of
distance education and face-to-face teaching.

Change of permanent home

Away from home approval usually ceases if the student or Australian
Apprentice's permanent home changes to a location not meeting reasonable
travelling time or distance. See Assessing continuity of study for
ABSTUDY away from home rate.

Tertiary students impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some tertiary students were required to leave their on campus term
accommodation. Many tertiary students also transitioned to online study
as face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Tertiary students who were receiving the away from home rate, and
temporarily transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19,
remain eligible for the away from home rate. Tertiary students must
return to face-to-face study as soon as it becomes available to continue
to be eligible for the away from home rate.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, will remain eligible for the away from home rate providing
they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

This includes students who:

-   have had their accommodation arrangement cancelled by their
    education provider and have moved their belongings out of that
    accommodation
-   were approved for the Residential Cost Option (RCO)

Note: the away from home rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance can be paid
for any period that the education provider does not charge a residential
fee, rather than the reduced rate of Living Allowance.

The Resources page contains examples of reasonable distance rules and,
reasonable time and distance determinations.

Related links

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Cessation of the ABSTUDY away from home rate

Assessing continuity of study for ABSTUDY away from home rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
