
ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance 010-02050090

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Additional Incidentals Allowance is payable
to full-time tertiary or Masters and Doctorate ABSTUDY students who
incur high levels of essential course costs.

Purpose of Additional Incidentals Allowance

The purpose of Additional Incidentals Allowance is to assist students to
meet essential course costs associated with study in an approved
tertiary course. The Additional Incidentals Allowance is only payable
where these costs must be incurred by all students in the course. This
allowance is not intended to cover the full cost of such items.

Qualification for Additional Incidentals Allowance

To qualify for Additional Incidentals Allowance the student must:

qualify for one of the following ABSTUDY Awards:

-   Tertiary Award
-   Masters and Doctorate Award

commence in the course, and

incur essential course costs that exceed the prescribed amount.

The Head of School/Faculty must complete Question 9 on the Additional
Incidentals Allowance Claim to verify that the incidentals being claimed
are an essential requirement for all students undertaking the course.

There are prescribed amounts for Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Note: Australian Apprentices are not entitled to Additional Incidentals
Allowance.

Additional Incidentals Allowance rates

The Additional Incidentals Allowance entitlement is the amount by which
essential course costs exceed the prescribed amount. There is a maximum
to the amount of Additional Incidentals Allowance that can be claimed in
a year.

When the claim is lodged with Services Australia, the cost of the
essential course costs/items listed will be totalled. If this amount is
greater than the Additional Incidentals prescribed amount, the excess
over the prescribed amount is the amount payable, up to the yearly
maximum. Course costs that are less than the prescribed amount however,
in excess of the Incidentals Allowance payable for the course, are the
responsibility of the student and are called the student contribution.

Additional Incidentals Allowance is paid directly to the customer
following approval of a completed claim from the customer.

Additional Incidentals Allowance is not means tested and is non-taxable.

Claiming Additional Incidentals Allowance

A student must lodge an ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim
Form M (SY031). The student must detail the cost of each item of
essential course costs, and may include necessary items that have not
yet been purchased, though evidence of expenditure (for example,
receipts) are required to cover the bulk of expenditure. The claim must
contain certification by the Head of School/Faculty of the education
institution that the items listed are essential for all students
studying the course.

There is no restriction on the number of Additional Incidentals
Allowance claims a student can make for a course (or courses) in a year,
although the total payment of Additional Incidentals Allowance payment
cannot exceed the maximum per calendar year. A customer who undertakes
more than one course in a year can qualify for Additional Incidentals
Allowance for each course, however the student's essential course costs
must exceed the relevant Additional Incidentals prescribed amount for
each course, prior to the student qualifying for payment of an amount of
Additional Incidentals Allowance.

Essential course costs

Essential course costs are considered to be those costs that are
mandatory to the course but that the education institution would not
reasonably be expected to provide. All students in the course are
obliged to incur these costs in order to undertake their course. Such
costs may include:

-   education institution fees - including union, sports, library,
    administration, amenities, laboratory fees or levies charged by an
    approved education institution, but not tuition or course fees or
    flying time and associated fees charged for aviation courses
-   textbooks and equipment - including books, published articles,
    stationery and other equipment items, but not items which would be
    expected to be provided by the education institution or items such
    as musical instruments, sewing machines, typewriters or computers
    (this includes tablet computers, for example the iPad).

Receipts

Students must keep receipts for all their course expenditure so Services
Australia can assess their entitlement for Additional Incidentals
Allowance.

Receipts should clearly show the business name, each item purchased,
date and amount of each item.

Where a student purchases essential course items from a fellow student a
fully itemised receipt detailing the purchase must be supplied. It must
show:

-   Name of seller
-   Details of each item purchased
-   Date of purchase of each item
-   Purchase amount of each item.

A quote from a retailer (for example, bookshop or stationery
supplier/catalogue) showing the recommended retail price of the item
must also be supplied.

The Resources page contains a link to the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals
Allowance Claim Form M (SY031) and examples of how to determine
eligibility to Additional Incidentals Allowance and links to the
following information.

Related links

A-B payment rates and thresholds

Completing the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M
(SY031)

Assessing Form m (SY031) ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
