
Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY 010-02070000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Away from Base assistance for
ABSTUDY students.

On this Page:

Away from Base assistance

Away from Base assistance is available to help eligible ABSTUDY students
participate in necessary academic components of an approved course where
that course requires students to travel away from their home or study
location for a short period of time.

Away from Base assistance is to cover the:

-   student's travel costs to attend the activity, and
-   reasonable costs of accommodation and meals while away from their
    normal residence

An Away from Base activity can be done by an individual student or a
group of students doing a joint activity.

Some restrictions apply to eligibility for assistance to travel
interstate.

Note: Away from Base assistance is not available for activities that are
part of an Australian Apprenticeship.

Away from Base activities

Away from Base activities include:

-   testing and assessment programmes for entry into tertiary or
    university courses
-   residential schools
-   field trips for tertiary courses, and
-   placements or practical components of tertiary courses

See Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base activities.

Approval criteria

Away from Base assistance is only available for activities in Australia.

Other than for a testing and assessment programme, an Away from Base
activity will only be approved if it is:

-   an essential academic component of a course, and
-   necessary for a student to do this component to meet the minimum
    requirements for successful completion of the course

Assistance from the Indigenous Advancement Strategy (IAS)

Not approved for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance:

-   courses receiving assistance from the National Indigenous
    Australians Agency (NIAA) under the IAS Away from Base element to
    fund costs of student participation
-   students enrolled in these courses must apply to the education
    provider for this assistance

Note: the IAS Away from Base element does not fund the cost of student
participation in testing and assessment activities. Therefore, if IAS
funding applies to participation in the actual course, assistance is
available to attend a testing and assessment activity. The current list
of IAS funded mixed-mode courses is available on the Resources page.

Assistance available for Away from Base activities

Assistance available includes:

-   Fares Allowance (FAA)
-   Living Allowance, and
-   residential expenses (meals and accommodation), comprising either a
    residential expenses package or travel allowance

Away from Base assistance may be granted if the journey is not within
reasonable travelling time or distance from the student's permanent home
or term address.

FAA can be approved if the student only needs to travel to the activity
and back in 1 day, so overnight accommodation is not required.

To be eligible for travel allowance or residential expenses, the student
needs to stay away from the permanent home or term address and require
overnight accommodation.

Away from Base assistance for education provider representatives

Where it is more cost effective, Away from Base assistance can be
approved for education institution representatives to deliver an Away
from Base activity at the home location of a group of students (rather
than have students travel to the institution). Situations may exist
where an education institution representative and students may be
approved for the same activity. For example, a teacher runs a
residential school in a community but other enrolled students in
different locations must also attend the residential school. Away from
Base assistance may also be approved for drivers or pilots of chartered
transport.

Claiming and payment of Away from Base assistance

Some limits on Away from Base assistance apply.

Approval of an Away from Base activity requires lodgement of an ABSTUDY
Submission for away from base activity funding form (SY034) by the Away
from Base submission closing date.

Claims lodged by educational institutions will not be accepted more than
13 weeks before the calendar year in which the first course is due to
start.

Payment in advance of an activity can be approved upon receipt of a
submission, with funds required to be acquitted within 4 weeks of the
activity completion. Otherwise, reimbursement of actual costs can occur
after the activity, upon lodgement of an acquittal.

Period of entitlement for Away from Base assistance

When assessing the costs of an approved Away from Base activity, the
period for which costs may be approved is:

-   the length of the approved Away from Base activity, and
-   any period(s) of unavoidable overnight stopover(s) at an in-transit
    location or an Away from Base location due to transport timetables

The Resources page contains links to the ABSTUDY Submission for away
from base activity funding (SY034) and links to the current and previous
lists of Indigenous Education Training Programme (IETP) funded
mixed-mode courses.

Contents

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base activities

Approval of ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance

Non-student beneficiaries for ABSTUDY Away from Base assistance

Assessing student eligibility to attend an approved ABSTUDY Away from
Base activity

Acquittal of funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances

Bulk funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances

Completing the ABSTUDY Submission for Away from Base Activity Funding
(SY034)

Away from Base travel for ABSTUDY

Related links

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award

A-B payment rates and thresholds

Indigenous Education Training Programme (IETP)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Testing and Assessment Award

Acquittal of funding for ABSTUDY Away from Base allowances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
