
Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at home' Statement by Parent(s) (SY016) 010-06010070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY: 'Unreasonable
to live at home' Statement by Parent(s) (SY016) form is required to be
completed.

When to use this form

Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY Statement by Parent(s) (SY016) is used to
assess independence where the young person claims it is unreasonable for
them to live at home. The rate of Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY is
not affected by parental income if the young person meets guidelines for
independence.

Guidelines for Independence

To meet the guidelines, it must be unreasonable for the young person to
live at home with their parents because of one of the following reasons:

-   extreme family breakdown or similar exceptional circumstances
-   it would be unreasonable to expect the customer to live at home as
    there would be a serious risk to their physical or mental well-being
    due to family and domestic violence, sexual abuse or other similar
    unreasonable circumstances
-   the parent(s) are unable to provide a suitable stable home for the
    customer

The young person must not be receiving:

-   continuous support (financial or otherwise) from a parent or any
    other person who is acting as a long-term guardian, or
-   continuous payments in the way of income support from an Australian
    Government agency/department or a state or territory authority

Who completes the form

The statement is to be completed by both parents jointly if they reside
together. If they are not living together each parent needs to complete
a separate form. If they are unable to complete the form or would like
to speak to the UTLAH Assessment Team, they can contact the Youth and
Students line on 13 2490 or the ABSTUDY line on 1800 132 317. The
parents can ask to speak to a Service Officer in the relevant UTLAH
Assessment Team, only where the young person claiming UTLAH has provided
permission to do so.

This permission can be declared:

-   within the online claim responses, under 'Unreasonable to live at
    home - Parent details' section
-   within the completed Statement by Young person (SY015) form, or
-   documented on the young person's record

Without this permission, the parent/s must not be transferred to the O18
UTLAH Assessment Team.

Customers 18 years of age and over

Customers 18 years and over must provide 2 statements:

-   Statement by Young person (SY015) or if claiming online, complete
    the digital version within the Youth Allowance claim
-   Statement by Parents (SY016)

For claimants over the age of 18 years, this is assessed by a Service
Officer within the O18 UTLAH Assessment Teams that process these claims.
These customers will generally be assessed via statement forms (as
above) only.

Customers under 18 years of age

Youth Allowance customers under 18 years of age applying to be assessed
as independent because it is unreasonable to live at home, are to be
booked in for an interview with a social worker. The social worker must
make the assessment of the young person's entitlement.

The Resources page has links to Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY UTLAH forms
on the Services Australia Website.

Related links

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Independence for ABSTUDY

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY: 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Young Person (SY015)

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY: 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Independent Third Party (SY017)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
