-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help institutions fill out submissions for
Away from Base Activity Funding for ABSTUDY forms.

On this Page:

When to use this form

The ABSTUDY Submission for Away from Base Activity Funding (SY034) is to
be completed by institutions who wish to apply for funding for a group
of students.

The group of students may wish to attend a:

-   testing and assessment program
-   residential school
-   field trip, or
-   placement

Note: for advance payments, this form should be lodged six weeks before
the activity, for which funding is required.

Individual student arranges their own testing and assessment

An individual student who arranges their own testing and assessment with
the institution for entry into a mainstream course is not required to
lodge an SY034.

The student must provide a letter from the education institution
confirming the date and period of the testing activity.

How to lodge this form

ABSTUDY claims and forms may be lodged in person at the nearest service
centre or ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing team, or in remote areas, with
a field officer. Claims and forms may also be posted to the nearest
service centre or ABSTUDY Smart Centre site. The form should be lodged
six weeks before the activity, for which funding is required. Claims
will not be accepted outside of 13 weeks prior to the calendar year in
which the first course commenced.

ABSTUDY Smart Centre processing has been consolidated across sites
nationally. Processing is now undertaken in one of four ABSTUDY Smart
Centre Processing sites. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims
and enquiries for more information about the responsibilities that each
section of Services Australia has when dealing with ABSTUDY related
matters.

When assisting customers to complete a form that is used to assess their
eligibility for payment, Service Officers must not make any notations,
underline or make comments of any sort on a form that is to be signed by
a customer and lodged with the department. Instead, any notations or
explanations to questions on the form should be made on a separate sheet
of paper and attached to the customer's file.

Where an activity involves a group of students, the institution must
lodge a submission on behalf of the students. An individual student who
arranges their own testing and assessment with the institution for entry
into a mainstream course, is not required to lodge a SY034, but must
provide a letter from the education institution confirming the date and
period of the testing activity.

The Resources page contains links to the ABSTUDY Submission for Away
from Base Activity Funding (SY034) and current and historical lists of
Indigenous Education Training Programme (IETP) funded mixed-mode
courses.

Related links

Claiming ABSTUDY

Away from Base assistance for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
