-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines reporting requirements for full-time students and
Australian Apprentices.

Government intent

Customers must be paid the correct amount of income support payment.
Reporting Statements assist in determining the appropriate rate of
payment and play an important part in ensuring that overpayments do not
occur.

Reporting requirements

Students and Australian Apprentices are required to notify Services
Australia of any income they receive in accordance with their
notification obligations.

Australian Apprentices must be profiled as 2 weekly stimulus reporters
in line with their notification obligations.

Customers must be placed on 2 weekly reporting within the new claim
activity, where:

-   their online claim indicates that they and/or their partner (where
    applicable) are employed
-   documents are provided indicating regular work (e.g. recent payslips
    or bank statements which show pay being deposited), or
-   a DOC or Note on their record advise the customer and/or partner is
    paid employment income

Note: customers only receiving business or self employment income, are
not required to be placed on 2 weekly reporting. See Recording and
correcting employment income details.

Reporting frequency

[]Australian Apprentices are automatically profiled as 2 weekly stimulus
reporters when their claim is granted. They must report any gross income
paid to them, as well as the hours they have worked during their
entitlement period.

Students are able to advise online that they or their partner have
commenced employment. Once they commence reporting online, they are
automatically placed onto 2 weekly reporting to declare their employment
income. If a customer is currently a notification reporter, they can add
their and/or their partner’s employment details by selecting Report
employment income under the heading 'Income and assets'.

The Service Profiler determines how often a customer is due to report
based on their employment income circumstances.

Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy student customers are profiled as a:

-   2 weekly reporter if they have employment income, and
-   notification reporter if they have no employment income

Notification reporters need to advise within 14 days if they and/or
their partner (if applicable) commence work.

Customers whose partner is receiving Carer Payment (CP) cannot use the
service.

ABSTUDY customers are profiled as a:

2 weekly reporter if they have:

-   employment income, or
-   3 or more occurrences of employment income within a 12 week period,
    and

notification reporter if they have:

-   less than 3 occurrences of employment income within a 12 week period

If an ABSTUDY customer reports income that results in a nil payment of
Living Allowance, they remain a 2 weekly reporter for 6 consecutive
fortnights. If, at the end of the 6 fortnights, they remain ineligible
for Living Allowance, they will be re-profiled as a notification
reporter.

Australian Apprentices are profiled as a:

-   2 weekly reporter, and must report any gross income paid to them as
    well as the hours they have worked during their entitlement period

Self-service reporting

[] Students and Australian Apprentices on 2 weekly reporting who contact
Services Australia to report employment income (REI) are required to
complete the transaction via self-service (online, Express Plus
Centrelink App or phone self-service). See Accessing and using
Centrelink self service for further information.

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

Early or late reporting

Early reporting

Early submission of Reporting Statements is usually not acceptable.
There are some situations when an early report can be accepted for
future processing, including:

where arrangements are in place for national public holiday processing

events which would result in cancellation of payment (e.g. returning to
full time work)

changing payday codes, and

where the customer is going overseas, see:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas
-   Austudy customer going overseas, or
-   ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas

Late reporting

Self-service can be used for up to 13 days after the due to report date.
If a student or Australian Apprentice fails to report within that time,
their payments will automatically cancel.

An exception exists following the grant of payment to full time students
and Australian Apprentices. Payment will not automatically cancel until
the customer has had 22 days to report, regardless of the report due
date.

For example, a grant is finalised on 15 April and backdated to 4
February (the date the claim was submitted). The customer is issued with
an initial Reporting Statement, due on 17 February. Payment will
automatically cancel if the customer has not reported by 7 May, which is
22 days after the grant was finalised.

Homeless customers

Service Profiler will automatically place homeless customers on 2 weekly
reporting, when a new claim is:

-   actioned in Process Direct, and
-   has a homelessness indicator coded

Homeless customers who receive Youth Allowance (Student) and have no
personal or partner earnings should be taken off 2 weekly reporting.

The Resources page contains a link to phone contact details for Services
Australia.

Related links

Using self service

Reporting employment income online

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Reporting overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
