-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist a Service Officer
determine the appropriate travel destination for approval of ABSTUDY
Fares Allowance (FAA).

FAA

FAA is a payment designed to cover the costs incurred by students for
specified travel to fully participate in their course of study. A
student is normally entitled to FAA only between the permanent home and
the study location, although travel to or from a destination other than
the permanent home or study location may be approved in certain
circumstances.

An Australian Apprentice is not entitled to FAA for the Australian
Apprenticeship.

Study location

The student's study location is the location where the student normally
studies.

Students may be considered to have a temporary change in study location
whilst attending a school activity. For further information, see the
Process page.

Permanent home

For independent students, the permanent home is the location where the
student lived immediately before the commencement or recommencement of
the approved course.

For dependent students, the permanent home is the location at which the
student's parent/guardian normally resides.

Home location is considered to have changed

A student's permanent home location will be considered to have changed
if:

-   the partner of an independent student, who remained at the permanent
    home whilst the student was residing at the study location, moves
    permanently to a new location
-   the parent(s) or guardian(s) of a dependent student move permanently
    to a new location
-   a student completing or discontinuing their course does not
    undertake a return journey to the permanent home within 3 months of
    ceasing study
-   a continuing independent student does not return to the permanent
    home for the long vacation at the end of the study year, or
-   a student has applied for and/or obtained rental accommodation
    through the local State/Territory Housing Authority, or purchased
    housing

A change in permanent address

A change in permanent home address may affect the student's future
eligibility for FAA. A student who retains eligibility for FAA after a
change in permanent home will qualify for travel between the new
permanent home and the study location.

If exceptional circumstances exist such that the student should not be
regarded as having changed their permanent home, FAA can continue to be
payable to, or from, the address the student resided before commencing
the course.

Destinations other than the permanent home

In certain circumstances, Services Australia can approve FAA for a
journey from, or to, a location other than the permanent home.

The circumstances for the travel must relate to:

-   unforeseen or exceptional circumstances, or
-   other allowable exceptions (for further information, see the Process
    page)

Note: travel costs must not exceed the level of FAA entitlement for
previously approved travel.

In unforeseen, exceptional circumstances or other allowable exceptions,
in consultation with DSS, FAA may be approved under ABSTUDY Additional
Assistance where the travel costs exceed the level of FAA entitlement
for previously approved travel. See the Process page.

Apart from above, FAA will not be paid, even if the travel location is
cheaper than from, or to, their permanent home and study location.

Additional costs for taking an indirect route or for breaking the
journey are not included in Fares Allowance unless:

a break in the journey cannot be avoided or

where a student is in receipt of a Third Party Indigenous Scholarship
and:

-   a variation to the usual travel route is required for students to
    joining a supervised group to travel to their school at the
    beginning of a school term, and
-   the travel route and arrangements are pre-approved by Services
    Australia as a reasonable variation from the usual travel route

The Resources page contains examples for determining the appropriate
travel destination for FAA and a link to the ABSTUDY Fares Allowance
Claim (SY032).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
