-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to follow to reimburse eligible
tertiary students in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) who claim Fares Allowance (FAA) for
the use of a private vehicle or for travel by taxi.

Fares reimbursement

Fares Allowance (FAA) for eligible tertiary students is normally paid at
the rate of the cheapest mode of public transport available for the
journey. It can also be paid for the use of private transport or taxi
where public transport is not available, or not practicable.

If public transport is available between the customer's permanent home
and their place of study, and it is practicable for the customer to use
such transport, the customer will be reimbursed at the rate of the
cheapest mode of public transport, regardless of the form of transport
actually used.

Determining whether the cost of a mode of transport is reasonable
depends on the circumstances. Where living necessities or personal
belongings, such as essential kitchenware and bedding, need to be
transported by the student from their family or permanent home in order
to undertake study, and it is not practicable to transport the items by
public transport (for example, due to strict luggage limits, or the
amount of luggage is difficult to manoeuvre), FAA may cover reasonable
costs of transport by a private vehicle.

Note: if the journey was able to be undertaken with additional luggage
via plane, train or bus, then additional luggage can be factored into
the calculations. The car is not included in any calculations. Fares
Allowance does not include the transportation of a car or accommodation
paid for during the period of travel.

Travel by private car is reimbursed according to a rate per kilometre
based on the engine capacity of the car. Note: if a student provides a
fuel receipt as verification of the trip, the value of the trip based on
the capacity of the car and the number of kilometres travelled should be
reimbursed, not the value of the receipt.

Taxi fares are reimbursed at a standard rate per kilometre.

A customer will need to explain why it is necessary to undertake the
trip by private car or taxi, such as no public transport available,
natural disaster or medical needs.

The References page contains a link to the Guide for information about
the current rates for reimbursement of Fares Allowance (FAA) where the
journey was made by private car or taxi.

The Resources page includes a table showing scenarios of rates to travel
by private car and approved free text when requesting evidence for the
requirement to transport living/study necessities.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
