
Checking the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040) 010-03020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to check the SY040 claim form has
been completed correctly. AIC is available for primary, secondary and
certain tertiary students who are unable to attend an appropriate state
school because of geographic isolation or a special health-related or
educational need.

SY040

Customers lodging AIC claims or forms can do so at any Services
Australia service centre. When the form is received, staff will check
the form for completeness and record its receipt on the system.

An organisation claiming AIC must complete an Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Organisation details (SY067) as well as the SY040.

When claims or forms are received, all documents will be scanned.
However, scannable document exceptions will be recorded in a DOC. This
states where and when the document was received, what action was taken
with the document and where it was sent. For more information, see
Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD.

Customers with a Centrelink record may be able to [] upload supporting
documents online.

If the form has not been signed, the claim needs to be photocopied and
the original sent to the applicant to be signed along with a letter
advising that the claim is incomplete.

All relevant questions must be answered and any required supporting
documents provided with the claim. The customer must have completed the
relevant income and Tax File Number (TFN) questions and signed the form.
The customer’s partner must also have signed the form if the AIC
Additional Boarding Allowance is being claimed.

Applicants living in isolated areas may have their original documents
photocopied and endorsed by an official of the local court, police
station or other government office. The photocopies must be stamped (if
an office stamp is used), signed and dated by the official viewing the
original documents.

Related links

Completing the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) (SY040)

Assessing the new Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
(SY040)

Assessing the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Organisation
details (SY067)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
