-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete a Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (SY020). This form is used by Australian Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islanders who wish to claim the ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES).

On this Page:

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement Claim

ABSTUDY PES is an additional payment to help with ongoing study costs
for customers receiving qualifying payments that attract ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Note: if the customer is not an Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander and wishes to claim PES, they should complete the Claim for
Pensioner Education Supplement (SY004).

Customers who already have a Services Australia record should be
encouraged to lodge a claim using the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool instead of a
paper claim.

Customers completing a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool can be
offered a verbal declaration. Customers who do not accept a verbal
declaration are required to return a signed CDF.

A customer’s acceptance to a verbal declaration is recorded in the
Verbal Declaration DOC, and in the Progress of ABSTUDY claim DOC.

Note: on 28 November 2016, a verbal declaration replaced the requirement
for the customer to return a signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF). All
customers who complete a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool prior
to 28 November 2016 may still be required to return their signed CDF.
See ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process for more information.

If a customer has been in receipt of ABSTUDY, for example Living
Allowance, and they have just recently begun to receive an income
support payment that attracts ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES), they may not need to lodge an ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (SY020) claim. Refer to Claiming ABSTUDY to determine if a
new claim is required.

The First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow will automatically
identify customers who may be eligible for PES. The FCSO workflow will
prompt the Service Officer to issue a claim for Pensioner Education
Supplement (SY004) or a claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(SY020) if the customer has identified as Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander.

Completing the claim

Points to note in completing the claim:

-   There is a Notes booklet attached to the claim that includes
    information about eligibility, allowances available, commencement
    dates, Aboriginality, study requirements and customer rights and
    obligations
-   All questions on the claim should be answered
-   The claim must be signed by the customer
-   Proof of enrolment (POE) may be required if the customer is not a
    school student or a student who is studying a higher education
    course at a university. ABSTUDY PES payments can be approved without
    POE however the customer must be advised they must provide POE as
    soon as possible. See Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study
-   In some cases a separate statement may also be needed, for example
    to give reasons for a break in study or unsuccessful study or to
    provide further details where there is not enough space

ABSTUDY PES closing dates

The closing dates for PES claims differ from other benefits administered
by Services Australia:

-   31 March if the course is a full year course starting before 1
    April, or
-   31 July if the course starts on or after 1 July, or
-   28 days from the date of qualification if the course is less than 1
    year

To ensure the student is paid from the earliest date possible they
should lodge their claim by the closing dates above.

Note: different processes apply for customers experiencing
vulnerability, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Lodging ABSTUDY claims and forms

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

-   [] Online - Registered customers can upload their claim and any
    supporting documents online. For information about how to lodge
    documents online, see Resources
-   Fax - Claims and supporting documents may be accepted by fax. The
    date the fax is received is considered the date of receipt for
    processing purposes
-   Post - Claims and supporting documents may be posted using the
    appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
    Processing team. Look up local Processing Services details for:
    ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES
-   In person - Claims and supporting documents may be lodged in person
    at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink
    field officer

ABSTUDY processing is undertaken in the ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing
teams. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries for
more information.

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the Claim
for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020). It also contains
information about how to lodge documents online.

Related links

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Assessing a Claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
