-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Second Home Allowance (SHA). SHA is
payable for students who live in an approved second family home to have
daily access to approved study during the school week.

Purpose

SHA contributes towards the cost incurred by mainly geographically
isolated families in maintaining a second family home for a student to
have daily access to appropriate schooling. A family may decide to set
up a second family home rather than having their child(ren) board at a
school, hostel or in a private boarding arrangement because of the age
of the children, or lack of boarding facilities, or other family
circumstances.

SHA is intended for families with student(s) who attend school on a
daily basis while living in the second family home. SHA is not payable
for students in the second home who study via distance education or home
schooling methods.

A common second home scenario is where one parent remains in the
principal family home and the other parent lives in the second home with
children during the school weeks and stay at the principal family home
from Friday night to Sunday night or Monday morning. There are
variations to this scenario, but it is not necessary for a parent to
live in the second home. Sometimes the children may be supervised during
the week by a grandparent or older sibling.

Eligibility criteria

General AIC Scheme eligibility criteria must be met for the applicant
and student.

The family's nominated principal family home must be an approved
principal family home.

The second family home must be maintained by the family for the purpose
of providing easier daily access to appropriate education for at least
one student who would not have such access from the family's principal
home. The student must live in the second home for at least four nights
of the school or education institution week for the full rate of SHA to
be payable. For students living in an approved second home for less than
4 nights of a school or education institution week, pro-rata payment of
Second Home Allowance may be available. For advice, contact the AIC
Level 2 helpdesk. The Resources page has a link to the AIC Level 2
helpdesk contact information.

A family may rent, lease or have purchased, or be purchasing the second
home and still be eligible for SHA. However:

-   receiving, or having ever received, the First Home Owners Grant (or
    since 1 January 2011 having received state or territory based first
    home owner assistance or incentives) for the property will exclude
    eligibility for SHA. The First Home Owners Grant is only intended to
    be received in relation to the principal family home
-   receiving, or having ever received any financial concession such as
    Home Builders Grant, stamp-duty concession or similar assistance
    when buying the home will exclude eligibility for SHA
-   receiving Rent Assistance (RA) will generally exclude eligibility
    for SHA as the payments are mutually exclusive (as per 3.8.1.90 of
    the Social Security Guide and 5.3.3 of the AIC Policy). Rent
    Assistance is usually only intended to be received in relation to
    the principal family home. However, in some cases, RA is payable for
    a non-principal family home address under the temporary
    accommodation provision in 3.8.1.90 of the Social Security Guide.
    Where this is the case, the family may have a choice between AIC
    Second Home Allowance and Rent Assistance for the second home
    address. If a retrospective decision is made to pay AIC SHA for a
    period, in which Rent Assistance was paid for a temporary address,
    it is necessary to recover any rent assistance for that period.
    Based on current legislation, a Rent Assistance debt amount could
    not be offset on AIC SHA arrears, so the RA must first be raised as
    a debt before the SHA is approved

The References page has links to the Policy described above.

Second Home Allowance or Private Boarding

If a family chooses to have someone other than a parent live with the
student during study term, the following factors that will assist in
determining whether the living arrangement is a second home or a private
boarding arrangement and which allowance is payable.

-   It is a second home arrangement where the parent or a close family
    member (dependent child) contributes to maintaining the residence
    and property, such as paying rent, lease or mortgage, utilities
    (gas, electricity and water) charges, and/or property rates
-   It is private board arrangement where the parent pays a boarding fee
    or board and lodging for accommodation, meals and laundry services
    charged by the boarding supervisor/provider in respect of the
    student

If the student is living with a dependent sibling (who may be eligible
for SHA, Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY Living Allowance) and they or a
parent is maintaining the residence, this circumstance should be
assessed as a second home and SHA may be payable.

If the student is living with an older sibling (who is not dependent on
the parent(s)) or an extended family member or other person (who is not
a family member) who are responsible for maintaining the
residence/property, this should be assessed as a private boarding
arrangement as long as the parent pays a boarding fee for the student.
See Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC Scheme
Boarding Allowance (BA/ABA).

If an AIC allowance is being claimed by a parent but the student lives
during the study term with another parent (from whom the parent is
separated or divorced) and the residence is being claimed to be a second
home or a private board arrangement, the AIC Scheme Guidelines
specifically prohibit the payment of SHA or other AIC allowance.

Where the parent doesn't pay a boarding fee or cost of maintaining the
residence (claimed as a second home), no AIC allowance is payable.

For examples of Boarding Allowance versus Second Home Allowance, see the
Resources page of Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC
Scheme Boarding Allowance (BA/ABA).

AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

If the student receives Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting
Payment Single (PPS), and is undertaking primary or equivalent ungraded
study, and would otherwise be eligible for SHA, the appropriate payment
would be AIC Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Students Impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, some students may have been unable to
reside in their approved second home. Additionally, some applicants may
not have been able to reside in the principal home.

SHA was still payable for Term2, 3 and 4 of 2020 and Term 3 or 4 of 2021
or Term 1 or 2 of 2022 where:

-   a student did not reside in their approved second home, because they
    could not attend school due to COVID-19 measures, or
-   an applicant could not reside in the approved principal family home
    due to COVID-19 measures

The Resources page contains a link to the AIC Level 2 helpdesk contact
details.

Related links

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Boarding
Allowance (BA/ABA)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Distance
Education Allowance (DED)

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
