-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers assess satisfactory progress
for tertiary Youth Allowance (YA) students.

Satisfactory progress towards completing their course

One of the requirements for tertiary students undertaking full-time
study is that they must be making satisfactory progress towards
completing their course. Satisfactory progress is a determination of
whether or not the student should have already finished their current
course. Students who have not reached or exceeded the allowable time,
for that course, are generally considered to be making satisfactory
progress and can be paid YA as a full-time student for their current
course.

Note: the satisfactory progress rules in this procedure are for YA only
and are significantly different from those for Austudy. See Assessing
satisfactory progress for tertiary students for Austudy for further
information.

Satisfactory progress is a determination of whether or not the student
should have already finished their current course within the allowable
time limit. This determination is only about the time spent in their
current course of study. Previous study in other courses of the same
level can affect the student's qualification, but is not specifically
counted as time spent studying in their current course.

Sometimes, due to circumstances beyond their control, a student may not
have completed their course within the allowable time. In such cases
some or all of the earlier study may be disregarded, see Disregarding
previous study for Youth Allowance (YA) for further information.

Students will not always maintain a steady work load for the duration of
a long course. A full-time student may choose to do some of the course
on a part-time basis and vice versa. Each study period of the course
should be assessed separately if possible.

Calculating amount of previous study

To determine whether the student is making satisfactory progress, the
amount of previous study in the current course is calculated as a
percentage of a year's full-time study, using the following process:

-   all previous study in this course is divided into its academic
    periods (for example, semesters, years)
-   a determination is made whether any of this study can be
    disregarded, for further information see Disregarding previous study
    for Youth Allowance (YA)
-   academic periods are then assessed to determine the percentage of a
    full year's study that they represent. Where study load aggregation
    has been applied to satisfy full-time study requirements, all study
    periods included in the aggregation assessment are counted as
    full-time
-   the percentages are totalled
-   the allowable time for the course is determined
-   previous study in the current course is compared with the allowable
    time for the course

If the student has not reached the allowable time, for the course, they
are generally considered to be making satisfactory progress. They can be
paid YA as a full-time student for their current course until they
exceed their allowable time.

Combined course option

If a tertiary student has completed a first course and starts a second
course when the same institution offers an approved course which
combines the two courses then the allowable time is based on the normal
duration of the combined course, see determining allowable
time/reasonable time for a course of study for further information. When
the allowable time is based on the normal duration of the combined
course, the study undertaken in the first course is still disregarded.

For example: A customer undertaking a Bachelor of Law, after completing
a Bachelor of Arts at an institution that offers a combination of both
courses, will have the allowable time for the combined course (five and
a half years) to complete the Bachelor of Law.

Student has undertaken study in another course of the same level

If a tertiary student has previously studied at the same level as their
current course, certain conditions may be imposed on their current
course of study. If a customer has successfully completed a course at
the same level as their current course, this previous course can be
disregarded.

If a tertiary student failed or withdrew from a previous course at the
same level, they can undertake a new course but may be required to enter
into an activity agreement with an obligation to complete the current
course within the allowable time for that course. The previous course is
then disregarded.

If a tertiary student withdrew for a reason beyond their control, they
can undertake a new course without entering into an activity agreement.
See Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance (YA).

Students impacted by Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the 2020/2021/2022 academic years

Due to COVID-19, students may request an extension of allowable time as
they were temporarily unable to study or reduced their study load below
full-time. In some situations, education providers supported students by
displaying failures as withdrawals on transcripts to avoid academic
penalty.

When assessing satisfactory progress, evidence may already exist on a
student’s record regarding the impact of COVID-19 on their study
circumstances. Search the file for previous DOCs that include
information about the customer being temporarily unable to study, or
having reduced their study load. If evidence exists for the
corresponding period this may be sufficient to disregard the withdrawal.

COVID-19 impacts varied nationally, not all states or territories were
impacted by shutdowns or the durations varied. If no evidence exists, or
documentation on the student’s record is insufficient to make a clear
determination, students can enter into an activity agreement.

Requesting academic transcripts

Youth Allowance students can now attach academic transcripts as part of
the online claim but are not required to do so as a compulsory task on
the Next Steps page. When making satisfactory progress assessments,
Service Officers should review the Claim Overview in Process Direct
before requesting any academic transcripts. This is because the online
claim will ask the student about their previous study and staff can use
this information for the assessment.

The Resources page contains additional information and scenarios to help
when calculating allowable time and assessing satisfactory progress for
tertiary students in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA), and a link to the
Student Programme Resource Tool.

Related links

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining allowable time/reasonable time for a course of study

Defining levels of tertiary study

Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) students

Negotiating Activity Agreements for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students with unapproved absences

Negotiating an Activity Agreement for Youth Allowance (YA) students
returning to study after discontinuing a previous course

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
