
Residence requirements for ABSTUDY 010-02030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the residence requirements for ABSTUDY.

Residence requirements

To be eligible for ABSTUDY assistance, a student or Australian
Apprentice must meet the general ABSTUDY eligibility criteria, which
includes:

-   being an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person who is an
    Australian citizen
-   enrolled in an approved course of study or Australian Apprenticeship
-   normally lives in Australia, and
-   is not receiving or will not receive any other Government assistance
    to study

The main ways of becoming an Australian citizen are by birth, by grant
(formerly called naturalisation), by descent, or by being adopted by an
Australian citizen.

The residence requirements for ABSTUDY apply to the student or
Australian Apprentice only. They do not apply to the parents/guardians
or to a customer's partner.

Proof of Australian citizenship

New students and Australian Apprentices may be required to provide proof
of their Australian citizenship to Services Australia if they have not
previously done so. Acceptable proof is:

-   original birth certificate or extract (generally for Australian born
    customers only)
-   passport
-   verification of Australian citizenship from Australia's immigration
    department, or
-   Australian citizenship certificate or an official copy

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

The Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) does not apply to
ABSTUDY customers.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, residence information will need to
be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with Centrelink, ongoing updates to movement information will be
automatically recorded on the customer's record.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia,
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

Early ABSTUDY claims prior to overseas study

ABSTUDY claimants are not required to be payable immediately before the
day of departure in order for ABSTUDY to be paid for the duration of
their overseas study as part of their approved Australian course. The
procedure, ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas has
further details.

Related links

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Age requirements for ABSTUDY

Aboriginality or Torres Strait Islander status for ABSTUDY purposes

Not qualified for ABSTUDY if receiving other Government assistance to
study or as an Australian Apprentice

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas

Australian residence requirements for payment

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screensProof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
