
Fares Allowance (FAA) paid in advance of travel for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 010-04060040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the payment of Fares Allowance (FAA) in advance
of travel for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES).

Advance payment of travel

FAA is normally paid by reimbursement. In certain circumstances, the
travel can be pre-booked for the student. Students can have their long
distance travel booked for airfares, rail or bus.

Travel can only be pre-booked for eligible YA, Austudy and PES students
who meet the eligibility requirements for FAA. FAA is not available to
Australian Apprentices or students who travel outside of Australia to
undertake study.

There is no rule allowing rejection of pre-booked travel if the customer
has capacity to pay for travel in advance.

Additional travel costs

If a student incurs additional travel costs, for example a taxi or bus
fare, to travel from their term address to the airport, they can lodge a
separate claim for reimbursement of these expenses after they have
completed the trip.

Economy airfare

FAA is reimbursed at the cheapest, most practicable, mode of transport.
When booking a flight on behalf of a customer, the Service Officer must
therefore select the cheapest level of economy fare (for example, saver
lite, saver or flexi) available for travel on the day that provides one
seat plus the necessary baggage requirement.

As Services Australia does not have a preferred airline carrier, the
Service Officer should make this booking without regard to the carrier.

Determining if a mode of transport is practicable

Determining whether the cost of a mode of transport is reasonable
depends on the circumstances.

FAA will cover reasonable costs of transport by a private vehicle, if:

-   living necessities or personal belongings, such as essential
    kitchenware and bedding, need to be transported by the student from
    their family or permanent home in order to undertake study, and
-   it is not practicable to transport the items by public transport
    (for example, due to strict luggage limits or the amount of luggage
    is difficult to manoeuvre)

As each journey is to be assessed separately, travel considered
reasonable for two different journeys along the same route for the same
student may differ.

For example, travel by public transport may be reasonable for a
particular route except where:

the student has a large amount of essential luggage, and

private transport is:

-   cheaper, or
-   the only practicable method

Additional costs not payable under FAA

The following travel costs would not be covered by FAA:

-   airport parking fees
-   manual check-in fees
-   SMS itinerary costs
-   travel insurance, or
-   entertainment bundles
-   seat allocation

Additional luggage costs

FAA can generally be paid to students to cover the cost of one standard
piece of checked in luggage.

If an airline charges extra for one piece of luggage, FAA may be paid
for this luggage. This applies whether the person has pre-booked the
fare and luggage together, or the luggage is purchased at the time of
check-in.

Note: in some cases, FAA may cover additional luggage costs, where the
cost of the excess baggage for a flight is needed to transport living
necessities or personal belongings, such as essential kitchenware. While
it would be reasonable to expect a student may need excess baggage if
they are moving to a premises for the first time, it would not be
reasonable for excess baggage to be booked if they are returning home
for a holiday period and maintaining their residence where they study.
Excess baggage costs may also be covered by FAA, to transport necessary
course equipment. For example, a music student has to transport their
musical instrument, as they need it for their course of study.

Booking non-preferred modes of travel

The agency will try to accommodate customer requests when booking travel
for customers in advance. However, this is not always possible because
of a range of reasons, including:

-   preferred mode and time of travel not being available, or
-   there is a cheaper and more practicable mode of travel available on
    that route

In the normal course of events, it is expected that Service Officers
will contact the customer to tell them of the proposed travel plans that
will be arranged. This would be the case if the student has requested
one mode of travel, for example a flight, however, the Service Officer
has found a cheaper mode of transport on the same route, such as a train
or bus. As part of this contact, the Service Officer will need to decide
if there are extenuating factors. For example, illness or incapacity
that may make air travel essential. In some cases, more details may be
needed from the student before travel arrangements can be finalised.

If the student does not agree with the decision to grant a lower
pre-booked fare for FAA, they should be advised of their review and
appeal rights. However, the formal review may not be completed before
the student's requested travel date. This should be clearly explained to
the customer.

Unfavourable decisions

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, a Decision Maker (DM):

-   must provide the customer with an explanation of the decision, and
-   an opportunity to provide more details or evidence relevant to the
    decision

The DM must also tell the customer of their review and appeal rights and
if needed, record a request for a review of the decision. This includes
unfavourable decisions made by Service Officers within Smart Centre
Call.

If a DM is not speaking with a customer at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 genuine attempts to contact a
customer before finalising an unfavourable decision.

For more details, see Initial contact about a decision and the review of
decision process.

There is no rule allowing rejection of pre-booked travel if the customer
has capacity to pay for travel in advance. Currently the Fares Allowance
script asks if the customer has $5,000 funds available. This question
should be ignored, as it has no basis in legislation or policy.

The Resources page has a link to the Qantas Business Travel (QBT)
pre-booking fares allowance form and a table of QBT account numbers.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Making an unfavourable decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
