-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how allowable time/reasonable time for a course
of study is determined for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), Austudy, Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and
Youth Allowance (YA).

Allowable time and reasonable time

Payments for students are not made indefinitely, there are limits on how
much study a student can undertake and still remain eligible for a
student payment. The time students have to complete their study may be
impacted by any previous study undertaken or completed.

This assessment process is known as:

-   reasonable time for ABSTUDY
-   allowable time for other payment types
-   satisfactory progress for YA. Under legislative provisions for YA,
    this is defined as completing the course within the allowable time
    limit

This process does not apply to

-   the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   YA, Austudy and PES for secondary students studying below Year 12
    level

Additional rules for ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY has additional rules (other than those based on course length)
that govern how long a student may be paid for a course of study.

Exceeding allowable/reasonable time

Exceeding allowable/reasonable time is where the student continues to
study beyond the allowable/reasonable time frame given for their
studies.

Austudy and PES customers are only disqualified from payment when they
have exceeded their allowable time for the course.

For ABSTUDY rules, see - Determining progress and duration of assistance
for ABSTUDY

A student's allowable time is affected by previous study in their
current course or other courses at the same level. In certain
circumstances, it is possible to disregard previous study.

For further information see:

-   Youth Allowance - Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance
    (YA).
-   all other payments - Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY,
    ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner
    Education Supplement (PES).

Allowable time limit for student payments

For student payments (except AIC which has no satisfactory progress
rule), the time allowed for a course is based on the normal duration of
that course (sometimes called minimum time). The time allowed also
depends on the type of payment the student is receiving. Study load
concessions may further extend the duration for which payment can be
made.

The allowable time limit for a tertiary course is calculated on the
basis of a combined course if the customer:

-   completes a first course and starts a second course at the same
    institution, and
-   the institution where they are studying offers an approved course
    combining the two courses

Study undertaken in the last 10 years (Austudy and PES only)

For Austudy and PES customers, include any course of study undertaken in
the last 10 years, whether completed or incomplete, in an allowable time
assessment unless it can be disregarded. See Disregarding previous study
for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

10 years is counted from the first day of the customer's current course,
not their current year of study. All previous study attempted in the 10
years prior to the first day of their current course is counted. This is
regardless of whether the customer was receiving a payment when they
first commenced their course, or if they are returning to complete a
course after a break in study. Once an allowable time assessment has
been completed, it cannot be 'reassessed' at a later date to allow
previous study to 'drop off' and produce a different outcome regarding
payability.

Where the customer completed a course within the last 10 years but the
course started more than 10 years ago, the entire duration of the course
must be included.

Progress rules for Year 12 students

The Austudy and PES progress rules for previous Year 12 study means
students will not usually be considered a full-time secondary student
for Austudy and PES purposes while attempting Year 12 for a third time.
A previous attempt at Year 12, however, can be disregarded in certain
circumstances. See Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES).

A Preparatory Course that is specifically designed for entry to
University that is at Year 12 level, also falls under these progress
rules for secondary study.

Note: a student who is not making satisfactory progress for Year 12 or a
Preparatory Course may be eligible for assistance for a different level
of study.

Students aged 18 years and over will not usually be considered a
full-time student for YA purposes while attempting Year 12 for a third
time. However, a previous attempt at Year 12 can be disregarded if the
student was affected by circumstances beyond the student's control. See
Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students and Assessing secondary students satisfactory progress for
Austudy.

ABSTUDY has no allowable time or limits of assistance rules for students
undertaking secondary (or eligible primary) school study.

Allowable time calculation

From July 2018, some Youth Allowance students will have their allowable
time calculated automatically by the system when they lodge a new claim.
The Allowable Time End Date field will be populated in Process Direct on
the Customer Study Details (EDC) screen or in Customer First on the
Education Course Details (EDC) screen.

The Student Programme Resource Tool, which includes the Allowable Time
Calculator that can assist with allowable time assessments. See the
Resources page.

The Resources page contains a link to the Student Programme Resource
tool, and a table describing examples of allowable time for full-time
and concessional study load students based on the normal duration of the
course and type of payment.

Related links

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Determining minimum (normal) time for a course of study

Determining progress and duration of assistance for ABSTUDY

Assessing secondary students satisfactory progress for Austudy

Assessing satisfactory progress for tertiary students for Austudy

Disregarding previous study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Disregarding previous study for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing satisfactory progress for secondary students for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing satisfactory progress and allowable time for tertiary students
for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Youth Allowance (YA) student reaches the allowable time in their current
course

Effect of articulated short courses of study on continuing payment

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) secondary
students

Assessing satisfactory progress for Youth Allowance (YA) tertiary
students

Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and PES students

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
