
Isolation conditions for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 010-03030040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different ways a student can be considered
isolated and how this is verified.

Isolation conditions

Isolation from an appropriate state school is one of the eligibility
conditions for payment under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme.

Reasonable daily access

Reasonable daily access is determined by the distance and travel
circumstances (including the time taken for the return journey) between
the principal family home and the nearest appropriate state school.

Principal family home

The principal family home must be the usual place of residence of the
family for the entire eligibility period, where the:

-   student normally lives, or would normally live but for the need to
    live away to attend school
-   student and the family normally live during school holidays, and
-   applicant and/or the applicant's partner live for more than half the
    calendar year (or, if the eligibility period is less than a calendar
    year, for more than half of the claimed period)

The residence must be:

-   in Australia
-   the principal residence of the applicant (including a home currently
    occupied by them in the course of their employment), and
-   able to adequately accommodate the student and the student's family
    (that is, parents and dependent children)

Appropriate state school

A school that offers tuition at the level in which the student is
qualified to enrol. If the student has a special need, the appropriate
school may be one that has or can provide access to a special program,
facilities or environment required for the student.

A primary or secondary school listed as a limited program school by the
State/Territory education authority is not an appropriate state school
for a student who can enrol at a level that is not available at that
school.

Limited program school

A secondary school that cannot offer a full program at the year or grade
in which the student is qualified to enrol. A school has a limited
program if it does not provide adequate facilities or programs to enable
a student to gain a year 12 certificate or tertiary entrance score, such
as an Australian Tertiary Admission Rank. For example, some high schools
may only have the resources to provide study up to year 10.

Primary and secondary schools where the syllabus and teaching
arrangements are specifically geared to Indigenous students may be
considered limited compared to the general curriculum of the state or
territory.

Each state or territory government Department of Education determines
which schools offer an adequate education for students in their state or
territory. Some schools offer education for students from prep to year
12, but do not deliver subjects that allow a student to enter higher
education. In such cases, the Department of Education may deem years
11-12 to be limited programs.

The Departments of Education in WA, SA and NT have classified their
remote community schools that mainly cater for Indigenous students as
limited program schools.

The state or territory government Department of Education decide whether
a school or years of study are consider to have limited programs.

If the state/territory government Department of Education places a
school on the limited program school list and a student is studying in a
year in which the school offers a limited program, then this school is
not counted in the Geographic Isolation Rules. The next closest
appropriate state school is then taken into account.

For a list of schools offering limited programs, see the Resources page.

Isolation conditions

A student can be considered isolated when their family circumstances
fall into one of the following categories:

-   geographical isolation
-   students with special needs
-   students who may be deemed isolated

More information is available below on each category.

Geographical isolation

There are 3 general rules which define Geographic Isolation.

If there is a transport service to the school, or could be made
available if requested, the shortest practical route is the distance
from the:

-   home to the nearest available transport service, and
-   transport service to the school by the route used by the service (or
    connecting services)

Where morning and afternoon transport services differ in length, the
average of the 2 is taken to be the shortest practical route.

1. The distance between the principal family home and the nearest
appropriate state school is at least 56 kilometres via the shortest
practical route.

2. The distance between the principal family home and the nearest
appropriate state school (via the shortest practical route) is at least
16 kilometres, and:

-   the distance between the principal family home and the nearest
    available transport service to the nearest appropriate state school
    is at least 4.5 kilometres via the shortest practical route, or
-   there is no available transport service between the principal family
    home and nearest appropriate state school

3. The student does not have reasonable access to an appropriate state
school for at least 20 school days in the year because of adverse travel
conditions (for example, impassable roads, or a return journey that us
at least three hours) or other circumstances beyond the family's
control.

The References page contains a link to the AIC Scheme Guidelines, 4.2
Geographical isolation rules for more information.

Students with special needs

The following are specific circumstances under which a student can be
regarded as having a special need. They:

-   attend a special school
-   need access to special facilities or a special environment
-   need to study from home
-   need to be removed from the local school environment (because of
    expulsion or health reasons)
-   need testing for a learning disability
-   need learning support or specialist remedial tuition
-   would suffer serious educational disadvantage if they were not able
    to bypass the local school

Students who may be deemed isolated

A student may be regarded as not having reasonable daily access to
appropriate schooling without meeting a geographical isolation rule
under certain circumstances:

The student has a disability or other health-related condition and needs
to live in a special institution

Parental work requires frequent moves

The occupation of the student's sole parent involves frequent overnight
absences. This criterion was removed from 1 January 2006. Before 2006,
certain students could be deemed geographically isolated where the
occupation of their sole parent, by its nature, required frequent
overnight absences. Any student who attracted AIC allowances on this
basis in 2005 will continue to be deemed geographically isolated until
they complete or discontinue their course of study, or their parent
changes occupation (whichever is earlier)

The student lives in a second family home with a sibling who meets an
isolation condition, or with a sibling receiving Youth Allowance (YA) or
ABSTUDY who was qualified for AIC in a previous year or earlier in the
current year or has a special need

The student previously met, but due to a change of circumstance no
longer meets, an isolation condition. However as they continue to study
at the same school, they can remain eligible under a continuity of
schooling concession. Where the student's circumstances change during
the school year and this makes them no longer eligible under an
isolation condition and they still board away from home, live in a
second home, study by distance education or other approved education,
and go to the same school, AIC payments continue:

-   until the end of the year for students below year 11, or
-   until the end of the following year for students who continue to
    year 12

The student commenced board, living in a second home or undertook study
by distance education or other approved education in anticipation of a
(later) change of circumstance resulting in him or her meeting an
isolation condition (retrospective continuity of schooling concession)

Direct enquiries to AIC Smart Centre staff. Look up local Processing
Service details for: Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC).

The Resources page contains a list of state schools with limited
programs provided by state/territory education authorities. An annual
list obtained from each state/territory education authority by
Centrelink Course Approval Officers.

Related links

Eligibility for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme allowances

Assessing Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
