
Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and Masters and Doctorate Award 010-02020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing a claim for ABSTUDY
Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and Masters and Doctorate Award.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY processing is undertaken in ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing
Teams. See Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries for
more information.

Requirement to lodge a claim

A claim should be lodged for customers who meet the ABSTUDY eligibility
criteria and meet one of the following:

-   An applicant wishing to claim ABSTUDY Schooling B Award on behalf of
    a secondary student who is under 16 and living away from home
-   A secondary or tertiary student who is 16 years or over or claiming
    independence and wants to claim the means tested components of
    ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award or Masters and Doctorate
    Award
-   An Australian Apprentice claiming the means tested components of
    ABSTUDY Tertiary Award. See Claiming ABSTUDY

Claims for ABSTUDY lodged by the relevant closing date, do not require
lodgement of another claim:

-   if the wrong ABSTUDY claim was completed, or
-   circumstances have changed

Customers need to supply additional information relevant to the ABSTUDY
Award or allowance to be assessed. Note: students aged 16 years and
under, boarding or intending to board, must lodge a new claim where
there has been a change of applicant.

See the Resources page of Claiming ABSTUDY for examples and a table
listing scenarios for whether a customer needs to lodge a new ABSTUDY
claim.

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool

ABSTUDY applicants can provide details verbally to a Services Australia
Service Officer, in an assisted claiming process, instead of completing
a paper claim form. A verbal declaration from the customer that the
information is true and correct replaces the requirement to return a
signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF). Applicants who do not accept or
have not been offered a verbal declaration will be required to return a
signed CDF.

Parents do not need to provide their signatures nor their details on the
Parent or Guardian details - for the BASE tax year and CURRENT tax year
for dependent Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY customers form (MOD JY) or CDF
(where a CDF is required) if:

-   a dependent ABSTUDY customer received Youth Allowance (YA) in the
    same year, and
-   the parental means details were provided for their YA claim

Claim lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

Phone - claims can be lodged by phone using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) or the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool (except claims for Lawful Custody
Award and Testing and Assessment Award)

[] Online

-   Australian Apprentice and Tertiary student claims can be lodged
    online. See Claiming ABSTUDY
-   Customers can upload paper claims (where an online claim option is
    not yet available) and supporting documents online. The Resources
    page contains information about how to lodge documents online
-   Registered customers can upload their claim form and/or supporting
    documents online. The Resources page contains information about how
    to lodge documents online

Fax - the date the fax is received is considered the date of receipt for
processing purposes

Post - using the appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart
Centre Processing Team

In person - at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a
Centrelink Field Officer

Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) when in receipt of ABSTUDY

From 27 April 2020 to 31 March 2021, customers receiving ABSTUDY Living
Allowance payments were eligible for the Coronavirus Supplement. See
Coronavirus Supplement.

During this period it may be more financially beneficial to receive
ABSTUDY than Family Tax benefit (FTB). See Calculating the start date
for ABSTUDY for more information.

Where applicable, discuss the option of claiming ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, or remaining on FTB, with the customer. Customers can compare
payment options via the Payment and Service Finder. See Online estimator
options.

Some customers may want to claim ABSTUDY Schooling B for eligible FTB
children to access the Coronavirus Supplement. Advise customers claiming
schooling B that:

-   Coronavirus Supplement is only payable for eligible Schooling B
    students for the above periods
-   if they lose entitlement to FTB due to dependent(s) claiming
    Schooling B, they will lose their FTB Health Care Card (HCC)
-   they can reclaim FTB when ABSTUDY Living Allowance is no longer the
    most beneficial payment

If the customer advises they wish to proceed with Schooling B claim,
record details in a DOC, including advice provided.

Do not encourage customers to claim a payment that may not suit their
current or future circumstances.

Australian Apprentices

[] Customers who wish to apply for ABSTUDY as a full time Australian
Apprentice can claim online via their online account or via the Assisted
Customer Claim. The ABSTUDY Claiming Tool can no longer be used for
these claims.

Where an Australian Apprentice indicates that they will be undertaking a
full-time Australian Apprenticeship, Services Australia will obtain the
Australian Apprentice details from the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment.

If there is a gap between ceasing study and commencing the Australian
Apprenticeship, and the customer wishes to access income support for
this gap, they may need to claim Youth Allowance (YA) or JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) as a job seeker.

Secondary students

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is the primary payment option for students aged
16-19 years in full-time secondary study. However in some circumstances
it may be more beneficial for the student to claim ABSTUDY (for example,
if the student is 18 years of age or older, living away from home or
independent).

If the claim is for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award and the student is either:

-   a current Schooling A customer turning 16 years of age, or
-   aged 16 years or over

Where applicable, discuss the option of claiming or remaining on FTB
with the applicant and parent(s)/guardian(s). Parent(s)/guardian(s) can
compare payment options via the Payment and Services Finder. See []
Online estimator options.

Claim lodged for the purpose of attending an interview

Orientation and Special Purpose Visit travel is available if:

-   a secondary school or boarding facility requires prospective
    students to attend interviews or other selection procedures prior to
    acceptance
-   the student is intending to study in an approved tertiary course of
    at least one year's duration at the study location, and has
    completed secondary studies in the previous year

In order to claim this type of travel, a full ABSTUDY assessment needs
to be made for the period the student is intending to study.

A secondary boarding facility may need to conduct an interview or
selection exercise in their own right and it may not be possible at the
time of claiming to confirm the school they are attending. In these
cases, special coding instructions are required. See Coding away from
home rate for ABSTUDY.

Job seeker transferring to ABSTUDY

When a customer is transferring from a current job seeker payment to
ABSTUDY, additional procedures may need to be followed before assessing
ABSTUDY, see:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study, or
-   Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning
    to full-time study

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Eligibility for EdEP must be checked as part of the ABSTUDY new claim
process.

Health Care Card (HCC)

From 1 January 2019, ABSTUDY Living Allowance customers will be
automatically assessed and, if eligible, granted a HCC. Non-Living
Allowance customers will still need to apply manually for a Low Income
Health Care Card (LIC). For more information, see Claiming Low Income
Health Care Card (LIC).

For customers transferring to ABSTUDY Living Allowance, from an income
support payment with an automatically issued HCC, the system will
determine which concession entitlement is the best option for the
customer and either:

-   cancel their current HCC entitlement and reissue the HCC with a
    specific ABSTUDY code, or
-   keep their current HCC entitlement on their record

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019), the
Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092) and a link to the Submitting your
Centrelink documents online website page.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling B Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Tertiary Award

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Masters and Doctorate Award

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Using the Desktop Fax workflow to fax forms and modules

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
