-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect on Services Australia administered
payments when a student is undertaking Vocational Education and Training
(VET) and secondary studies concurrently.

On this Page:

Undertaking additional study

Over recent years, closer links have been forged between secondary
schools and Registered Training Organisations (RTOs), including
Technical and Further Education (TAFE) providers. Students can be either
undertaking their Year 12 qualification at an RTO (rather than at
school) or undertaking VET and secondary studies concurrently. This
document focuses on the latter.

Appropriate level of study

Students at either a secondary school or RTO may choose to undertake
additional study outside their main course. If there is no link between
this extra study and the course for which they are being paid, then it
does not affect their student payment. As long as they maintain the
appropriate study load in their approved course, their payments are
unaffected.

VET study and secondary students

If a secondary student's VET studies will allow entry to a VET course in
an RTO, or will be credited towards a VET course after completion of
their secondary studies, in an arrangement with their secondary
education provider, they are still regarded as a secondary student for
Services Australia purposes.

Where secondary study is undertaken as part of a VET qualification, the
student (except an Assistance for the Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
student) will be considered a tertiary student where:

-   there is an association between the two levels of study and both are
    integrated into the structure of the course
-   the study leads to both senior secondary and to an accredited VET
    qualification
-   both institutions are approved for Services Australia purposes and
    the student is enrolled at both, and
-   both levels of study are undertaken in the same year

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) students

AIC students undertaking concurrent study at secondary school and an
RTO, in an arrangement with their school, are considered to be secondary
students.

ABSTUDY students

ABSTUDY students who undertake concurrent un-related courses of study
may qualify for ABSTUDY Living Allowance or ABSTUDY PES for one course
and Incidentals Allowance under Part time Award for the other course.

Note: whilst a student may study one or more courses at the same time
and qualify for ABSTUDY PES for one course and Incidentals Allowance for
the other course, special provisions apply to some ABSTUDY PES customers
undertaking concurrent courses.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website
which includes online accounts and access to online forms.

Related links

Approved non-high school secondary study

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and
Masters and Doctorate Award

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (SY020)

Assessing Claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentices claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Approved courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
