-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the amount of ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA) and additional costs associated with travel to be
reimbursed after travel has been undertaken.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY FAA reimbursement

To be eligible for FAA reimbursement:

-   The student and/or non-student traveller must be eligible for Fares
    Allowance
-   A Fares Allowance Claim has been lodged by the relevant ABSTUDY
    closing dates
-   Travel and additional costs have been paid for and confirmation of
    payment for travel arrangements can be provided
-   Travel has been completed

Travel carriers, such as charter or transfer companies, cannot claim FAA
reimbursement. Customers and third parties must not organise travel
arrangements with carriers or accommodation providers on the provision
that ABSTUDY will reimburse these costs directly to the company.

Determining reimbursement of fares

The Service Officer will reimburse for the total cost of the journey,
after the journey has been undertaken and after determining:

-   the appropriate mode of transport for the journey
-   the appropriate travel destination for ABSTUDY Fares Allowance
    (FAA), and
-   if additional costs associated with travel, such as transport
    terminal transfers and overnight accommodation can be reimbursed

Other costs involved with taking an indirect route to the permanent home
or study location may not be reimbursed.

FAA reimbursement can only be paid if proof of payment for travel
arrangements has been provided. Paid tax invoices, receipts and/or
travel tickets must be lodged as proof of payment and travel completion.
Travel quotes and purchase orders are not considered proof of payment
for FAA reimbursement.

Who can be paid

Reimbursement of costs for travel, and any other approved additional
costs associated with a journey, can be paid directly to either the
applicant, student or third party who has paid for the travel
arrangements. However, payments cannot be made to a dependent student
until their sixteenth birthday.

The Resources page contains links to online forms, Services Australia
website, and scenarios in which Fares Allowance and additional costs
associated with travel for ABSTUDY are payable via reimbursement.

Related links

Assessing eligibility for Fares Allowance (FAA) for ABSTUDY

Determining the appropriate mode of transport for ABSTUDY Fares
Allowance (FAA)

Additional costs associated with travel for ABSTUDY

Coding pre-booked Fares Allowance (FAA) entitlements for ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding Fares Allowance (FAA) reimbursements and Away from Base
entitlements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES)

Travel Management Application (TMA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
