-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

National information

For a page containing links to course listings, TAFE, University and
Private Provider links, and other course approval information, see the
National Course Approvals sub-site.

General information about approved courses

To be eligible to receive a student payment customers must be
undertaking an approved course of study with an approved provider.

An approved course can be of any duration, as specified for the course.

The mode of the study is not important as long as it is approved.
Courses can be taken internally, externally, online and through home
schooling.

Differences between course and provider

The link between course and provider is important. For example,
Technical and Further Education (TAFE) institutions are generally
approved education providers but this does not mean that all TAFE
courses are approved. A TAFE usually offers a wide variety of courses
from hobby courses for example, belly dancing which is not an approved
course to vocational courses for example, Certificate IV in Information
Technology, which is an approved course.

Masters courses

Approved Masters Courses

Masters level courses approved for student payments:

-   are listed in Student Assistance (Education Institutions and
    Courses) Determination 2019 (legislation.gov.au) and
-   [\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
    Blueprint Migration\RDT Release
    Icons\32w\icon-attachment.png]Approved Masters Courses for Austudy,
    Youth Allowance and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES). The list
    contains the provider name and course title that a student must be
    enrolled in to be eligible for payment

Note: course codes are not used to assess if a course is approved. If
the course name matches exactly to the approved Masters list, then the
course is approved.

Combined Master Courses

If a student is undertaking a combined masters course (for example, a
Master of Business and Master of Accounting), this course is approved,
provided both courses are listed either as a combined course or separate
courses in the Determination.

Previously approved masters

The Approved Masters courses for Austudy, Youth Allowance and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) lists courses which are currently approved
for student payments.

Students remain eligible for payment until the end of their course if:

-   there is no break in study
-   they are already undertaking a course which was approved when they
    began the course, and
-   they are receiving a student payment

Check previous versions of the Determination to find records of
previously approved courses. If there is any doubt, create a referral to
a CALO. See Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

For courses approved between 12 October 2011 and 8 June 2021, see both
Student Assistance (Education Institutions and Courses) Determination
2009 and 2019.

Universities and other higher education providers

The National Course Approvals sub-site contains links to all
universities in Australia and other higher education providers
including:

-   All University and higher education provider codes
-   links to provider websites where semester and term dates are located
-   specific course information on each provider's page
-   details of approved or unapproved courses, and
-   course with unusual characteristics

Most universities are self-accrediting and can approve their own
courses. Most other higher education providers are accredited by the
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) and must submit
their courses for accreditation. In addition to being self-accredited or
with TEQSA, all courses must also meet the policy guidelines for
Services Australia student payments.

Some universities and higher education providers are also TAFEs and/or
Registered Training Organisations (RTOs, also known as private
providers) as well. Make sure to select the correct provider code for
these combined providers, so the correct scholarship payment and level
of study is applied.

Technical and Further Education (TAFE)/VET course approval procedures

See the Resources page of Assessing study load requirements for a list
of how many hours are considered full-time for TAFE courses in each
state. The full time load varies from state to state.

The National Course Approvals sub-site lists:

-   all TAFE and provider codes
-   details of approved or unapproved courses, and
-   courses with unusual characteristics

It does not list all approved TAFE courses, as there are too many to
list individually.

Approval requirements

Approval can be given for a TAFE course:

leading to an accredited award (other than a TAFE Statement of
Attainment)

listed under their scope of registration on the National Register on VET
in Australia at Training.gov.au, and

starting with:

-   Certificate I
-   Certificate II
-   Certificate III
-   Certificate IV

Approval for courses leading to TAFE Statement of Attainment

For approval, all units of the course must be accredited.

Non-approved courses

Non-Award or Statement of Attendance are non-approved courses for
student payments.

Diploma level courses

To be an approved course of study for YA student, Austudy and PES:

Vocational Educational Training (VET) courses at diploma level or higher
must be:

-   a course approved for the VET Student Loan (VSL), and
-   provided by an approved VSL provider

Higher education diploma courses must be:

-   undertaken with an approved/authorised provider offering the Higher
    Education Loan Program (HELP)

Diploma course no longer approved after 1 January 2018 but commenced
prior

If the customer started a Diploma course before 1 January 2018, that is
no longer approved under the above requirements and they receive a
payment, the payment will continue until:

-   the end of the course, or
-   there is a break in the customers entitlement including a break in
    study

Private providers course approval procedures

Private providers are listed in the National Tertiary Institution
Directory in the A-Z Index at top of each page of the National Course
Approvals sub-site.

Most private providers are Registered Training Organisations and must
maintain their registration on the official National Register on VET in
Australia, Training.gov.au.

Both the provider and course must be listed to ensure it is approved and
being delivered in the appropriate way to enable the student to qualify
for a student payment.

Create a CALO referral where the student is attending their course, if
unable to find:

-   the provider on the listing, or
-   the course on the private provider page

See Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

Secondary schools course approval procedures

Not all secondary schools are listed on the National Course Approvals
and Educational Institutions sub site because of the large number of
schools.

To find a secondary school code, access the CODES screen in Customer
First and search in the Educational Institutions Summary.

In Process Direct search codes in [Data Search Prompt] left of the
Education Institution ID in EDS field.

If the school is:

-   listed, it is approved
-   not listed, create a CALO referral. See Referrals to Course
    Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs)

Secondary schooling is state based in Australia and may differ
considerably. Check the Secondary Schools in Australia page at the
National Course Approvals sub-site for local education and training
structures in Australia.

If a student advises they are studying alternative secondary education
not at the secondary school premises, create a CALO referral to make
sure they qualify for a student payment. See Referrals to Course
Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

Services Australia staff seeking assistance

If seeking assistance from a CALO, see Referrals to Course Assessment
and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

If the CALO has to request course details from an external provider,
they must allow the provider 14 days to respond. Student claims should
be streamed to allow for this 14 day turn around. The CALO will try to
obtain the course details as soon as possible to assist claim
timeliness.

In the interim, if a student contacts Services Australia about the
progress of their claim, document the record and advise them:

'Your course has not yet been assessed as meeting eligibility
requirements for a student payment. The provider has been asked to
provide information to Services Australia to determine if the course
meets these requirements. We will be able to progress your claim once we
have received this information'

Education providers seeking assistance

Where an education provider seeks assistance from a CALO Services
Australia staff should follow processes to make a query on the education
provider's behalf. See Referrals to Course Assessment and Liaison
Officers (CALOs). CALOs provide a service to education providers and
Service Officers to determine if a provider and course meets the
eligibility requirements for payments administered by Services
Australia.

The CALO:

-   investigates the course details and provides advice to the staff
    member initiating the enquiry
-   assesses and lists courses by approved private providers

If unable to find a provider in the A-Z directory in the National Course
Approvals sub-site, and/or the course is not yet listed with that
provider, create a referral to a CALO. See Referrals to Course
Assessment and Liaison Officers (CALOs).

See Training.gov.au.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
