
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the disability study load
concession for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY PES.

Study load concessions

A student will normally only be eligible for one of the Services
Australia administered payments for students if they are studying at
least 75 per cent of the accredited full time study load.

However, in some cases they may be paid as a full time student even
though they are studying less than the required minimum of 75 per cent.
These students are said to be subject to a study load concession. The
disability study load concession is one such concession.

Awards suitable for the disability study load concession

The disability study load concession is available for the:

-   ABSTUDY Tertiary award
-   ABSTUDY Masters and Doctorate award
-   ABSTUDY Schooling A award, and
-   ABSTUDY Schooling B Award

These Awards can include recipients of both ABSTUDY Living Allowance and
ABSTUDY PES.

Intention of disability study load concession

The disability study load concession is intended to be used for the
benefit of students who have a substantial physical, psychiatric, or
intellectual disability, who are incapable of, or would face additional
educational barriers or disadvantage by studying under normal ABSTUDY
study requirements due to their disability.

Proof of disability required

Services Australia assessment practices require sufficient proof of the
disability and its effects on study to ensure that students eligible for
the concession can be granted the concession in a fair and timely way.
This also safeguards against abuse of the concession by students without
substantial disabilities who want to avoid the normal ABSTUDY study load
requirements.

Duration of disability study load concession

The medical evidence supplied by the student will determine how long the
study load concession can be applied.

For example, where evidence advises the condition is permanent with no
chance of improvement, then the study load concession can be applied for
the entire course duration. Conversely, where evidence indicates a
disability may improve during the course period, the information
supplied on the medical evidence will determine the length of time the
concession should be applied.

Youth Disability Supplement

Full time students and Australian Apprentices in receipt of ABSTUDY and
21 years of age and under may be entitled to Youth Disability Supplement
(YDS). The customer must have been assessed by an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial capacity to work of less than 30
hours per week.

Related links

ABSTUDY eligibility and requirements

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Assessing the two-thirds study load concession for ABSTUDY

Assessing the pensioner study load concession for ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
