
Assessing the claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A 010-02020040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for assessing the Claim for
ABSTUDY Schooling A.

Claim processing

ABSTUDY claim processing is undertaken by the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
National Processing Team. See the Resources page for a link to ABS in
Office Locator.

Eligibility for ABSTUDY Schooling A

To be eligible for payment:

the student must meet the eligibility criteria for the ABSTUDY Schooling
A Award, and

the applicant and/or student must meet the eligibility requirement for
the specific allowance they are applying for:

-   ABSTUDY School Term Allowance
-   School Fee Allowance (Group 1 or Group 2)
-   Fares Allowance
-   Away from Base Assistance

Requirement to lodge a claim

Applicants wishing to claim ABSTUDY for secondary students under 16
years old, who are not applying for an independent status or the Away
from home rate, are required to complete a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling
A. A claim is also required for primary school students who are 14 years
of age or more on 1 January of the year in which the claim is lodged.

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool

Customer Declaration Form (CDF) requirements from 28 November 2016

From 28 November 2016, applicants completing a claim through the ABSTUDY
Claiming Tool, will be offered a verbal declaration. A verbal
declaration from the claimant that the information is true and correct
will replace the requirement to return a signed CDF. Applicants who do
not accept or have not been offered a verbal declaration will be
required to return a signed CDF unless the applicant is receiving Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) for that child, and:

-   the applicant or applicant's partner has already identified as an
    Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person, or
-   an ABSTUDY claim has previously been lodged indicating that the
    student is an Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person

CDF requirements prior to 28 November 2016

All applicants who completed a claim through the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool
prior to 28 November 2016 are still required to return their signed CDF
unless the applicant is receiving FTB for that child, and:

-   the applicant or applicant's partner has already identified as an
    Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person, or
-   an ABSTUDY claim has previously been lodged indicating that the
    student is an Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person

The Other Contact Details (OCD) screen can be used to determine if the
applicant or applicant's partner identifies as an Australian Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander person.

Note: access is limited to the applicant's record to confirm the above
information. If the biological parent is not the applicant nor the
applicant's partner for the ABSTUDY Schooling A claim, do not access the
biological parent's record or any other previous carer's record as per
the Unauthorised Access guidelines. It is not considered part of a
Service Officer's duties to be accessing previous carer or biological
parent's records to confirm if they are an Australian Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander person.

When a signed CDF is required for a Schooling A claim, only 1
parent/guardian signature is required.

Claim lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

-   Online - [] Registered claimants can upload their claim and any
    supporting documents online. For information about how to lodge
    documents online, see the Resources page
-   Fax - Claims and supporting documents may be accepted by fax. The
    date the fax is received is considered the date of receipt for
    processing purposes
-   Post - Claims and supporting documents may be posted using the
    appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
    Processing Team
-   In person - Claims and supporting documents may be lodged in person
    at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink
    field officer

Change of applicant

In the event of a change of applicant, a new Claim for Schooling A must
be lodged for all students.

The Resources page contains links to the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A
form (SY018), information about how to lodge documents online, a link to
Office Locator and eligibility examples.

Related links

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Claiming ABSTUDY

Issuing appropriate modules and additional forms for students and
Australian Apprentices

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)

ABSTUDY eligibility criteria for Schooling A Award

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
