-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how students and Australian Apprentices (or a
person on their behalf) can make a claim for ABSTUDY.

Who can make a claim for ABSTUDY

The correct applicant must lodge an ABSTUDY claim. The applicant is not
always the student or Australian Apprentice. There are 5 types of
acceptable applicants for ABSTUDY.

These are as follows:

-   students
-   full-time Australian Apprentices
-   parents or guardians
-   institutions, or
-   interim applicants

For more information, see Determining who should be the ABSTUDY
applicant or the Process page.

How to make a claim

There is no requirement for the applicant to be in Australia on the day
they make a claim.

Australian Apprentices and tertiary students claiming Living Allowance
and/or Incidentals Allowance only can submit:

-   an online claim
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   a paper claim form

Secondary students or customers claiming ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement can submit:

-   a claim over the phone using the ABSTUDY Claiming Tool, or
-   a paper claim form

Customers claiming Testing and Assessment must submit a paper Claim for
ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021).

Customers claiming Lawful Custody Allowance must submit a paper Claim
for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in lawful custody (SY022).

Students and Australian Apprentices approved for ABSTUDY may be eligible
for one or more of the ABSTUDY allowances. For further information, see
Eligibility for ABSTUDY.

See the Process page for further information on claiming ABSTUDY.

Timeframe for claiming

Early claims can be lodged for ABSTUDY.

ABSTUDY claims must be lodged by the relevant closing date. For further
information, see Closing date for ABSTUDY claims.

Withdrawn claims

A withdrawn claim is treated as though no claim was received.

If a customer contacts regarding a withdrawn claim advise that a new
claim is required. The Resources page contains an example of this
situation.

When a claim is not required

It is not always necessary for a customer to lodge an ABSTUDY claim. For
further information on when an ABSTUDY claim is required, see the
Process page.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
forms, mySupport, contact details, examples showing when a new claim for
ABSTUDY is or is not required, and information about documents that may
be required to support ABSTUDY claims.

Contents

Determining who should be the ABSTUDY applicant

ABSTUDY interim claim

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY (SY019)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Remote Areas (SY092)

Completing the Study Details MOD St

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Completing the ABSTUDY Additional Information Form (SY023)

Completing the ABSTUDY Additional Incidentals Allowance Claim Form M
(SY031)

Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and forms

Progress of claim - ABSTUDY

Related links

Assessing ABSTUDY claims

Early claims

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Processing arrangements for ABSTUDY claims and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
