-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when claimants need to provide more
information for their claim for ABSTUDY.

When to use this form

Claimants who have lodged an incomplete or incorrect claim for ABSTUDY
are required to complete and lodge an ABSTUDY Student Additional
Information Form (SY023), so that their claim can be determined. A
Service Officer may also determine if an SY023 should be issued to a
recipient when they advise of a major change to their circumstances that
may affect their rate of or eligibility for ABSTUDY.

Where students wish to advise of a change in their study details only,
they can [] view and update the study details online if they are
registered online and are authenticated.

The SY023 form is divided into sections:

-   Personal details
-   Payment details
-   Accommodation details
-   Income and assets
-   Study / Australian Apprenticeship (apprentice or trainee) details
-   Away from home details
-   Recipient/claimant circumstances
-   Dependent children/student details
-   Tax details
-   Declaration

Claim lodgement

ABSTUDY claims and supporting documents can be lodged by using any of
the following options:

-   [] online, registered claimants can upload their claim and any
    supporting documents online. See Submit your Centrelink documents
    online on the Services Australia website for information about how
    to lodge online
-   faxed claims, claims may be accepted by fax. The date the fax is
    received is considered the date of receipt for processing purposes
-   post, claims and supporting documents may be posted using the
    appropriate reply paid envelope to the ABSTUDY Smart Centre
    Processing Team
-   in person, claims and supporting documents may be lodged in person
    at the nearest service centre, or in remote areas, with a Centrelink
    field officer

ABSTUDY processing is consolidated into a National Smart Centre
Processing Team. Look up Processing Services details for: ABSTUDY and
ABSTUDY PES.

Identity Confirmation (IC)

ABSTUDY claimants are subject to Identity Confirmation. The Service
Officer should investigate if the claimant needs to confirm their
identity when accepting the Additional Information Form (SY023).

Service Officers assisting claimants

When assisting claimants to complete a form that is used to assess their
eligibility for payment, the Service Officer must not make any
notations, underlining or comments of any sort on a form that is to be
signed by a claimant and lodged with Services Australia. Instead, any
notations or explanations to questions on the form should be made on a
separate sheet of paper and attached to the claimant's file.

The Resources page contains a link to ABSTUDY Additional Information
Form (SY023).

Related links

Assessing the ABSTUDY Additional Information Form (SY023)

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Manage study details option online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
