
National Cancer Screening Register 011-22100417

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the National Cancer Screening Register.

The National Register

The National Bowel Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP) transitioned from
Services Australia on the 15 November 2019 to the National Cancer
Screening Register (the National Register).

The Department of Health and Aged Care is the policy owners of the
National Register and has contracted Telstra Corporation Limited to
operate the National Register.

To enable the National Register to support the NBCSP, data from the
existing National Bowel Cancer Screening Program was transferred to the
National Register. This process has been completed under the strictest
IT security protocols in accordance with the legal and legislative
requirements and is monitored by the Department of Health and Aged Care
and Telstra.

Personal information

Individuals’ information was migrated from state and territory cervical
screening registers and the Services Australia National Bowel Cancer
Screening Program in order to build the National Register. This included
individuals demographic information, Medicare numbers and other
information in relation to cervical and bowel cancer (for example,
diagnosis and screening test results).

Personal details are incorrect

If the customer’s personal details are incorrect they will need to phone
the contact centre.

Complaints

The National Cancer Screening Register is the first point of contact for
all enquiries relating to cervical or bowel cancer screening. The
contact centre team may refer enquiries to the Department of Health and
Aged Care if the enquiry is specific to the operation of the National
Cervical Screening Program or the National Bowel Cancer Screening
Program.

Any complaints regarding NBCSP data need to be referred to either the
contact centre or via the Online Enquiry form available on the NCSR
website. The Resources page contains a link to the NCSR website.

The Resources page contains links to contact details.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
