[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information about Medicare.

Government intent

Medicare provides access to medical, allied health and hospital services
for all Australian residents and certain categories of visitors to
Australia. Services Australia administers the payment of Medicare
benefits. Note: from 1 July 2016 includes permanent residents of Norfolk
Island.

Under Medicare, benefits are paid for professional services listed in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) that are provided to eligible
patients in and out of hospital.

Medicare benefits are payable only for 'clinically relevant' services
rendered by an appropriate health practitioner. A 'clinically relevant'
service is one which is generally accepted by the relevant profession as
necessary for the appropriate treatment of the patient.

When a service is not clinically relevant, the fee and payment
arrangements are a private matter between the practitioner and the
patient.

Medical practitioners are free to set own fees for their professional
service.

Medicare Benefits Schedule

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) is a listing of the professional
services that attract a Medicare benefit.

For each services, it includes a unique item number, a description, the
Schedule fee and Medicare benefit, together with a reference to an
explanatory note relating to the item (if applicable).

The MBS is not a legal document. It operates under the Health Insurance
Act 1973 (as amended) and, in cases of discrepancy, the legislation is
the source for payments of Medicare benefits.

Medicare Benefits

In general, the Medicare benefit is 85% of the Schedule fee listed in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for the service (known as the
Schedule fee).

For attendances provided by GPs (or on behalf of a GP) to out of
hospital patients, the Medicare benefit is 100% of the listed Schedule
fee.

For professional services provided to private hospital patients
(admitted to either a private or public hospital) the Medicare benefit
is 75% of the listed Schedule fee.

Public patients admitted to public hospitals, receive free medical and
hospital treatment funded under State/Territory arrangements, therefore
are not entitled to Medicare benefits.

Contents

Better Access Initiative under Medicare

Complex neurodevelopmental disorders and eligible disability services in
Medicare

Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate Scheme in Medicare

Medicare Teen Dental Plan (MTDP)

Telehealth Program for Medicare

Related links

Interpreter Services

National Prescribing Services Limited MedicineWise (NPS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
