
Search organ donor records and respond to calls on behalf of Authorised Medical Personnel (AMP) 011-11070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify and respond to calls for
Authorised Medical Personnel (AMP), and search for organ donor records
on behalf of AMP in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR).

On this Page:

Authorised Medical Personnel (AMP)

The AODR ensures a person's donation decision can be verified 24 hours a
day, seven days a week by AMPs anywhere in Australia. In the event of a
person's death, information about their donation decision can be
accessed from the AODR by authorised AMPs and provided to the family of
the deceased.

AMPs are trained health professionals in the donation sector who
register with Services Australia for AMP access. AMPs are often
employees of state health departments. They can also be staff of eye and
tissue banks and various other organisations.

Information recorded on the AODR can only be accessed by AMPs who have
signed confidentiality agreements covering the access and use of
personal information.

Authorised AMPs can access information from the AODR in two ways:

-   by calling the dedicated AMP telephone enquiry line where Service
    Officers will perform the search on the AODR on their behalf
-   by utilising the secure AODR AMP Online System using Provider
    Digital Access (PRODA) which allows access to the AODR information
    via Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Verify AMP credentials

Service Officers with appropriate access can search for an AODR record
on behalf of an AMP.

Service Officers must perform checks to verify the calling AMP's
credentials every time they call. Do not conduct an Organ Donor
Registrant (ODR) search until the security check has been completed. If
a call is received from a Non AMP hospital staff, the Organ and Tissue
Authority (OTA) recommends the call be directed to their relevant
DonateLife agency. The following details must be confirmed:

-   Name
-   Business name
-   Pass phrase
-   Ensure the AMP access is not end dated

Note: if the AMP has forgotten their pass phrase, confirm additional
information such as the address of the agency the AMP is employed with
and/or their contact phone number. Once this information has been
verified, Service Officers may assist the AMP with the pass phrase by
providing them with a little prompt or clue such as 'the name of your
child' 'the name of your pet'.

Note: if an end date is recorded against an AMP's registration Service
Officers must not provide any information about an ODR to the AMP.

The Process page has details for Service Officers responding to calls to
the AODR AMP enquiry line.

The Resources page contains information regarding registration details
that must be checked to ensure correct information is provided to the
AMP and contact details.

Related links

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Accessing Health Professional Online Services

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
