
Processing a Stoma or ParaQuad claim 011-19012122

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers who specialise
in processing Stoma or ParaQuad claims.

On this Page:

Claims for Stoma or ParaQuad reimbursement requests

Stoma and Paraquad claims are submitted to Services Australia:

-   electronically via the Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)
    claim upload function
-   via mail (manual claim), or USB

The HPOS claim upload function introduced in June 2020 aims to
transition associations to uploading their claims file via HPOS,
removing the requirement for associations to provide their claims file
via USB.

There are two software versions associations can use to upload their
claims via HPOS – software version 1.1 and the new software version 2.0.
See Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) for more information (including payment
information).

All claims submitted via HPOS are automatically flagged with the ‘Hold
Payment’ indicator.

Claims submitted using version 1.1 are automatically held to allow
supporting paperwork to be received by Services Australia, and for
quality assurance and financial delegate approval to be completed prior
to payment release.

For claims submitted using version 2.0, Service Officers need to remove
the Hold Payment indicator when completing quality assurance.

A daily report is automatically produced and sent to Operational Policy
and Legacy Programs Section, Pharmaceutical Benefits Branch and the
Stoma and Paraquad processing team in Aged Care Allied Health Branch.
The report is titled ‘Claims stuck as at DD/MM/YYYY’. This report
identifies the associations and relevant claim information for claims
submitted via HPOS the day before.

Note: claims submitted via USB will automatically be flagged with the
Hold Payment indicator. Service Officers need to untick the Hold Payment
checkbox to begin processing.

The system will automatically default the Payment Due Date to the
following day. The PBS Payment ID’s will not be populated and the status
of the payment will be ‘Withheld’. Once the Hold Payment indicator is
unticked, the system will calculate the actual payment due date (using
the Claim Package Received Date) and allocate PBS Payment ID’s during
the overnight payment batch job.

Abandoning a claim

Abandoning a claim would be required when the date of lodgement has been
entered incorrectly in the Loading and Registering Phase or if requested
by an association.

A claim can only be abandoned prior to completion.

Associations

A list of Stoma associations (sometimes referred to as ‘Ostomy
associations’) can be found on the Department of Health and Aged Care
website.

The Resources page provides a link to the Department of Health and Aged
Care Stoma Appliance Scheme webpage.

There are 2 paraplegic & quadriplegic associations authorised under the
National Health Act 1953 (Paraplegic and Quadriplegic Program) Special
Arrangements 2010 to supply certain medicines to eligible members. See
Paraplegic and Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) Program for more information on
these associations.

Financial delegate

A financial delegate is required to approve the claims for payment prior
to the payment due date. For claims up to $1,000,000 spending approval
can be provided by an EL1 Pharmaceutical Adviser or nominated EL1.

Claims that exceed $1,000,000 require spending approval at the National
Manager level.

A claim package is provided to the financial delegate to facilitate
approval. There are 2 quality assurance procedures, one for claims
submitted using version 1.1 and one for version 2.0.

If a different Service Officer receives the claim back after financial
delegate approval, they continue the processing from that point onwards.

The Resources page contains the Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) and
ParaQuad contact details, links to the Services Australia SAS webpage,
the Department of Health and Aged Care SAS webpage (which includes a
link to the Australian Council of Stoma Associations), and a link to the
Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) reason codes and fix instructions
for Stoma and ParaQuad claims.

Related links

Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS)

Enquiries regarding Stoma or ParaQuad claims

Financial delegation checking of a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Loading and registering a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
