
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Medicare eligibility for customers who have been
granted permanent resident status.

Permanent residency

A customer can enrol in Medicare as a migrant when they:

-   have been granted permanent residency, and
-   are living in Australia

Eligibility for Medicare

The customer can enrol in Medicare if they meet all of the criteria.
When they enrol they will get a green Medicare card.

The customer must supply documents to enrol in Medicare.

Document verification

-   Identification documents must be verified for all customers in the
    Document Verification Service (DVS) before processing an application
-   The DVS processing form must be completed for each document
    verification attempted, both successful and unsuccessful
    verification must be recorded on the form
-   If an application is received and processed in a service centre, DVS
    is only required if the Service Officer is not satisfied with the
    validity of the documents

See Identity verification for Medicare enrolments and re-enrolments in
the Document Verification Service (DVS) for more details.

Parent visa (subclass 103 and 804)

A person living in Australia who has applied for a parent visa (subclass
103 or 804) is not eligible to enrol in Medicare until the parent visa
has been granted.

The only exception is where a person who has applied for a parent visa
(subclass 103 or 804) is from a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA)
country. They must meet the conditions for that RHCA country to be
eligible for Medicare.

See Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Service Officers must take care when assessing an application for
enrolment where a person has a parent visa.

Changing a conditional migrant to a migrant

Where a person is a conditional migrant and their entitlement is updated
to migrant via the Department of Home Affairs immigration link, this
will automatically update the person’s entitlement type in CDMS and
should reissue a new Medicare card.

Where a person has not been linked to the Department of Home Affairs
immigration link an update will need to be done manually.

Permanent residents residing outside of Australia

Holders of permanent resident visas who permanently reside in Australia
may lose their Medicare eligibility when they are absent from Australia
for 12 months or more.

Services Australia accepts advice confirming that a person is residing
overseas from the following sources:

-   over the phone
-   in person, or
-   in writing (letter or email)

Where advice is received that a permanent resident visa holder intends
to or is residing overseas, enter the departure date (if known), in the
Comments field in Personal.

Where it has been confirmed that a permanent resident visa holder has
been absent from Australia for 12 months or more but the exact date they
left the country is unknown, eligibility can be consumer end dated with
the date advised or date the written advice was received.

Note: a consumer end date should not be applied to a customer's record
until they have been residing outside Australia for 12 months or more.

The Process page provides information on:

-   how to consumer end date a person
-   permanent residents returning to reside in Australia

Migrant now an Australian citizen

Where a person presents with Australian citizenship papers, their
Medicare entitlement type can be updated to reflect Australian (A).

See Amend customer entitlement details in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare.

The Resources page contains links to results codes, data tables, country
codes, forms and contact details.

Related links

Applicant for Partner visa (subclass 309/100 and 820/801)

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolments

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
