
This document outlines the process to enrol an unidentifiable child in
Medicare.

On this Page:

Unidentifiable child

An unidentifiable child is where either, the:

-   organisation caring for the child is unable to release the name of
    the child for privacy reasons (for example, to protect the identity
    of the natural mother), or
-   identity of the child is not known

Special procedures were introduced for unidentifiable children to cover
situations where a child is placed in the care of an organisation, and
emergency medical care is required before the child's identity can be
determined.

Medicare for unidentifiable children

Organisations approved by a state or territory to care for
unidentifiable children can apply to the Manager (Eligibility), Services
Australia Canberra, for approval to operate as agencies to claim for the
payment of Medicare benefits for medical services rendered to those
children.

Under these arrangements, an agency can seek approval to claim Medicare
benefits for medical expenses they incur where there is insufficient
information to effect enrolment for the child, or to ascertain whether
enrolment has already been effected.

If approval is granted:

-   The agency is allocated a Medicare number, which must be quoted on
    all Medicare claim forms lodged by the agency for services rendered
    to the children in its care.
-   Medicare cards are not issued.
-   The Medicare numbers cannot be used for bulk bill purposes.
-   The Medicare number issued to the Department of Community Services
    (DoCS) or any other agency is only to be used by these
    organisations. It is solely for unidentifiable children (where a
    child’s name is known this Medicare number would not be used).

Documents required to enrol unidentifiable children

-   Medicare Enrolment Application form (completed by organisation
    approved to care for the child), and
-   Written request for the child to be enrolled from the organisation
    (on letterhead) caring for the child.

Related links

Child Protection Agency – Medicare card number requests for children and
young people in out-of-home care (OOHC)

Child born in Australia enrolling in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
