-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information about the Medicare
Compensation Recovery Program for staff. It includes how to send and
resend correspondence, a list of terminology, manual and system letters
and forms.

Government intent

The Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995 (HOSC Act) sets
out the responsibilities of Services Australia (the agency) in relation
to administration and recovery of Medicare benefits and care costs
relating to notifiable compensation claims.

The HOSC Act was introduced to recover the benefits and subsidies paid
on behalf of the injured person.

Medicare Compensation Recovery (the program) must carry out duties as
described in the legislation, but may determine the way in which some of
those duties are performed. The program has developed systems and
procedures to administer the Acts under the provisions contained in the
legislation.

Claim processing and management

The notifiable person must tell the agency in writing of an injury or
illness to a person where:

-   a compensation amount of more than $5,000 was fixed by judgment or
    settlement (including legal costs for settlements), or
-   a reimbursement arrangement was made more than 6 months after a
    claim was lodged

The Australian Government pays benefits and subsidies on that person’s
behalf to service providers, when:

-   a person receives professional services for which a Medicare benefit
    is paid, and/or
-   nursing home, residential care or home care services

When a person receives compensation for an injury or illness, this
usually includes related medical costs.

This means that they may need to repay the Australian Government any of
the below related benefits or subsidies before they can receive their
money:

-   Medicare benefits
-   nursing home benefits
-   residential care subsidies, and/or
-   home care subsidies (collectively referred to as ‘care costs’)

Only related services between the date of injury (DOI) and the date
compensation was fixed by a judgment, settlement, or a reimbursement
arrangement was made, are recovered.

If an injury or illness was sustained before the Medicare program
commenced on 1 February 1984, the notice to claimant will only list
services received on or after that date.

Date and description of injury or illness

The date and nature of an injury or illness must be provided in writing
so a claim can be registered in the MCRS. Notice can be provided on a:

-   Notice of past benefits request form (MO026)
-   Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022)
-   Notice of reimbursement arrangement form (MO027), or
-   supporting documents

If the claimant or notifiable person is having difficulty specifying a
date of injury or illness, see Table 10 on the Resources page for help.

The nature of the injury or illness can be a basic description if it
adequately describes it. For example:

-   whiplash
-   upper or lower extremity (left or right not required)
-   psychiatric
-   psychological

Note: a description of the accident is not acceptable as it does provide
information about the injury or illness sustained. For example we cannot
accept ‘hit by car’, ‘slip and fall’ or ‘fell off ladder’.

Changes to date or description of injury or illness

Any change to a date of injury (DOI) or illness or description for a
registered claim must be notified in writing.

The DOI or injury description may change over the life of a compensation
claim for various reasons such as:

-   the injury or illness was caused by an incident earlier than
    originally thought
-   the parties agree that the injury or illness was due to the nature
    and conditions of the injured person’s employment and agree on an
    earlier date to encompass the whole period
-   various injuries or incidents are added or removed from the scope of
    the claim (either by agreement or by determination of a tribunal or
    similar body), or
-   the initial date notified to the agency was incorrect and the error
    has been identified

MCRS will not automatically send a new Notice to Claimant. If a new
Z2800 Identify related Medicare and history services and Z2801 Medicare
history and care services statement letter are required, information
must be submitted on a:

-   Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022)
-   Notice of reimbursement arrangement form (MO027) or
-   Notice of past benefits request (MO026)

If a new Notice to Claimant is not required, select document type Other
– all other documents to update the date of injury illness without
issuing the new notice to claimant.

If there is a current notice of past benefits based on the old date of
injury or description, it will:

-   remain current until expiry if the claim does not settle, or
-   automatically expire when the new notice to claimant is issued when
    a MO022, MO026 or MO027 is received

If the current notice lists services before the DOI, they will be
removed once an MO022, MO026 or MO027 is received.

Advice for compensation payers in determining the date of injury or illness

The date of the injury or illness depends on the type of compensation
claim being made by the injured person and the nature of the injury,
illness, disease or condition reported. Compensation claims lodged
against compensation payers can include claims for:

-   workers compensation
-   motor vehicle accidents
-   public liability
-   product liability
-   common law
-   medical negligence
-   school accidents
-   sporting injuries
-   wrongful deaths (including malpractice)

If a compensation payer contacts Services Australia to clarify the
agency's position about a notifiable date of injury or illness, see
Resources for information to help with giving advice about the
notifiable date of injury or illness.

If a Service Officer needs further support to help the compensation
payer, refer the case to a Programme Support Officer.

Date of injury or illness prior to 1 February 1984

Medicare was introduced to eligible Australian residents on 1 February
1984. When the date of injury or illness is before 1 February 1984, a
compensation case must be registered with the actual date of injury or
illness e.g. 10 February 1970.

However, the Notice to claimant (Medicare history statement and
declaration form) will only list services for which a Medicare benefit
has been paid since 1 February 1984.

Date of injury and historic cases

While a specific date of injury or illness should be provided to the
agency, for historic abuse cases this may not be possible due to the
length of time involved (for example, historic abuse or psychological
cases). The date of injury or illness provided will often be provided as
only a year or a month and year, an approximate date or a date range.

If a form or notice is received by the agency to register a case for a
historic claim without a specific date of injury or illness, refer to
the Resources page as to how to register the date.

Letters

The program uses letters to make contact where:

-   there is a legislative requirement to provide a written notice, or
-   a form or request cannot be processed due to missing information

This includes when:

-   making a decision
-   sending a formal notice

Always use a system generated letter, except when sending copies of
legacy CCMS letters.

Standard letter template manual letters are used in these 3 instances
only.

MCRS will show one of the following statuses for each system issued
letter (correspondence):

requested – has gone to print (next business day) – it can only be
previewed before being submitted

sent – has been printed and sent by Australia Post

consolidated – multiple letters of the same type and to the same
recipient were triggered within a claim on the same day – only the
latest will be sent, and all others will be marked as consolidated

-   e.g. if a Z2806 letter was issued for an incorrect reason, if a new
    one is issued on the same day only the later version will be sent.
    Any system issued letter except the Z2803 Compensation Claim
    Documents Enclosed letter can be consolidated

error – an error has occurred and the letter has not been sent, advise
the Program Management team via email so that this can be rectified

There is no ability to delete letters once a letter has been submitted.

See Resources page for a list of manual and system generated letters.

Case notes

Case notes must be entered every time a claim is viewed, accessed or
processed.

For more information about why and how to add case notes, and to access
the case notes template, see Escalations and case notes.

The Resources page contains:

a list of:

-   system and manual letters
-   terminology

links to:

-   contact details
-   standard letter template (manual) letters
-   forms
-   email templates

information about notifiable date of injury or illness

Contents

Medicare Compensation Recovery System (MCRS)

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Case management – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare Compensation Recovery quality checking

Related links

Escalations and case notes – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Using Standard Letter Templates (SLT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
