-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers about how a
statement by claimant (SBC) is processed. It also outlines how care
costs are calculated.

Statement by claimant

When a notice to claimant is completed and returned to the agency, it
becomes a statement by claimant and will result in a notice of past
benefits or notice of charge being issued.

If the statement by claimant is not returned by the due date on the
statement, all items on the notice to claimant will be taken as relating
to the injury/illness unless an extension of time has been granted.

If the statement by claimant is incomplete it will be assessed as not
substantially correct.

Requests for an extension of time to submit the statement

A request for an extension to return a statement by claimant must be
received before the due date on the statement. Each request must be
assessed independently as the claim status determines whether an
extension can be granted.

See Extensions, not substantially correct, decisions and reviews for
more information.

Valid statement by claimant

To be considered complete, the statement by claimant must include:

-   Yes or no indicated in the tick box for the Medicare service
-   Yes or no indicated in the tick box for the care services statement
-   Full name of the person making the declaration
-   Tick in the relevant box to indicate who is making the declaration
-   Business name (if applicable)
-   Address of the person making the declaration
-   Signature of the person making the declaration
-   Date the declaration is made

If the claimant has identified services by selecting at least one ‘Yes’
or ‘No’ box Services Australia will assume the only services that do
relate are the ones which are selected ‘Yes’. Any blank box is to be
considered as ‘No’. If no boxes have been indicated, the statement must
be assessed as incomplete.

Incomplete or amended statement by claimant

AP claims and pre-settlement

If the statement by claimant is incomplete, a Statement not
substantially correct letter (Z2805) will be sent asking the claimant to
re-submit a new or amended form within 28 days.

If no response to the Z2805 letter is received, or if the returned
amended statement by claimant is still assessed as incomplete, all
services will be considered as relating and an all services included
notice will be issued.

NON-AP (Failed AP and NOC) claims

If the statement by claimant is incomplete an all services included
notice is required to be issued. This is required as the Z2805 letter
does not extend the timeframes for section 24(4).

Removing services

If a subsequent statement by claimant indicates that previously verified
services do not relate to the injury/illness, process it as requested
unless the current NOBP is valid, the claim has reached
judgment/settlement or the claimant is seeking to remove care costs as
these will require evidence and/or approval from an APS5 or above.

See

-   Extensions, not substantially correct, decisions and reviews for
    amending a valid NOPB or if the claim has reached judgment or
    settlement
-   Process for how to process a statement by claimant

Cross referencing

The injured person may have multiple claims for the same or similar
injury/illness however Services Australia (the agency) can only recover
the cost of a provided service once. The process of checking whether
services have previously been recovered is called cross-referencing.

Service Officers must cross reference the statement by claimant for this
claim against closed claims for the same injured person. When services
indicated on a statement by claimant have been previously recovered the
service cannot be included in the new NOPB, NOPB-AP or NOC. This will
ensure that indicated services have not already been recovered by the
agency in relation to another compensation claim. If identified that
services indicated are not to be included Service Officers must add a
case note to detail which services were not included and why.

Cross referencing must be done when on a closed claim there is a:

-   verified NOPB-AP or NOC and payment has been received
-   NOBP-AP or NOC which is for all services included and more than 2
    years has passed

Cross referencing is not required when:

-   the current SBC has no services indicated
-   previous NOPB-AP or NOC is for a nil recovery
-   the other claim/s has not settled
-   a NOPB-AP or NOC on a closed claim has an outstanding debt
-   SBC is not returned or is incomplete and an all services included
    notice is being issued
-   a NOPB-AP or NOC is for all services included and less than 2 years
    has passed.

Note: when determining previously recovered services for claims
finalised in CCMS Service Officers must not rely on the most recent
system issued notice of charge. This is because a manual amendment may
have been actioned. Case notes and document on the claim need to be
assessed to determine the latest notice of charge.

Care costs

If an injured person received residential care facility or home care
services as a result of their compensable injury or illness there may be
recoverable care costs.

Care costs refers to the:

-   nursing home benefits
-   residential care subsidies, and
-   home care subsidies

These are paid to service providers by the Australian Government on
behalf of an injured person for those services.

When a statement by claimant is:

returned and showing care services were provided, a care costs check
will be completed. When care costs are selected in MCRS, the work will
be allocated to the APS5 for action

not returned, and all services are related to the compensable
injury/illness:

-   the care costs check is not completed, and
-   previously identified care costs will be brought forward to the new
    notice of past benefits or notice of charge

See Process for how to request a care costs check.

How recoverable care costs are checked and calculated

A trained APS5 (or above) will calculate care costs from the date of
injury/illness until:

-   the date of judgment or settlement, or
-   the date a reimbursement arrangement was made

Where a judgment, settlement or reimbursement has not yet been made, the
amount is calculated:

-   up to the date the care costs check is performed, or
-   the date of discharge from the care facility or service, or
-   the date of death

Only the increase in the level of care after the date of injury is
recoverable:

-   where a person was already in care before the date of
    injury/illness, and
-   continues to be in care as a result of the compensable
    injury/illness

The home care subsidy was only recoverable from 1 July 2015. If home
care subsidy was paid before this date, those amounts are not
recoverable.

Breakdown of care costs

A notice of past benefits or notice of charge will not include a
breakdown of the care costs, and is only a total figure. The request for
a breakdown of care costs can be received as a verbal request or in
writing from:

-   the injured person
-   the claimant
-   an authorised third party
-   the compensation payer, or
-   the compensation payers solicitor

The breakdown of care costs:

-   is calculated by an APS5 (or above)
-   is sent to the person who made the request, along with a copy of the
    notice of past benefits
-   is an itemised summary of Australian Government payments made for
    care services provided to the injured person. Note: it must not
    contain screen shots or reports from agency systems
-   lists the time period and levels of care that were paid

See Process for how to process a request for a breakdown of care costs
and how the breakdown of care costs is provided.

Disputes over care costs amount

Amendments to care cost amount can be approved by an APS 5 and required
evidence from a treating medical practitioner. See Extensions, not
substantially correct, decisions and reviews.

The Resources page contains links to contact details.

Related links

Extensions, not substantially correct, decisions and reviews – Medicare
Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge – Medicare Compensation
Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
