
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines professional services related to Medicare patient
claims.

Professional services covered by Medicare

A professional service is defined as a clinically relevant service
rendered by a medical or dental practitioner, an optometrist or an
eligible allied health professional.

A clinically relevant service is defined as a service that is generally
accepted in the medical, dental, optometric or allied health profession,
as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the patient to whom
it is rendered.

Medicare benefits are paid under the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act)
for professional services in accordance with fees set out in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS). The MBS is a publication that is
maintained and update by the Department of Health and Aged Care.

Each professional services contained in the MBS:

has been allocated a unique item number:

-   the Schedule fee and Medicare benefit are found with the item number
    and description for each service, and
-   a reference to an explanatory note relating to the item (if
    applicable)

Services listed in the MBS must be rendered according to the provisions
of the relevant Commonwealth, state and territory laws. The day-to-day
administration and payment of benefits under the Medicare arrangements
is the responsibility of Services Australia.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Professional services that do not attract a Medicare benefit

There are some professional services which, because of their nature, do
not attract a Medicare benefit. The Health Insurance (General Medical
Services Table) Regulations 2018 states that the following services do
not attract benefits:

chelation therapy (that is to say, the intravenous administration of
ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid or any of its salts) otherwise than
for the treatment of heavy-metal poisoning

the injection of human chorionic gonadotrophin in the management of
obesity

the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in the treatment of multiple
sclerosis

the removal of tattoos

the removal from a cadaver of kidneys for transplantation

the transplantation of a thoracic or abdominal organ, other than a
kidney, or a part of an organ of that kind, or

-   the transplantation of a kidney in conjunction with the
    transplantation of a thoracic, or other abdominal organ, or a part
    of an organ of that kind, if the services are rendered to an
    in-patient of a hospital

administering of microwave (UHF radio wave) cancer therapy, including
the intravenous injection of drugs used immediately before or during the
therapy

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Regulations
2018.

Health screening services

Unless the Minister otherwise directs, Medicare benefits are not payable
for health screening services as stated in Section 19(5) of the Health
Insurance Act 1973.

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Explanatory Note titled Services
which do not attract Medicare benefits defines a health screening
service as a medical examination or test that is not reasonably required
for the management of the medical condition of the patient.

Medicare benefits are not payable for health screening services.

Services considered to be health screening services include:

multi-phasic testing

mammography screening:

-   except as provided for in items 59300/59303

testing of fitness, to undergo physical training programs, vocational
activities or weight reduction programs

compulsory examinations or tests:

-   to obtain a flying, commercial driving or other licence, except age
    or heath related medical examinations to obtain or renew a private
    motor vehicle licence
-   to obtain entrance to schools and other educational facilities
-   for the purpose of legal proceedings
-   for admission to aged persons' accommodation and pathology services
    associated with clinical ecology

The References page contains links to the MBS and the Health Insurance
Act 1973.

Health screening services where benefits are payable

The Minister has directed that the following categories of health
screening services attract Medicare benefits:

-   symptomless patient
-   pathology requested by the National Heart Foundation of Australia
-   drivers licence
-   unemployed person
-   occupational STD blood testing
-   adoption or fostering of a child
-   social security benefits or allowances (including Centrelink and
    DVA)
-   Ministerial exceptions

Symptomless patients

Medicare benefits are payable for medical examinations or tests on a
symptomless patient by the patient's medical practitioner in the course
of normal medical practice. This is to make sure the patient receives
any medical advice or treatment necessary to maintain their state of
health.

Benefits are payable for attendance and tests that are considered
reasonably necessary according to patients individual circumstances
(age, physical condition, past personal and family history).

The routine check-up should not necessarily be accompanied by an
extensive series of diagnostic investigations.

Pathology requested by the National Heart Foundation of Australia

Medicare benefits are payable for a pathology service requested by the
National Heart Foundation of Australia, Risk Evaluation Service.

Driver's licence

Medicare benefits are payable for medical examinations for reasons of
age or health, for persons wanting to obtain or renew a licence to drive
a private motor vehicle.

Unemployed person

Medicare benefits are payable for medical or optometrical examinations
provided to an unemployed person (as defined by the Social Security Act
1991) at the request of a prospective employer.

Occupational STD blood testing

Medicare benefits are payable for medical examinations of, and/or blood
collection from persons occupationally exposed to sexual transmission of
disease.

This is in accordance with conditions determined by the relevant state
or territory health authority (one examination or collection per person
per week).

Benefits are not to be paid for pathology tests resulting from the
examination or collection.

Adoption or fostering of a child

Medicare benefits are payable for medical examinations that are a
condition of child adoption or fostering.

Social security benefits or allowances (including Centrelink and
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA))

Medicare benefits are payable for medical examinations that are required
for social security benefits and allowances.

DVA eligibility

Disability service pension administered by DVA.

Note: where a veteran receives medical screening for the purpose of
obtaining a disability service pension through DVA, the account is paid
through DVA's Medical Expenses Privately Incurred (MEPI) process.

Centrelink eligibility

Under direction made by the Minister under section 19(5) of the Health
Insurance Act 1973, Medicare benefits are payable for medical
examinations that are required to claim eligibility for the following
Centrelink benefits or allowances:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Parenting Payment (Partnered)
-   ABSTUDY
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
-   Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Ministerial exceptions

There are Ministerial directions under section 19(5) of the Health
Insurance Act 1973 that state Medicare benefits are payable for health
screening services in the following circumstances:

pathology arising from health screening in:

-   Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Community Controlled Health
    Services in all states and territories
-   Indigenous communities in rural or remote Central Australia
    (Northern Territory, South Australia or Western Australia)

The Minister can also direct in accordance with section 19(2) of the
Health Insurance Act 1973 that Medicare benefits be payable for some
professional services that would otherwise not be payable.

There are Ministerial directions under section 19(2) of the Health
Insurance Act 1973 that state Medicare benefits are payable for services
in the following circumstances:

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Publicly funded bodies

The following is a list of publicly funded bodies where Medicare
benefits are payable for services received:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community Controlled Health
    Services in all states and territories
-   remote health centres engaged by the Northern Territory State
    Government
-   Indigenous communities serviced by the Queensland State Government
    or Royal Flying Doctor Service
-   Royal Flying Doctor Service, Rural Women's GP Service in all states
    and territories
-   specific community health centres in Queensland, South Australia and
    Tasmania
-   health services provided in Queensland, Western Australia, Northern
    Territory and New South Wales as part of the Council of Australian
    Governments' Improving Access to Primary Care Services in Rural and
    Remote Areas initiative
-   services provided under the Nurse Practitioner - Aged Care Models
    Practice Program
-   services provided under the Diabetes Care Project

For further information about Ministerial directions under Sections
19(2) and 19(5) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 contact Medicare Claims
Policy.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Medical services related to employment

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Explanatory Note titled Services
which do not attract Medicare benefits states that, unless the minister
directs, a Medicare benefit is not payable where:

-   medical expenses are incurred by the employer of the person to whom
    the service is rendered
-   the person is employed in an industrial undertaking and that medical
    service is rendered for purposes related to the operation of the
    undertaking, or
-   a person is required to attend a pre-employment screening service

Note: the Service Officer must return any claims relating to employment.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Pre-employment screening exception

A Medicare benefit is payable to a registered unemployed person for a
medical or optometrical examination at the request of a potential
employer for the purposes of employment.

Note:

-   There is no particular item number to be used in this instance. The
    health professional can use the item number that best describes the
    consultation, as described in the MBS
-   The onus is on the health professional to correctly itemise accounts
    and to only charge for services to unemployed persons (as defined by
    the Social Security Act 1991)

The References page contains a link to the Social Security Act 1991

Sporting bodies

A sporting body can be classified as an employer. Professional sports
players who receive an income from a sporting body are considered
employees of that sporting body.

On 30 October 2014, the Minister for Health signed a direction stating
that Medicare benefits are payable for persons employed to play sport.
This direction applies to claims received from 25 May 2014 until 30
October 2017.

A new direction was signed on 6 March 2017, revoking the direction
signed on 30 October 2014. This new direction states that Medicare
benefits shall be payable indefinitely in respect of a professional
service rendered to a person where that person is employed to play
sport.

For claims submitted by a sporting person, Service Officers can continue
to process these indefinitely.

Services rendered to dependants

Medicare benefits are payable only where:

-   there is a genuine commercial arrangement between the health
    professional and the patient, and
-   the health professional expected to receive a payment in relation to
    the service

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Explanatory Note titled Services
which do not attract Medicare benefits states that:

Medicare benefits are not paid for professional services rendered by a
practitioner to:

-   dependants
-   a practice partner, or
-   a practice partner's dependants

A dependant person is a spouse or a child.

A spouse, in relation to a dependant person, is a:

-   person who is legally married to and not permanently living apart
    from the health professional
-   de facto partner

A child, in relation to the dependant person, is aged:

under 16 years and in the custody, control and care of the health
professional or their spouse

16 years and over and in the custody, control and care of the health
professional or their spouse

16 years and over and:

-   in full-time education at a school, college or university
-   not receiving a disability support pension under the Social Security
    Act 1991
-   wholly or substantially dependant on the health professional or
    their spouse

The References page contains links to the MBS and the Social Security
Act 1991.

Reimbursement of medical costs by state departments or agencies

See Register children (including children in care) for Medicare Safety
Net.

Locum arrangements

Locum arrangements occur where a locum-tenens (locum) tenders a service
on behalf of another health professional.

A locum is a health professional who temporarily fulfils the duties on
behalf of a health professional in a practice. It is each locum's
responsibility to ensure that their provider number is used on patient
accounts.

It is an offence to use another health professional's allocated number.

Where a locum practices for more than 2 weeks or is at a practice for
less than 2 weeks but on a regular basis, the locum should apply for a
provider number for the relevant location.

Where either a:

-   general practitioner (GP) acts as a locum for a specialist, or
    consultant physician
-   specialist acts as a locum for a consultant physician
-   GP acts as a locum for a principal health professional

The Medicare benefit is only payable at the level appropriate for the
qualifications held by the locum, for example:

-   GP level for GP locum
-   specialist level for a referred service rendered by a specialist

Account documents

When a locum renders a service on behalf of another health professional,
the account documents must indicate it is a locum service either by the
word 'Locum' or the letters 'LT' (Locum Tenens).

The account must also include both the:

-   locum's name and provider number (and their address if required)
-   name, address and provider number of the doctor on whose behalf the
    locum is acting

PAYP lines

A pay provider (PAYP) line is used when an account indicates that the
service(s) was performed by a locum, for example, 'locum' or 'LT'.

A PAYP line must be keyed regardless of whether a paid or unpaid account
is involved.

Keying a PAYP line ensures that Medicare benefits are correctly assessed
and made payable to the health professional for whom the locum is
acting.

Note: for quality control purposes, locum details must be present for a
PAYP line to be keyed.

New referrals

New referrals are not required for acting locums. Referrals to a health
professional in the practice are accepted as applying to the locum.

Initial attendance

Medicare benefits are not payable at the initial attendance rate for an
attendance by a locum if the health professional being replaced has
already performed an initial attendance in respect of the particular
instrument of referral.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Medicare claims
helpdesk.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
