
Eligibility for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 011-60010000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility requirements for accessing the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this page:

PBS patient requirements

Patients are responsible for presenting to the supplier the prescription
written by the prescriber. They are required to sign on the prescription
for receipt of the pharmaceutical benefit item supplied.

Patients are responsible for maintaining their PBS Safety Net records.

Patients are required to use pharmaceutical benefit items only in
accordance with the prescription and supply.

PBS for Australian dependencies

While on Cocos (Keeling), Christmas or Lord Howe Island, holders of
permanent resident status or Australian citizens are eligible for PBS
benefits if a prescription is prescribed by a PBS prescriber who is
registered in Australia and has a PBS prescriber number. These
prescriptions must be dispensed by an approved supplier.

See the Resources page for a table outlining PBS eligibility for
residents of Australian dependencies.

PBS for government officers working outside Australia

Eligible Commonwealth, state or territory government officers working
overseas and their accompanying spouses and dependents are eligible for
PBS prescriptions. PBS medicines supplied for this purpose can be taken
or sent out of Australia. Safety Net benefits are available for these
individuals and families.

Access under this provision is limited to government officers who would
otherwise be eligible for the PBS when residing in Australia.

A valid Medicare, Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) or other
entitlement card is required. Information from the officer's government
agency in Australia may be used to establish that they are working,
serving or on government duties overseas.

PBS for detainees and in correctional centres

If a person is eligible for PBS benefits this does not automatically
entitle them to be eligible for PBS benefits whilst detained in police
custody or a correctional centre (prison).

Where healthcare is provided to people in police custody, prisoners or
those on remand, and is arranged for, provided by and funded by the
State, then PBS benefits are not payable. The only exceptions are Highly
Specialised Drugs (HSDs) and Trastuzumab (Herceptin®).

Incarcerated prisoners

PBS benefits are not payable for incarcerated prisoners as their
healthcare has been arranged for, provided by and funded by State and
Territory Governments.

The exceptions are Highly Specialised Drugs (HSDs) and Trastuzumab
(Herception®).

Participating public hospital - prisoner discharged

A prisoner who is discharged after receiving treatment as an in-patient
from a participating public hospital is not eligible to be prescribed
PBS/ Repatriation Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (RPBS) medicines,
if the prisoner is returning to permanent custody at a State funded
correctional centre (prison).

If the prisoner on discharge from a participating public hospital is
returning to the community, then the prisoner is eligible to be
prescribed PBS/RPBS medicines and PBS/RPBS benefits are payable.

Day release

PBS benefits are payable for a person on approved day release if their
healthcare has not been arranged for or provided by the State.

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSDs) and Trastuzumab (Herceptin®) benefits
are also payable for prisoners on approved day release.

Home detention

PBS benefits are payable for a person under home detention if their
healthcare has not been arranged for or provided by the State.

PBS benefits are not payable for a person under home detention if their
healthcare has been arranged for or provided by the State, such as the
provision of State funded drug counselling.

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSDs) and Trastuzumab (Herceptin®) benefits
are payable for prisoners in home detention.

Inmates of other State institutions

In most situations inmates of State funded institutions are not eligible
for the supply of PBS medicines, as their healthcare is arranged for and
funded by the State.

However, where an inmate attends an institution on a daily or short-term
basis and their healthcare has not been arranged for or provided by the
State, then they are entitled to PBS benefits.

PBS and defence force personnel

Australian Defence Force (ADF) personnel are entitled to access the PBS.

ADF prescription

If a patient presents an ADF prescription (marked as private or non-PBS)
at a community pharmacy, the pharmacist is to supply the prescription as
a private prescription. The ADF patient can claim the amount paid back
from the Defence Health Services (DHS).

PBS prescription for ADF personnel

If a patient presents a PBS prescription (not marked as private or
non-PBS) for ADF personnel at a community pharmacy, normal Improved
Monitoring Entitlements (IME) provisions apply, that is if the patient:

-   has a Medicare card, that card number is used
-   does not have a Medicare card, and the pharmacist is satisfied that
    the patient is entitled to access the PBS, then the pharmacist can
    use the appropriate special number

The Resources page contains details of Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) eligibility for residents of Australian dependencies.

Contents

Improved Monitoring of Entitlements (IME) for pharmaceutical benefits
enquiry line

Repatriation Benefits card (RPBC) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS)

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
