[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) patient refunds.

Types of PBS patient refunds

Section 87A of the National Health Act 1953 sets out the circumstances
in which a person is entitled to claim a refund for PBS medicines from
Services Australia.

A patient can request a PBS patient refund for the following reasons:

-   Over the PBS Safety Net threshold - the patient/family exceeded the
    annual general or concessional PBS Safety Net threshold
-   Medicare or Concession card not shown (No-card) - the patient paid a
    higher co-payment for their prescription for not showing a Medicare
    card or concession card at the pharmacy. Note: The pharmacy may
    charge allowable additional fees and premiums that are not
    refundable.
-   Closing The Gap (CTG) - a patient entitled to the reduced CTG
    co-payment and registered under the CTG - PBS Co-payment Program did
    not get a reduced co-payment applied when the script was dispensed

Refunds are paid by EFTPOS to the claimant’s bank account details
registered for Medicare.

Claiming a patient refund

Services Australia can only pay refunds for PBS items supplied through
approved PBS suppliers.

Submitting patient refund

Claimants submit a refund by completing the PBS Patient claim for refund
form (PB132) available to download and print on the Services Australia
website. The appropriate supporting documents must be included in the
claim.

PBS patient refund claims can be submitted at a Service Centre, or by
post. There is no electronic option for submission of patient refund
claims.

Supporting documents required for a patient refund

The type of supporting document submitted for a patient refund will
depend on the type of refund being claimed. The pharmacist must sign all
supporting documents.

Prescription record forms (PRFs) - Over-the-threshold patient refunds
Prescription Record Forms (PRFs) are generated by pharmacy dispensing
software. Patients can also download a PBS/RPBS Safety Net prescription
record form (PB240) from the Services Australia website to keep a record
of how much they spend on RPBS/PBS medicines

Pharmacy receipts - No-card and CTG refunds
S87A Pharmacy receipts:

show the:

-   patient details
-   date of supply
-   PBS item code
-   quantity supplied
-   amount paid by the patient, and

must be signed by the pharmacist

No-card refund claims for scripts dispensed privately may also need a
copy of the original/duplicate prescription to determine if the script
is eligible for a PBS refund.

Tax invoice or patient history report
In addition to S87A pharmacy receipts and Prescription Record Forms
(PRFs), a tax invoice or patient history report can also be accepted if
they have been endorsed as:

-   paid in full, and
-   signed by the pharmacist, and
-   include all relevant information required to process a patient
    refund

The pharmacy tax invoice or patient history report will show the amount
paid which may include additional fees and premiums. The details on the
pharmacy tax invoice may be:

-   enough to claim a no-card refund, ,but
-   not enough to claim an over the threshold refund

Documents that cannot be accepted for a patient refund

The following documents are not accepted for a patient refund:

-   A pharmacy account or statement of account
-   The pharmacy cash register/EFTPOS docket
-   A PRF where the pharmacy has added items supplied at other
    pharmacies to their own computer generated PRF

Calculating the refundable amount

Section 87A of the National Health Act 1953 states the refundable amount
is the difference between the patient's contribution and the
Commonwealth dispensed price, as listed in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits.

There are additional fees and charges that may be applied to
prescriptions that are not refundable:

-   Allowable extra fees
-   Brand price premium
-   Therapeutic group premium
-   Special patient contribution (SPC)

For this reason, the difference between the amount paid and the amount
refunded may be greater, resulting in the claimant being refunded less
than they expected.

RHCA - visitors and PBS patient refunds

Visitors from Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) countries may or
may not be issued a Medicare card.

All eligible visitors covered under the RHCA are entitled to patient
refunds for valid PBS prescriptions except for section 100 In-Vitro
Fertilisation medicines.

Power of Attorney (POA), Guardianship and Administrative Orders

POA, Guardianship and Administration Orders give people the authority to
act on behalf of another individual and can vary on a case-by-case
basis. Each patient refund claim made by a claimant with this legal
authority will be considered to determine whether they are allowed to
claim on behalf of another individual.

Note: Services Australia is required to either sight the original POA,
Guardianship or Administration Order documents or a certified copy of
the original documents.

Contents

Process a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient refund

Related links

Process a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) patient refund

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
