
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about the policies and process for
Medicare claims.

Government intent

Medicare provides access to medical, allied health and hospital services
for all Australian residents, including permanent residents of Norfolk
Island and certain categories of visitors to Australia. Services
Australia administers the payment of Medicare benefits.

Under Medicare, benefits are paid for professional services listed in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) that are provided to eligible
patients in and out of hospital.

Medicare benefits are payable only for 'clinically relevant' services
rendered by an appropriate health practitioner. A 'clinically relevant'
service is one that is generally accepted by the relevant profession as
necessary for the appropriate treatment of the patient.

When a service is not clinically relevant, the fee and payment
arrangements are a private matter between the practitioner and the
patient.

Medical practitioners are free to set own fees for their professional
service.

Medicare Benefits Schedule

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) is a listing of the professional
services that attract a Medicare benefit.

Each service includes a unique item number, a description, the Schedule
fee and Medicare benefit, together with a reference to an explanatory
note relating to the item (if applicable).

The MBS is not a legal document. It operates under the Health Insurance
Act 1973 (as amended) and, in cases of discrepancy, the legislation is
the source for payments of Medicare benefits.

Medicare benefits

In general, the Medicare benefit is 85% of the fee listed in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for the service (known as the Schedule
fee).

For attendances provided by general practitioners (GP) (or on behalf of
a GP) to out of hospital patients, the Medicare benefit is 100% of the
listed Schedule fee.

For professional services provided to private hospital patients
(admitted to either a private or public hospital) the Medicare benefit
is 75% of the listed Schedule fee.

Public patients admitted to public hospitals, receive free medical and
hospital treatment funded under state/territory arrangements, therefore
are not entitled to Medicare benefits.

The Resources page contains Medicare claims helpdesk and Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) contact details.

Contents

Claims processing in Medicare

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

Latter day adjustments (LDA) and HELD payments in for patient claims

Simplified billing claims in Medicare

Simplified billing latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare

Medicare Safety Net

Cheque processing in Medicare

Medicare Two-way and claims processing

Medicare Easyclaim service

Electronic funds transfers (EFT) for Medicare claims

Medicare electronic claiming

Medicare online claiming

Telephone claiming service for Medicare

Medicare benefit tax statements

Medicare Claims Review Panel (MCRP)

Bank Reconciliation Electronic Funds Transfer Enquiry (BREFTE) system
for Medicare

Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) for Medicare
claims

Medicare Patient History (NHSI) Mainframe

Related links

Using Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
