
Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS telephony 011-40120020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to support staff handling incoming
and outbound phone calls in Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) telephony.

Incoming phone calls greeting

Service Officers should use a greeting when answering phone calls that
ends with the Service Officer's name as the last word.

For example, 'Hello this is Sarah' rather than 'Hello Sarah speaking'.

PBS Authority call handling

The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authority telephony service has
separate policy advice.

See Related links for information on call enquiries and release of
information specifically for PBS queries.

Mandatory security checks

Staff must perform security checks before answering enquiries or
updating information.

See Authenticating a Medicare customer for more details.

Mandatory Sensitive Information Indicators checks

If a Sensitive Information alert displays when accessing a record in
CDMS, staff must check active Sensitive Information Indicators before
answering enquiries or updating information.

The alert may indicate the customer has a password for:

-   enquiries
-   safety concerns, or
-   other needs to consider

To check active Sensitive Information Indicators, select the Yes link
against the customer in the:

-   Consumers table in Personal
-   Members Details tab in Group

See Sensitive Information Indicators in CDMS for more details.

Mandatory password checks

A customer may have a Sensitive Information Indicator for a password for
enquiries.

A Sensitive Information Indicator for a password has the following
labels:

-   Category: Identity
-   Indicator type: Password for enquiries
-   Comment: the password is recorded in the Comment field

If a customer has a password, staff must:

-   complete the usual security checks, then
-   ask the customer to provide their password

If a customer cannot provide their exact password, they are
unauthenticated.

See Customer password for Medicare enquiries for more details.

Mandatory bank details check

During every Medicare customer interaction (every customer, every time):

-   customer bank details must be confirmed, and
-   relevant comments keyed in CDMS Personal

Note: this does not apply to PBS customer interactions.

Cyber Security

When a member of the public advises or is concerned that personal
records/identity may have been compromised or accessed, Service Officers
should:

advise that Services Australia:

-   treats unauthorised access to Medicare numbers and privacy
    seriously, and
-   takes every precaution to protect the sensitive information and
    payments it makes on behalf of the Australian Government

assure that a Medicare number is not sufficient to access any personal
health records or personal health data. See Release of claims
information in Medicare for further information on when this is
permitted

discuss self service options (Express Plus Medicare mobile app and
myGov) as a way of tracking all transactions

If fraud or a privacy breach is suspected or reported, see Identity
fraud for further information.

If a scam is reported, see Advice of a scam or theft or loss of personal
information. The Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk can also provide
support and advice if a scam has been detected.

Phone etiquette and standards

Phone principles

Service Officers:

-   manage emotions during calls
-   recognise and manage complaints
-   are assertive
-   maintain and encourage vocal health
-   offer alternative communication channels to callers
-   promote the digital strategy as appropriate to the call – see the
    self service index for support

The Resources page contains a link to the National Feedback Tool.

Hold facility

Always obtain the caller's permission to put them on hold. Explain why,
and offer alternatives:

-   holding
-   leaving a message
-   speaking to someone else (ensure a warm transfer is done)

Mute facility

The 'Mute' facility on a phone is useful for times when it may be
necessary, for example, to cough or sneeze during the conversation. Use
'mute' for short periods only.

Sourcing further information for callers

If Service Officers cannot find the right information for the caller and
need more time, they should explain to the caller that they are finding
the correct information for them. Make sure to:

-   make it personal (use their name)
-   get agreement

Conference calls initiated by customers

Services Australia staff may need to speak to a third party over the
phone initiated by the caller ‘in’ to the call, or putting the third
party on speaker.

Staff must:

ensure the individual has consented to the disclosure to the unrelated
third party

document on the individual’s Medicare record:

-   that customer initiated the involvement of the third party in their
    call
-   customer’s consent and details to reflect the consent in this
    one-off occurrence

ensure the call recording privacy script is read and agreed once the
third party joins the call

Outbound phone calls

Services Australia staff may be required to make outbound calls to
members of the public, medical providers, and authorised third parties.

Service Officers make outbound calls for a variety of reasons, mainly
to:

-   follow up incomplete, incorrect or illegible forms
-   clarify EFT account details or claimant details
-   clarify Organ Donor Registration forms (batched processing work)

Service Officers should:

-   introduce themselves and advise they are calling from Services
    Australia
-   avoid making outbound calls before 9 am or after 8 pm (local time
    for the member of the public or provider). The Service Officer’s
    business line may require for Service Officers to raise proficiency
    of a work item so that staff working during normal contact hours can
    attempt customer contact
-   only make one outbound contact attempt within a 24 hour period.
    However, if the situation is urgent or requires an immediate
    response, Service Officers may continue contact attempts via phone
    for as long as necessary
-   complete the appropriate level security check for the call type
    being performed
-   ensure they tell the customer that the call may be recorded or
    listened to for quality and coaching purposes

Note:

-   The Service Officer must not disclose the reason for the call or
    identify the team they work with. This could reveal the type of
    business the person has with the agency and impact their privacy. Be
    aware of privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls,
    or leaving messages on answering machines.
-   Phone numbers should be obtained from the Medicare claim form, or
    from one of Services Australia’s databases
-   As a last resort, the phone number may be obtained from the online
    white pages directory

The Resources page contains a link to the white pages website.

Leaving a message during an outbound phone call

Messages should not be left on an answering machine where the phone
number has been obtained outside Services Australia sources.

If the call directs to a voicemail or answering machine (where the
contact number was obtained from a Services Australia source), Service
Officers can leave a generic message that ensures customer privacy is
maintained and request the customer to contact.

Note: the Service Officer must not disclose the reason for the call or
identify the team they work with. This could reveal the type of business
the person has with the agency and impact their privacy. Be aware of
privacy concerns when calling customers returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines.

Add a note into CDMS, if applicable, in the following format:

-   Attempted to contact <insert name> to <insert reason>. Left VM
    request to return the call

If someone who offers alternative means to contact the person being
called answers the phone, this is acceptable.

Note: Services Australia records should not be updated without consent
of the person concerned.

Receiving returned outbound calls

When a member of the public or the provider responds to a message left
on an outbound call, Service Officers must follow the security check
guidelines to confirm the caller's identity.

Note: assure the caller that the security check is to verify their
identity and prevent information being disclosed to someone else.

Unreturned outbound calls

If the member of the public or provider does not return the call, send a
Standard Letter Template within 2 working days requesting that they
contact Services Australia.

Handling abusive or aggressive calls

Services Australia supports Service Officers in being assertive during
any abusive or aggressive calls. In response to an abusive or aggressive
call, the following must be followed:

-   acknowledge the reason for the abusive call, for example, long wait
    times, inaccurate or misleading information, lack of training or
    support
-   display appropriate empathy
-   respond courteously and calmly
-   accept ownership of the call
-   calm situation by using vocal skills
-   remain in control of call
-   summarise action to be taken
-   refer call to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) or Team Leader if
    the contact escalates beyond the Service Officer's area of expertise
-   end call on a positive note

Team Leaders should ensure that Service Officers are given support after
handling an abusive or aggressive call. This includes time to debrief
and recover away from the general work area if required.

Access to employee assistance programs should be offered as required.
Ensure all staff are aware of their responsibilities under the APS
Values and Code of Conduct.

Customers placing Service Officers on hold

Being placed on hold for a short time is sometimes appropriate,
depending on the nature of the call.

Determining factors could include:

-   the nature of the hold request (doctor asking patient a question,
    MCR lawyer looking for case file, customer looking for Medicare
    number, pharmacist advising customer they are on a call)
-   audience on the call (interpreter involved, getting family member
    for security clearance)
-   exceptional circumstances involved (e.g. FDV calls)

If the caller:

-   already has the Service Officer on hold before speaking with them,
    allow 30 seconds for the customer to return to the phone. If the
    caller does not return in that time, terminate the call
-   asks to place a Service Officer on hold during the call and
    circumstances do not warrant this action, the Service Officer should
    tell the caller that they are unable to hold and ask them to call
    back later

Vocal health

Service Officers need to look after their vocal health.

Information Centre management helps Service Officers look after their
vocal health by ensuring:

Service Officers take regular voice breaks

training is provided:

-   positioning of microphone
-   volume controls
-   voice care training and awareness

Service Officers have easy access to drinking water

background noise is minimised

The Resources page contains:

-   information on PBS Authority call handling
-   contact details
-   links to National Feedback Tool, Privacy Incident Portal and the
    White pages

Related links

Call transfers for Medicare and PBS telephony

Call tracing for Medicare and PBS telephony

Call enquiries in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Release of information in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA)

Customer password for Medicare enquiries

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
