
Obstetrics services for Medicare 011-42060040

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see

Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines Medicare obstetric services. Obstetrics is the
medical specialty dealing with the care of a patient during pregnancy
(antenatal period), childbirth (intrapartum period) and after delivery
(postpartum period).

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) obstetric items

MBS Category 3 - Therapeutic Procedures includes group T4 which is
dedicated to specific obstetric services. In addition to these,
obstetric services may be provided from the following MBS categories:

-   Category 1 Professional attendances
-   Category 3 Therapeutic procedures (Group T6 Anaesthesia)
-   Category 5 Diagnostic imaging services
-   Category 6 Pathology services
-   Category 8 Miscellaneous Services (Group M13 Midwifery and Group M19
    Midwifery telehealth and telephone services)

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online for more information.

Health professional eligibility

Medicare funded obstetric services are provided by a diverse range of
health professionals. Health professionals who most commonly provide
obstetric services include (but are not limited to):

-   general practitioners (GP)
-   non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners (non-VR MP)
-   practice nurse/Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health
    practitioners working on behalf of a GP
-   obstetricians and specialists
-   paediatricians
-   anaesthetists
-   participating midwives

Antenatal care

Antenatal care or 'prenatal' care covers consultations and check-ups
associated with pregnancy before birth, except for the initial
consultation at which pregnancy is confirmed.

The Resources page contains a sample of common item numbers and claiming
frequencies applied to antenatal MBS items.

Approaches to antenatal care

Antenatal care can be provided in primary health and hospital settings
by a range of health professionals. Models of antenatal care include:

-   Public hospital care - the patient attends the hospital for all
    aspects of their antenatal care and receives care from hospital
    doctors and midwives. Note: Medicare benefits are not payable for
    these services
-   General Practitioner (GP) care - the patient sees a GP throughout
    the pregnancy
-   Private obstetrician or private midwife care - the patient sees a
    private obstetrician or midwife throughout the pregnancy
-   Private obstetrician and GP - the patient sees a GP regularly during
    the antenatal period with specific visits to an obstetrician
-   Shared care - several health professionals are involved in the care
    of a patient during pregnancy often in the context of a formal
    arrangement; health professionals involved may include GPs,
    midwives, other primary care health professionals, specialist
    obstetricians and hospital practitioners
-   Midwife care - midwives are the primary providers of care for the
    patient; this may be through a team of midwives sharing a caseload
    (team midwifery) or a patient receiving care from one midwife or
    their practice partner (caseload midwifery)

As well as these health professionals, others who may have an integral
role in the antenatal care team where available include Aboriginal
health workers, maternity liaison officers, bilingual or multicultural
health workers and sonographers. Child and family health workers,
psychologists, nutritionists and drug and alcohol workers may also play
a role in a person’s antenatal care.

Intrapartum (in childbirth) care

This care covers the consultations and procedures during labour and
delivery. This period includes the onset of labour to the end of the
third stage of labour.

The Resources page contains a sample of common item numbers and claiming
frequencies applied to intrapartum MBS items.

Postpartum (postnatal) care

This care covers the consultations and procedures provided immediately
after the birth of a child. The postpartum period is usually considered
as 6 to 8 weeks after birth.

For Medicare purposes, the day of birth is regarded as the first
postpartum day.

Items that include words such as the following cover all attendances on
the mother and baby by the medical practitioners who supervised the
labour and delivery (confinement) for the period specified in the item
description:

-   'management of labour and birth including post-partum care for 5
    days'
-   'including postnatal care for 7 days'
-   ‘post-operative care for 7 days' in the case of Caesarean section

The Resources page contains FAQs including some about postpartum care.
It also contains a sample of common item numbers and claiming
frequencies applied to postpartum MBS items.

Mental health assessments for obstetric patients

Items for the planning and management of pregnancy (16590 and 16591) and
for a postpartum attendance between 4 and 8 weeks after birth (16407)
include a mental health assessment of the patient. This includes
screening for drug and alcohol use and domestic violence, to be
performed by the clinician or another suitably qualified health
professional on behalf of the clinician.

A mental health assessment must be offered to each patient. However, if
the patient chooses not to undertake the assessment, this does not
preclude a rebate being payable for these items.

It is recommended that mental health assessments associated with items
16590, 16591, and 16407 be conducted in accordance with the National
Perinatal Mental Health Guideline. The Resources page contains a link.

Results of the mental health assessment must be recorded in the
patient’s medical record.

A record of a patient’s decision not to undergo a mental health
assessment must be recorded in the patient’s clinical notes.

Examination of newborn infants

Examination by a medical practitioner of all newborn infants soon after
birth is included in the benefits allocated for postpartum care.

Any medical practitioner who practices obstetrics should be competent to
manage and routinely examine the newborn infant.

Where the practitioner determines that the newborn infant requires
examination by a consultant or specialist paediatrician, the
responsibility for referral rests with the doctor in charge of the
mother and newborn infant.

Medicare benefits are payable for attendances at high risk births and
supervision of premature newborn infants.

Routine examinations of newborn infants by a consultant or specialist
paediatrician do not attract benefits where no complications are
apparent.

Obstetric care provided by participating midwives

Medicare benefits are payable for treatment by eligible privately
practising midwives working collaboratively for the following services:

-   antenatal (during pregnancy before childbirth)
-   intrapartum (in childbirth)
-   postnatal (up to 6 weeks post-delivery)
-   referral of a patient to a specified medical practitioner
-   transfer of the patient's care to an obstetric specified medical
    practitioner

A collaborative arrangement is one between an eligible midwife and a
specified medical practitioner or hospital. It must provide for
consultation with an obstetric specified medical practitioner as
clinically relevant to ensure safe, high quality maternity care.

There is no limit attached to long and short postnatal attendances
(items 82130, 82135, 91214, 91215, 91221, 91222) by a participating
midwife in the first 6 weeks post-delivery.

Only one participating midwife postnatal check (item 82140), performed
at 6 weeks, is payable per pregnancy. After this, the patient would be
referred back to their usual GP.

Postnatal attendance items by participating midwives (for example, item
82130) cannot be claimed in the same pregnancy as postnatal attendance
items for midwives attending on behalf of and under the supervision of
the medical practitioner who attended the birth (for example, item
16408).

The Resources page contains links to MBS Online and to the Department of
Health and Aged Care website for more information on eligibility, MBS
items, prescribing and referring for obstetric pathology and diagnostic
imaging. It also contains more information on midwifery MBS item
claiming frequencies.

Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) and obstetric services

EMSN benefit caps apply to most obstetric services. This means there is
a maximum amount of EMSN benefits payable regardless of the
out-of-pocket costs incurred.

Once the relevant EMSN threshold has been met, the claimant is entitled
to the Medicare benefit, plus, for out-of-hospital services, whichever
is the lower amount of either:

-   EMSN benefit (80% of out-of-pocket costs)
-   EMSN percentage cap (may vary between item numbers), or
-   EMSN maximum cap (may vary between item numbers)

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online which states the EMSN
cap for each MBS item.

For more information on eligibility, thresholds and calculations, see
Medicare Safety Net.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to MBS Online and other external websites
-   frequently asked questions
-   claiming frequencies (time dependencies)

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

General assessing information for Medicare

Professional attendance assessing rules in Medicare

Therapeutic procedures assessing rules in Medicare

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Understanding Pathology assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

QITI assessing information system

Medicare Safety Net

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
