
Amend organ donor registration 011-11030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to amend an organ donor
registration in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR), including
objection to donate/no decisions.

On this Page:

Organ donor registration types

There are 3 types of organ donor records stored in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the public:

Donor Only Entitlement

-   not linked to a Medicare entitlement
-   Donor Only records cannot be created by Service Officers

AODR Entitlement with a Medicare number supplied

-   linked to a Medicare entitlement (where the registrant’s Medicare
    card number is supplied at the time of registering or at a later
    date to link a donor only entitlement)
-   updates made to the registrant’s personal details with Medicare will
    automatically update their organ donor registration

AODR Entitlement without a Medicare number supplied

-   linked to a Consumer ID without a Medicare entitlement
-   this record type can potentially be a duplicate
-   Medicare card and reference numbers are not listed on the Donor
    Decision Details tab
-   has been created due to the registrant either not supplying their
    Medicare number or not being registered with Medicare, e.g.
    temporary residents, DVA clients etc.

Note: the donor entitlement type is located at the top of the CDMS
screen. Duplicate Consumer ID records must be escalated for deletion via
the AODR PSO Team to AODR Policy.

Organ donor registration amendments

Organ Donor registrations (AODR or Donor Only entitlement) may need to
be updated upon request by the organ donor, or if an error was made when
the registration was initially processed.

If the Organ Donor Registrant (ODR) has:

an AODR (linked) entitlement, then:

-   changes can be made to their Donation Decision details
-   changes to their personal details, including title, must follow
    Medicare rules and procedures including changing address in Medicare
    Group

a Donor Only entitlement, then:

-   changes can be made to both Personal and Donation details

Note: date of last contact must be updated with the date the donor last:

visited a service centre - face to face (without a form)

telephoned (only for intent registrations – cannot update a consent
record via phone)

signed and dated a mailed form - letter/ mail received

-   if the form has not been dated/incomplete/invalid, the date the form
    was received should be used

See Amend a person’s Medicare enrolment details.

The Resources page contains information regarding the rules associated
with removing Entitlement End Date and End Date Reason where the member
of the public has an AODR entitlement recorded in CDMS.

Processing Rules

To avoid duplicate registrations, a Search for existing organ donor
registration or entitlements must be completed:

-   before creating a new organ donor registration in CDMS, and
-   for all processing of forms

Forms not signed - return with the appropriate letter (digital
signatures via electronic document signing programs are accepted)

Forms for persons under the age of 16 –return with the appropriate
letter. No details are updated on Medicare

All organ donor registration enquiries must pass a security check before
confirming or accessing registration and donation decisions

The Process page has information about forms not previously registered
with blank organs and/or tissue for donation, conflicting decisions
change address/personal details.

Processing rules must be actioned prior to registering or amending AODR
Donor and Medicare records. If unable to finalise AODR, scan and send
the registration form to the AODR email box for upload to PaNDA.

Where the registration form has been assigned to an operator incorrectly
in PaNDA, raise proficiency to be actioned by AODR trained staff.

Notes:

-   once updated in an AODR registration within CDMS, a date of contact
    and/or decision can not be reversed or backdated
-   the donor registration number on forms (or in 'Processing Notes' if
    using PaNDA), once processing is complete. Do not write over any
    personal information or signatures

Objection to donate organs – No Decision

When a person registers their objection to being a donor with the Donor
Register, donation will not proceed unless:

-   the person subsequently changes their mind, and
-   their family confirm this to be the case

Objections to donate are shown as a ‘No’ Decision Type in the Donor
Register and can be known as being a non-donor.

The objection to donate covers:

-   bone tissue
-   eye tissue
-   heart
-   heart valves
-   kidneys
-   liver
-   lungs
-   pancreas and skin tissue

When a customer registers their objection to donate as a no decision
they receive an automated confirmation letter. A card is not included
with the letter.

Note:

-   if the donor has an existing ‘Yes’ consent registration and requests
    to register their objection to donate, they must complete and return
    a new form
-   the processing of an objection is similar to a new ‘Yes’
    registration. However, the Organs and/or Tissues for donation
    section is deselected to prompt a ‘No’ Donor Decision Type in
    Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). See Register new organ
    donor

Amend AODR entitlement with an end date

If a Service Officer attempts to amend a registration with an end date
and end date reason, the system does not allow any updates to occur
until:

-   the end date, and
-   end date reason has been removed

The system stops the Service Officer from continuing by returning an
error message.

The following End Date and End Date Reasons must be removed before the
Donor Only Entitlement can be deleted, linked or amended:

-   Deceased
-   Fact of Death
-   Permanent departure overseas
-   ODR request
-   Duplicate
-   Admin (Do not remove end date or update registration)

A member of the public can request that their registration details for
AODR be reinstated by completing a registration form.

Donor Media Type and Donor Delivery Type

For all amendments and enquiries, update the Media Type and/or Delivery
Type with the appropriate values.

If these fields were not changed, re-select the same values as
previously stated (displayed on the right hand side of the field).

The Resources page contains information regarding the rules associated
with removing Entitlement End Date and End Date Reason where the member
of the public has an AODR entitlement recorded in CDMS.

Forms with and without a Medicare number or authority to link to Medicare

Where an AODR registration form is received without a Medicare number
but with authority to link, conduct a search to:

-   locate
-   access, and
-   link to their Medicare record where available the same as with a
    Medicare number

No authority to link is where:

-   the Medicare number has not been provided
-   an authority to link to Medicare tick a box has not been selected

Do not access their Medicare record or update any Medicare details if no
authority to link has been provided/obtained. If there is an existing
Donor Only record, that record is to be updated as per the form.

Discrepancies in personal details and Donor Registration form

The Process page contains more information. Where Service Officers are
unsure/not trained in AODR, proficiency may be raised in PaNDA. This can
include comments for AODR trained staff to then action.

The Resources page contains information about the system error messages
and the relevant resolutions.

The Resources page contains information on:

-   removing Entitlement End Date AODR entitlement in CDMS
-   system errors Entitlement End Date Donor Only entitlement

Related links

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Register a new organ donor in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Link Donor Only entitlement to consumer record

Request replacement organ donor card

End date and remove requests for organ donor registration

Delete duplicate organ donor registration

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
