
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the different ways to enrol a newborn child in
Medicare depending if the application is received via Medicare online
accounts and Medicare Newborn Enrolment (MAENROL) document and what to
do if the newborn is unnamed, only one name or has a long name.

Customer contacts the agency

When a customer contacts the agency by phone about their application,
suitably skilled Service Officers must attempt first contact resolution.
Service Officers not skilled in this work type should follow the
Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

Note: all Financial hardship and vulnerable customer claims, must be
processed at first point of contact. Service Officers not skilled in
this work type, must escalate to a PSO for assistance.

Partner is the applicant

The partner can complete the [] Centrelink online claim and submit the
Medicare enrolment application (MS004) form and request for their
newborn to be enrolled in Medicare.

If both parents are on the same Medicare card, then enrol the newborn on
the parent’s family card

If the partner is on their own Medicare card and wants to enrol the
child on their card, the Service Officer must:

-   sight evidence of the partner’s parental relationship with the child
    (birth certificate or other legal documentation), or
-   sight or obtain verbal consent from the birth mother to enrol the
    child on the partner’s card

If the partner is the applicant and on the same card as the birth
mother, it is okay to enrol newborn without obtaining verbal consent
from the birth mother as long as parental relationship documents are
sighted or mother’s signature is on the FA081 form.

The below options are deemed acceptable for a partner to provide
evidence of their parental relationship to the newborn child to enrol
the newborn onto their Medicare card:

[] Online claim

The partner can complete the online claim and submit:

-   the back page of the FA081 form along with evidence of their
    parental relationship with the child (birth certificate or other
    legal documentation), or
-   all 4 pages of the FA081 form including their details, the birth
    mother’s details and both their signature and the birth mother’s
    signature

If the partner has completed the online claim and:

-   both parent’s details and signatures are on the form the newborn can
    be enrolled on both Medicare cards
-   only submitted the back page of the FA081 form, if both parents are
    on the same Medicare card, the newborn can be enrolled

[] Newborn enrolment using Medicare online accounts

The partner can enrol their newborn/s using Medicare online accounts. If
the partner is on their own Medicare card and wishes to enrol the child
on their card, the Service Officer must:

-   sight evidence of the partner’s parental relationship with the child
    (birth certificate or other legal documentation), or all pages of
    the completed Child Declaration (FA081), or
-   sight or obtain verbal consent from the birth mother to enrol the
    child on the partner’s card

If the partner has completed:

-   Medicare enrolment form and both parent’s details and signatures are
    on the form the newborn can be enrolled on both Medicare cards
-   the online claim and only submitted the back page of the FA081 form,
    provided both parents are on the same Medicare card, the newborn can
    be enrolled

MS004 form

-   the partner can complete and submit Part C of the MS004 form along
    with evidence of their parental relationship to the child (birth
    certificate or other legal documentation), or
-   if the nominated partner in Part C of the MS004 form is the birth
    mother and she also signs the form, the form can be submitted along
    with the back page of the FA081 form or the doctor/midwife’s
    declaration of birth

If both parent’s details and signatures are on the form and they have
ticked 'yes' to adding the newborn to their Medicare card, the newborn
can be enrolled on both Medicare cards.

The child cannot be enrolled until adequate evidence is provided. If the
Service Officer is unable to make immediate contact with the partner or
the birth mother, the standard letter template must be completed.

The Resources page contains a links to the standard letter templates.

Document verification

Identification documents must be verified in the Document Verification
System (DVS) before processing the application. Table 9 on the Process
page contains details on how to verify and record this information.

Unnamed newborn

Services Australia can enrol a newborn child when they have not yet been
named. This may occur when the newborn requires urgent medical treatment
following their birth and they require access to Medicare.

When registering a newborn child not yet named, Service Officers must
key ‘Newborn' as the child's first name when entering their personal
details.

For a multiple birth, the newborns must be enrolled by order of birth.
‘Newborn 1’, ‘Newborn 2’, ‘Newborn 3’, etc. must be keyed as the first
name.

Newborns are not to be enrolled using any other term except for the
above, and their last name.

When notified of the child’s legal name, documentation must be provided
before it can be updated and a new Medicare card issued.

See Change of name on Medicare record.

Only one name (‘only name’ enrolment)

An ‘only name’ enrolment occurs where the newborn has only one name -
there is no separate last name and first name.

When enrolling a newborn with an only name, Service Officers must enter
the name in the last name field only and select the Only Name Indicator
box.

Long names

If a legal name is a long name, it usually requires enrolment of the
person on their own Medicare card. Medicare allows names to be shortened
so all family members can be enrolled on the same Medicare card.

A name is considered long when any of the following apply:

-   the person's last name contains more than 18 characters
-   their first given name contains more than 12 characters, or
-   the combination of their first name, initial and family name have
    more than 25 characters, (including spaces between the names)

If a newborn has a long name, a parent has 2 options:

-   the newborn child can be enrolled on their own Medicare card, or
-   the newborn child's name can be shortened to enable enrolment on the
    family Medicare card

The Service Officer must contact the applicant to get advice on which
option they prefer.

If contact cannot be made with the mother, the newborn must be enrolled
on their own Medicare card. A long name record must be created to make
sure the correct name is embossed on the card and the birth mother as
the group contact.

The Process page contains more details.

If the applicant chooses to shorten the newborn child’s name, it must
only be made at Group level. The legal name of the child is still held
at Personal level.

If a name is hyphenated and the applicant wants to remove one of the
names, this is considered a name change, not shortening a name. It would
require documentation. See Change legal name on Medicare record.

[] If the applicant submits an enrolment on Medicare online accounts and
the child has a long name, they will be presented with 2 options:

-   the newborn child can be enrolled on their own Medicare card, or
-   the newborn child’s name can be shortened to enable enrolment on the
    family Medicare card

When processing an enrolment submitted via Medicare online accounts,
contact with the applicant to confirm how they want to treat the long
name is not required. See Process newborn child enrolment (MOA) from
CDMS Provisional Registration screen table.

Parent with long name

If the parent has a long name, the child cannot be added to their
Medicare card. The newborn must be enrolled on their own card with the
parent as the group contact and a comment placed in Group in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Parents/guardians cannot use their Medicare online account to make a
Medicare claim for a newborn on their own card.

See Process newborn child enrolment for newborn with long name table.

My Health Record questions for a newborn

My Health Record preferences are processed in the Medicare entitlement
screens in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). The
following conditions must be met for the applicant to be eligible to
answer the My Health Record question(s):

-   question is on the form
-   applicant provides appropriate evidence of parental responsibility
    (outlined for each form below), and
-   applicant has completed the question(s)

If any of the conditions are not met, select: Question is not on form or
not answered.

Do not select Consumer does not want a My Health Record if any of the
conditions are not met.

If all of the conditions are met, the applicant’s My Health Record
choice should be processed as one of the following:

-   Consumer does not want a My Health Record
-   Consumer does want a My Health Record

Conditions are slightly different for each form.

See also Processing My Health Record options – tips and error reporting.

Newborn Child Declaration FA081

If all of the conditions below are met, the Service Officer can process
the applicant’s My Health Record preference:

-   Question is on the FA081
-   The birth mother is the applicant or has signed as the partner on
    the form, and
-   Applicant has completed question

The birth mother’s parental responsibility evidence is the proof of
birth page.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app and Online claim

The birth mother can complete the My Health Record questions online. The
My Health Record toggle does not appear for other applicants.

-   My Health Record toggle I do not want a My Health Record for my
    newborn child is included in the questions, and
-   Applicant uploads Proof of Birth page

The birth mother’s parental responsibility evidence is the proof of
birth page.

If the applicant is not the birth mother, select Question is not on form
or not answered in CDMS.

Medicare enrolment application form (MS004) - Part C - Enrolling a
newborn child

If all of the conditions below are met, the Service Officer can process
the applicant’s My Health Record preference:

-   Questions are on the MS004
-   Applicant has provided evidence of parental responsibility, and
-   Applicant has completed the My Health Record question

The birth mother’s parental responsibility evidence is the proof of
birth page. Other applicants can also provide the Proof of Birth page if
the birth mother has signed as the partner.

If the birth mother has not signed the MS004 as the partner, other
applicants must provide a birth certificate, adoption papers or court
orders.

The Resources page contains a link to the My Health Record Website for
information on applying in other ways for a My Health Record on behalf
of a child.

The Resources page contains:

links to letter templates

the MS004 and FA081 forms

My Health Record Website

contact details for:

-   Medicare eligibility and enrolments, and
-   My Health Record

Services Australia and myGov Websites

a list of Medicare entitlement type of newborn, and

acceptable proof of birth documents

Related links

Change legal name on Medicare record

Complex eligibility and entitlement type of newborn child enrolments in
Medicare

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Customer enquiries about newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Individual registrations in the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Lodgement of newborn child enrolments in Medicare at service centre

National Programme Support Officers (PSO) line for Medicare and PBS

Newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Processing My Health Record options - tips and error reporting

Register children (including children in care) for Medicare Safety Net

System functionality of the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
