
Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about payments, refunds and debts for
Medicare Compensation Recovery, Compensation Finance and Debt Recovery
teams under the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995 (the
HOSC Act), inclusive of advance payments, non-advance payments, notice
of charge payments and voluntary recoveries.

Multiple compensation payers

Notification of claims

Services Australia (the agency) is notified by:

-   The first defendant in the compensation case, or
-   Each individual compensation payer

The compensation payer must notify the agency where the total amount
awarded is fixed at greater than $5,000.

Note: where multiple compensation payers settle a case on the same day
for the same injury or illness and apportion the amounts to be paid
between the parties, consider the total sum of all amounts payable by
all compensation payers to determine if the case is notifiable.

First defendant

The first defendant is nominated as the principal point of contact with
the agency when all the compensation payers involved in a single
compensation case agree to this arrangement.

The role of the first defendant is to:

-   Notify the agency of the claim
-   Provide all relevant documentation, and
-   Be responsible for any amounts owing to the agency

Normal processing applies to these cases and only the first defendant
will receive a response.

Notification from each individual compensation payer

If multiple compensation payers involved in a single compensation case
notify the agency individually, contact the compensation payers (if
required) to confirm it is the same case and determine which
compensation payer is the first defendant.

Payments from multiple compensation payers

Where the agency receives multiple payments from different compensation
payers in relation to an advance payment (multiple compensation payers
are responsible to pay a portion of the total advance payment), consider
all payments when calculating whether a refund is payable to the injured
person or claimant or if a further debt is owed.

In these circumstances, manually process the notice of past benefits to
make sure all payments are reconciled before the case is finalised.

Advance payments

About advance payments

A compensation payer may choose to make an advance payment under section
33B of the HOSC Act. An intended advance payment is:

-   Any amount greater or less than 10% of the total compensable amount
    of the judgment or settlement
-   Payable where the total amount of compensation (including legal
    costs for settlements) is more than $5,000
-   Notified to the agency on a completed Medicare Compensation Recovery
    Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022), and to the claimant
    in writing
-   Made where no valid notice of charge exists on the date of
    settlement (see Intended advance payments below)

Note: when an advance payment does not equal exactly 10%, the CP057K
letter must not be issued and must be deleted from the Print Queue
Maintenance application.

After the agency has received an advance payment, the compensation payer
can then release the remainder of the settlement sum to the injured
person or claimant before the amount owed to the agency has been
determined. Once an advance payment has been made, the compensation
payer is not entitled to receive any further information relating to the
case, including:

-   Details of any debts owed by the injured person, or
-   Any amounts deducted from the advance payment

Note: where a notice of past benefits has been issued within 6 months of
the day on which the judgment or settlement is fixed, it becomes the
notice of charge and an advance payment cannot be made.

Advance payments and Centrelink clearance

While the insurer or compensation payer may need to wait for a
Centrelink clearance under the Social Security Act 1991 (SS Act) before
releasing a compensation payment to the person, this does not prevent
them from making an advance payment.

The SS Act states that it is an offence for a potential compensation
payer or insurer to release payment of compensation to a person if they
have been given a notice under section 1182 or 1184 of that act
(recovery from compensation payers and insurers). As an advance payment
made to the agency in accordance with the HOSC Act is not a payment of
compensation to a person, making an advance payment is not an offence
under the SS Act.

If the compensation payer is unable to comply with the advance payment
requirements under section 33B of the HOSC Act it remains an option to
them to withhold payment of the compensation amount under section 32 of
the HOSC Act and request a notice of charge from the agency.

Criteria for advance payments

If the compensation payer intends to make an advance payment, they must
notify the injured person in writing under section 33A of the HOSC Act.

The notice must state:

-   The compensation payer intends to make the advance payment
-   The amount of the advance payment
-   The circumstances in which the agency can retain some or all of the
    advance payment, and
-   The circumstances in which the injured person will be required to
    make an additional payment to the agency in respect of eligible
    benefits

A compensation payer can make the advance payment in respect of the
compensation payable, if:

-   A notice of past benefits has not been issued in respect of the
    claim in the 6 months preceding the day on which the judgment or
    settlement is fixed (see Intended advance payments below)
-   A notice of judgment or settlement under section 23 of the HOSC Act
    has been given to the agency indicating the compensation payer
    intends to make an advance payment
-   A notice under section 33A of the HOSC Act has been given to the
    injured person
-   The total amount of compensation fixed under the judgment or
    settlement (including legal costs) is fixed at more than $5,000
-   The advance payment is a portion of the total amount of compensation
    payable, and
-   The advance payment is made after the judgment or settlement was
    fixed

Any payment that does not meet the criteria for advance payments is
considered a failure to comply and will be treated as a voluntary
payment and used to offset any debt to the insurer. See Voluntary
Payment under ‘Other Payments’ on this page.

The References page contains legislation relevant to Division 2A -
Advance payments to the Commonwealth.

Intended advance payment

Where a payment is received that is 10% of the total compensable amount
on a case where a valid notice of past benefits exists, any refund is
made as if it was an advance payment.

Advance payment and payment of notice of past benefits received for the
same case

Where the agency receives an advance payment and has previously received
payment for a notice of past benefits, consider both payments when
calculating whether a refund is payable to the injured person or
claimant or if a further debt is owed.

In these circumstances, manually process the notice of past benefits to
ensure both payments are reconciled before the case is finalised.

Finalising advance payment cases

Following receipt of an advance payment, finalise the case in
consultation with the injured person or claimant. Deduct any eligible
benefits owed (if applicable) from the advance payment.

The amount to be repaid to the agency is calculated by the following:

-   If a statement by claimant is not returned by the injured person or
    claimant, all services are taken as relating to the injury or
    illness
-   If a completed statement by claimant is returned, all eligible
    benefits identified by the injured person or claimant are taken as
    relating to the injury or illness
-   If a valid section 23A statement is received and accepted, the
    amount specified in the expired notice of past benefits or, no
    repayment if a notice of past benefits has not been previously
    issued
-   Any advice received from the agency relating to nursing home
    benefits or residential and home care subsidies incurred by the
    injured person

Note: under Section 33D the agency must finalise an advance payment case
within 3 months of receiving a notice of judgment or settlement or the
advance payment, whichever is the later.

Where an extension was granted, if the new statement return date is
after the section 33D(1) date (3 months after the date of receipt of
notice or judgment or settlement or advance payment, whichever is
later), the new 33D date is 28 days after the new statement return date.
For example, if the section 33D(1) date was 2 April 2020, but the
extension to return the statement was granted until 10 April 2020, a
notice of change must be issued by 8 May 2020. Where the agency does not
meet this timeframe the whole of the advance payment is payable to the
injured person or claimant, discharging the injured person’s liability
to pay any amounts owed.

Cases where the whole of the advance payment is payable to the injured
person or claimant need to be reported to Programme Management at case
closure. Complete the 'S33K report' email template.

The Resources page contains a link to the ‘S33K report email’ template.

The References page a link to Division 2A - Advance payments to the
Commonwealth.

Reconciliation of eligible benefits

Where the amount owed is less than the amount of the advance payment,
the difference is payable by the agency to the injured person or
claimant.

Where the amount owed is more than the amount of the advance payment,
the difference is payable to the agency by the injured person or
claimant within 28 days after the notice is given.

Amount owed remains unpaid

When the injured person or claimant does not pay the agency within 28
days of the request, the amount is recoverable as a debt. Recovery of
the debt is commenced by the Debt Management Team.

Refer to process steps for Compensation Case Management System (CCMS) in
Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery and
Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Other payments

Voluntary payment

A voluntary payment:

-   Was not intended as an advance payment
-   Matches the notice of past benefits amount valid at the date of
    judgment or settlement
-   Is the notice of charge amount
-   Will be used to offset any debt owed by the injured person

Payment of the notice of charge

The notice of charge must be paid to the agency, either:

-   Within 28 days from the date of judgment or settlement, or
-   Within 28 days from the date the notice of charge is issued

A non-advance payment case can be closed, provided the judgment or
settlement documents are accepted by the agency. The compensation payer
is not permitted to release any settlement monies to the claimant until
all amounts owing to the agency have been repaid.

Payment of an expired notice of past benefits

Where valid judgment or settlement documents have been received by the
agency with payment of an expired notice of past benefits, the case can
only be finalised if:

-   a notice of past benefits previously issued and expired prior to the
    date of judgment or settlement is accompanied by a valid section 23A
    statement, and
-   the agency accepts the section 23A statement and issues a notice of
    charge

The compensation payer is not permitted to release any settlement monies
to the claimant until they receive the notice of charge and all amounts
owing to the agency have been repaid.

Party to receive a refund

Refunding an advance payment

When an advance payment or intended advance payment was received by the
agency, any refund due must be paid to the injured person or claimant in
accordance with section 33H of the Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995. However, a legal document may be provided that
directs the refund to a third party.

The Process page contains information on the steps for processing a
refund by referring to Q53 on the Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice
of judgment or settlement form (MO022).

See also Authority to release payment to a third party on this page.

Refunding miscellaneous payments

Refund according to payment type. The Process page contains information
on who to refund.

Refunding notice of charge and other payments

For notice of charge or other payments, the compensation payer is liable
to pay the total amount specified in the notice of charge to the agency.
The amount owing to the agency may be reduced if:

-   The claimant, within the period of 2 years from the date of judgment
    or settlement, satisfies the agency that not all of the services in
    the notice of charge (all services taken) were provided for
    treatment of the injury or illness
-   The judgment or settlement fixes the amount of compensation on the
    basis liability for the injury should be apportioned between the
    claimant and the compensation payer, or
-   The judgment fixes an amount of compensation specifying the past
    expenses component for medical, nursing home care, residential care
    and/or home care already incurred for the injury or illness

For other reasons for amending a notice of charge see Amended notices
and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Process page contains information on how to process a refund by
referring to Q53 on the Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of
judgment or settlement form (MO022).

Authority to release payment to a third party

An advance payment refund must be issued to the injured person unless a
legal document directing the release of the refund to a third party has
been provided.

Any advance payment refund to anyone other than the Public Trustee or
injured person/care of the claimant must be escalated to Programme
Management with the relevant documents. Cases must be escalated to
Programme Management where any doubt exists regarding the acceptability
of a document directing the refund to a third party.

These documents may be in the form of:

-   Court documents directing disbursement of the funds
-   Tribunal documents naming a financial administrator
-   Letter from a state trustee office confirming they are administering
    the funds
-   Guardianship documents
-   Garnishee notice, or
-   Notice under section 72A of the Child Support (Registration and
    Collection) Act 1988

Entitlement to the refund must be established at settlement, and be
described in settlement documentation, and processed accordingly prior
to finalising the case. Otherwise, the advance payment refund will go to
the injured person.

The References provides a link to the legislation.

The Medicare Compensation Recovery Third party authority (MO021) form
does not provide the authority to release any payment to a third party.

Refunds to a third party will be issued by cheque in the name of the
injured person and be directed to the nominated third party, once
confirmation in writing is received from the relevant Court or Trustee.
If there is no written documentation, do not issue a refund to the third
party.

Issue Public Trustee refunds for:

-   Tasmania and ACT by cheque
-   all other states by EFT

The Process page contains information on the Public Trustee refund
process.

Medicare Compensation Recovery Bank account details collection form MO024

-   The injured person may provide a MO024 form for payment of a refund
-   The Process page contains information on how to process a refund
    with a Bank account details form on file. That is, once the injured
    person is confirmed as the refund recipient.

Recovery of monies

All outstanding debts are payable to the agency within 28 days of the
date of judgment or settlement or receipt of the notice of charge
provided to either the compensation payer or the claimant.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Debt Recovery.

Recovery of outstanding debts

Medicare Debt Recovery are responsible for the recovery of any
outstanding debts owed to the agency. If a claimant or their solicitor
notifies the agency they are unable to repay a debt in full, they can
enter into a repayment plan directly with Medicare Debt Recovery.

Payment methods

Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payments

The agency’s preferred mode of receiving incoming payments is via EFT.
For those organisations who do not have access to EFT facilities, cheque
payments are accepted.

Payments are banked or deposited into the 'Services Australia Medicare
Official Recovery of Compensation for Health Care and Other Services
Special Account'.

Compensation payers are required to apply for a unique account number
before any payments can be made. If a compensation payer does not have a
unique account number, they can email the Compensation Finance team and
a unique account number will be created.

Compensation Finance will issue a letter with the unique account details
for the compensation payer along with the requirements, allowing
Compensation Finance to allocate the money to the correct case.
Compensation payers are required to email a remittance advice for any
EFT payment outlining the details of the injured person so payments can
be allocated to the correct case.

See: Accounts receivable and banking for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Cheque payments

Cheque payments should only be received together with a remittance
advice. Where no advice has been provided, Compensation Finance will
attempt to identify who the payment is for. If identified, a copy of the
receipting information is forwarded to Medicare Compensation Recovery
for scanning into the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS).
Cheques are usually banked within 2 working days. If the case cannot be
identified, either the funds will be allocated to a generic ‘87’ number
or the cheque will be returned to the sender with a request for further
information.

See: Accounts receivable and banking for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Types of cheque payments

Cheques payable to Services Australia or Medicare Compensation Recovery

When a cheque is made payable to the agency, the Compensation Finance
Officer must determine if the payment is related to Medicare
Compensation Recovery and whether a case has been registered.

When a compensation case has:

-   Been registered, the payment is allocated to the Work Identification
    Number (WIN)
-   Not been registered, the payment is allocated to the Medicare number
    provided, or to a ‘87’ number if the injured person cannot be
    identified

All payments banked can be viewed in Systems, Applications and Products
(SAP).

Note: cheques made payable to Services Australia, DHS, Medicare,
Medicare Compensation or Medicare Compensation Recovery are acceptable
and will be banked by Compensation Finance.

Foreign banking

Any cheque received in foreign currency must be returned to the payer
using the 'z2475 - Returned payment' letter requesting a new cheque to
be issued in Australian currency.

The Resources page contains a link to the letter templates.

Cheques not payable to the agency

When a cheque is not made payable to Services Australia, DHS, Medicare,
Medicare Compensation or Medicare Compensation Recovery, the Finance
Compensation Team will return the cheque to the payer using the z2475 -
Returned payment' letter.

Bulk payment agreement

A bulk payment agreement (BPA) is a legal agreement with a compensation
payer where a specified amount is paid per settled claim under a
specific compensation scheme. A copy of all BPA related payment
remittance advices must be sent to Programme Management.

General information about bulk payment agreements can be found in
section 34 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

All enquiries relating to bulk payments should be directed to Programme
Management using the 'Escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or
PSO' email template.

Cheque extractions and Stop Cheques

The request to stop a cheque being posted to the payee is referred to a
'cheque extraction'. This is different to a 'stop cheque' which is after
a cheque has been posted.

Contact the Compensation Finance Team immediately to request a cheque
extraction or a stop cheque before sending them the 'Referring a case to
Compensation Finance email template.

Reasons for requesting a cheque extraction can include:

-   where a processing error has been identified, or
-   an omission has occurred, e.g. the payee’s address has not been
    amended prior to initiating the refund

All cheque extraction requests are sent to the Compensation Finance
team. Call the Compensation Finance team first, before emailing the
request.

Cheque information can be found in Systems, Applications and Products
(SAP). Enter case notes in the Compensation Case Management System
(CCMS), or the National Compensation Recovery Information (NCRI)
mainframe screen, if CCMS is not working.

Note: Compensation Finance can make a cheque extraction request before
the cheque is issued. However, the extraction cannot be guaranteed.

Compensation Finance complete cheque runs on Mondays and Thursdays only,
with the exception of public holidays, where the cheque run is
authorised the next business day.

The Resources page contains links to letters, email templates, contact
details and forms relevant to payments for Medicare compensation
recovery.

Contents

Accounts receivable and banking for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Voluntary recoveries for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Related links

Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims

Mandatory checks for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
