
Immunisation medical exemptions on the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how immunisation medical exemptions are assessed
and recorded on the AIR. Immunisation medical exemptions are assessed
and notified by eligible medical practitioners using the AIR site, or
the Australian Immunisation Register immunisation medical exemption form
(IM011).

Legislation information

The A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999 and the Australian
Immunisation Register Act 2015 govern requirements for recording
immunisation medical exemptions on the AIR and for family assistance
purposes. The References page contains links to the Acts.

This legislation specifies that:

-   an individual must be up to date with immunisations, be on a
    catch-up schedule or have an immunisation medical exemption recorded
    on the AIR. That is, for the individual to meet immunisation
    requirements to be eligible for some family assistance payments
-   only certain medical practitioners are eligible to certify
    immunisation medical exemptions, and
-   that notification of immunisation medical exemptions must be made in
    the form and manner required by the Secretary, Department of Social
    Services (DSS)

Types of immunisation medical exemptions

There are 2 types of immunisation medical exemptions recorded on the
AIR:

-   medical contraindication to a vaccine or a component of a vaccine,
    and
-   natural immunity to a disease

Note: Service Officers do not offer medical or policy advice on
immunisation medical exemptions. Refer customers to their medical
practitioner or vaccination provider for advice. Medical practitioners
can refer to the Australian Immunisation Handbook or seek further advice
from their state or territory health department. See the Resources page
for links.

Medical contraindications

According to the Australian Immunisation Handbook, a medical
contraindication is:

-   a medical condition, or
-   risk factor in an individual that makes getting a specific vaccine
    potentially harmful to that individual

Therefore, the individual should not be vaccinated with that vaccine or
component during the recorded contraindication period.

Medical contraindications are assessed and determined by eligible
medical providers, and can be recorded on the AIR for a vaccine as
either:

-   permanent – there is no end date, or
-   temporary – the end date is in the future

The individual may also be considered up to date for the purposes of:

-   meeting requirements for family assistance payments
-   overdue reminder letters and overdue reports for providers
-   child care enrolments

Valid reasons for eligible providers to record a permanent immunisation
medical exemption on the AIR due to a medical contraindication are:

-   previous anaphylaxis (to vaccine/vaccine component)
-   significant immunocompromise (for live attenuated vaccines only)

Valid reasons for eligible providers to record a temporary immunisation
medical exemption on the AIR due to a medical contraindication are:

-   acute major medical illness
-   significant immunocompromise of short duration (live attenuated
    vaccines only)
-   the individual is pregnant (live attenuated vaccines only)

Service Officers must record all the vaccine brands the medical
practitioner has ticked on the form. Even if they contain the same
antigens (components), inactivated and live.

Generic vaccine codes can be recorded. For example, generic diphtheria
(GF) or generic tetanus (GT). See Navigate AIR system for full list of
vaccine codes.

Medical contraindications to COVID-19 vaccines

Temporary medical contraindications to COVID-19 vaccinations cannot be
recorded for longer than 6 months

Staff must assess each AIR - immunisation medical exemption form
(IM011)on its own merits

If providers lodge the exact same IM011 form multiple times, do not:

-   make a new assessment, or
-   return the form to the provider

Escalate quality control issues to an AIR Programme Support Officer.
Note: do not record natural immunity for COVID-19 disease

The IM011 form includes all COVID-19 vaccines approved by the
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) to be administered in Australia.
It is not possible to record a contraindication for COVID-19 vaccines
not approved for use in Australia. COVID-19 antiviral medications cannot
be recorded on the AIR because they are not vaccines.

An individual can use a COVID-19 digital certificate as proof of their
COVID-19 vaccination status. That is, if they have a contraindication
recorded for all TGA approved COVID-19 vaccines.

If an IM011 form:

-   has only one COVID-19 vaccine selected and ‘ALL COVID-19’ in the
    ‘Other' field, the contraindication should be recorded in the AIR
    for all COVID-19 vaccines. That is, if approved to be administered
    in Australia on the date of processing or recording
-   states the individual has had a previous anaphylaxis to other
    vaccinations, this may exempt them from COVID-19 vaccines. The form
    can be processed regardless of date of previous anaphylaxis

State and territory medical contraindication forms

Some states and territories have developed a medical contraindication
form to grant exemptions for COVID-19. These forms:

-   are acceptable as evidence of medical contraindication to COVID-19
    vaccination under state and territory public health orders
-   cannot be processed in the AIR

If a caller asks about getting a state or territory COVID-19 vaccine
medical contraindication added to their immunisation record on the AIR,
staff must tell callers to speak to their vaccination provider about an
immunisation medical exemption. If eligible, the provider can record it:

-   online directly to the AIR through the AIR site
-   through their Practice Management Software
-   by completing an IM011 form

Requests for COVID-19 medical contraindication due to pregnancy or significant immunocompromise

-   On 30 September 2021, the IM011 form was updated to remove pregnancy
    as an approved reason for a medical contraindication for COVID-19
    vaccines. That is, after recommendations from the Australian
    Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI)
-   From 10 December 2021, significant immunocompromise and significant
    immunocompromise of short duration are not valid reasons to record a
    medical contraindication for COVID-19 vaccines on the AIR

Note: medical contraindications that were recorded for these reasons
before the change in clinical advice, remain on the individual’s record
until the exemption end date. Do not record requests made after these
dates on the AIR.

Natural immunity

Natural immunity is when an individual is assessed as not requiring a
vaccination because they previously contracted a disease or diseases. As
a result, they have developed natural immunity to that disease. Natural
immunities are recorded for diseases, unlike medical contraindications,
which are recorded for vaccines and their components.

Natural immunity is confirmed by a laboratory test or physician based
clinical diagnosis.

A natural immunity has no end date. Currently, only natural immunity to
hepatitis B, measles, mumps, rubella and varicella can be recorded on
the AIR.

Recording a natural immunity to a disease means the individual is not
required to receive that disease component of a vaccine. That is, to be
considered up to date with immunisations for the purposes of:

-   meeting requirements for family assistance payments
-   overdue reminder letters, and overdue reports for providers
-   child care enrolments

The Department of Health and Aged Care may consider the individual
due/overdue for any remaining antigens in the vaccine. For example, if
an individual has a recorded natural immunity to mumps, they may be
due/overdue for measles and rubella. This displays on their immunisation
history.

Eligible medical practitioners

Under the Australian Immunisation Register Act 2015, the following
medical practitioners can record a medical contraindication on the AIR:

General practitioners - defined by the Health Insurance Act 1973 as:

-   Fellows of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
-   Fellows of the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine, or
-   Medicare’s Vocational Register of General Practitioners

General practice registrars on an approved 3GA training placement

Paediatricians

Public health physicians

Infectious diseases physicians

Clinical immunologists

The Resources page contains information about specialty codes.

The Process page contains information about how to search for a
provider's specialty code in Provider Directory System (PDS).

Medical practitioners not eligible

The Health Insurance Act 1973 does not deem the following practitioners
to be equivalent to general practitioners. Therefore, the Australian
Immunisation Register Act 2015 deems them not eligible for recording
immunisation medical exemptions on the AIR:

-   Those with an oncology specialisation
-   Medical practitioners as defined under the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   Practitioners on an old specialist pathway
-   Prevocational practitioners
-   After hours medical practitioners
-   Those with no relevant provider registration

The Resources page contains information about specialty codes.

End dated speciality codes and suspended providers

A provider with an end dated specialty code is not eligible to record
contraindication or natural immunity. That is, regardless of the
signature date on the IM011 form. Ineligible or suspended providers are
not able to make updates to the AIR.

In these cases, Service Officers cannot record details from the IM011
form. That is, because when the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency (AHPRA) suspends or ceases a provider's registration,
the provider cannot record an immunisation medical contraindication or
natural immunity on the AIR.

Acceptable notification channels for immunisation medical exemptions

The A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999 determined that
medical contraindications and natural immunity notifications:

-   must be made in the approved form and manner, and
-   be accompanied by any documents, required by the Secretary

The AIR can only accept a medical contraindication or natural immunity
notification from an eligible medical practitioner:

-   recorded online through the AIR site (preferred), or
-   recorded online through their Practice Management Software, or
-   using a correctly completed IM011 form

The AIR cannot accept medical contraindication or natural immunity
notifications sent through other channels.

Examples of inappropriate notification channels:

-   other AIR forms, reports or statements
-   vaccine trial, or test group notifications
-   serology, or clinical test results
-   provider/practice letterhead
-   unapproved/unofficial form, that is, a form that is not an IM011
    form
-   statutory declarations
-   verbal updates
-   state and territory medical contraindication forms

Note: if unsure whether the AIR approves a document for use, escalate
the document to an AIR Programme Support Officer.

Vaccination objections

Vaccination objection (formerly referred to as ‘conscientious
objection’) is not recorded on the AIR. The A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) Act 1999 removed the provisions for conscientious objection
exemptions to immunisation from 1 January 2016.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
