
Payments for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 011-13050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the payments made by the
External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP).

On this Page:

Amount of reimbursement

The EBPRP provides a payment of up to $400 for each new and replacement
prostheses for purchases made from 1 July 2008, depending on the cost of
the prostheses. This limit applies to each prosthesis for each breast.

Frequency and allocation of reimbursement

There must be a period of 2 years or more between the purchase dates of
the prostheses in order to make a further claim. Discretion may be
applied if there is a medical condition and/or cancer treatment reason
for replacement prosthesis purchased within the 2 year claim again
period.

The $400 limit cannot be apportioned over the 2 years to allow further
claims to be made for the same breast. For example, if the purchase
price for a single prosthesis is $130, the reimbursement will be $130
and a subsequent claim for that breast cannot be made until 2 years
after the date of last purchase.

The reimbursement amount of up to $400 for each breast prosthesis, or up
to $800 for both breasts prostheses will be available every 2 years.

Payment method

All reimbursements are paid via EFT to the bank account nominated on the
claim form, or recorded in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS). No cash or cheque reimbursements are available.

Payment by EFT ensures the prompt payment of the reimbursement.

EFT transfers will occur within 10 business days of the claim being
lodged with Services Australia.

Note: accounts must be paid in full. No payments will be made to a
supplier or retailer of breast prostheses.

Refunds from private health funds

A claimant can still get a reimbursement under the program if they have
already received a rebate from a private health fund, provided:

-   They received less than the full purchase cost, and
-   The refund is less than the reimbursement limit

The amount of reimbursement is reduced by the amount already received.

For example, if a claimant purchased a prosthesis at a cost of $400 and
received a full refund from their private health fund of $50 then the
amount of reimbursement paid will be $350.

See the Resources page for a list of EBPRP benefits amounts when there
is private health fund assistance.

The claimant should confirm their entitlements with their private health
insurer prior to making any purchases.

The claimant may wish to confirm their entitlement to claim under the
program before purchasing a prosthesis by contacting the agency and
requesting to be warm transferred to the EBPRP Processing Team.

The EBPRP Processing Team can discuss their claim history and when they
are eligible to claim again.

If the claimant has a concern regarding a private health insurer,
contact the Private Health Insurance Ombudsman. For contact details see
Commonwealth Ombudsman and from the website select 'Private Health
Insurance'.

The agency does not need to see a statement confirming the amount
previously reimbursed through the private health fund or financial
assistance obtained from another source.

Payment notice

Once the EBPRP Processing Team has assessed and processed the claim, a
payment notice is posted to the claimant notifying them of the amount
deposited into their nominated bank account.

The payment notice includes:

Payment date

Claim ID (EBPRPxxxxxxx)

Bank reference number (12 digit)

Claim details:

-   Date of purchase for each prosthesis
-   Prosthesis(es) type claimed (for example left and/or right)

Payment details:

-   Total payment amount
-   Name of bank
-   Branch number (BSB)
-   Account number (for security, only the last 3 digits of the account
    number are displayed)

The payment notice identifies a lodgement reference number (12 digits)
and MCA-EBPRP, however, each bank is different and the entirety of these
details might not appear.

Rejected payments

The EBPRP utilise the Common Payments System (CPS) to reimburse
claimants for their breast prostheses. The EBPRP Processing Team receive
a daily finance report of payments that have been rejected by the
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA).

The Resources page contains the amounts of EBPRP benefits given when
there is private health fund assistance and contact details.

Contents

Debt recovery for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program
(EBPRP)

Related links

Eligibility for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 2 year claim
again period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
