
Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access Initiative) 011-41010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Better Access to Psychiatrists, Psychologists
and General Practitioners (GP) initiative under the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS).

Information for health professionals

The Services Australia website has an education guide for health
professionals about mental health treatment plans.

Health professionals can access the page by searching for ‘better access
to mental health care’ on the Services Australia website or by
navigating to the Health Professional Education Guides section.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.

Overview of the Better Access Initiative

The Better Access Initiative includes items for the treatment and
management of patients with one or more mental disorders.

Items under the Better Access Initiative support patients to:

-   have a MHTP created by their usual medical practitioner
-   access up to 20 individual psychological treatment services
-   access up to 10 group psychological treatment services

Access to Medicare benefits for these services depends on patient
eligibility and health professional registration with Medicare.

Under Better Access, referred patients can access Medicare benefits for
mental health services provided by:

-   consultant psychiatrists
-   general practitioners (GP)
-   non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner (non-VR MPs)
-   psychologists
-   clinical psychologists
-   occupational therapists
-   social workers

Determining patient eligibility

Health professionals can check patient eligibility for Medicare benefits
through HPOS using the:

-   MBS item online checker
-   patient care plan history search

The Process page has instructions for handling phone enquiries about
patient eligibility from health professionals.

Patients in Residential Aged Care Facility (RACF)

Better Access to mental health care has been expanded to eligible
patients in Residential Aged Care Facilities in response to the COVID-19
pandemic.

This is measure from 10 December 2020 until 31 December 2022.

Eligible patients cannot be an admitted patient of a hospital.

Flag fall items RACF

Flag fall items are available to practitioners and allied health
professionals when they attend patients in a RACF.

These items are available for the first patient seen at a RACF on any
one occasion. Where there is a break of service between attendances with
one or more patients, this does not constitute as a separate occasion.

Eligible conditions

Health professionals are responsible for determining the clinical
eligibility of patients. The initiative is designed for patients with an
assessed mental disorder who would benefit from a structured approach to
their treatment and management.

There is no list of eligible conditions for services under the Better
Access Initiative.

Claiming frequencies

In general, claiming frequencies for MHTP items are:

-   Preparing a MHTP: once per 12 months and not within 3 months of any
    MHTP review
-   Reviewing a MHTP: once per 3 months and not within 4 weeks of any
    MHTP preparation

Multiple treatment plans

It is expected that patients will generally have only one treatment and
management plan in place. There are no restrictions between MHTP items
and other treatment and management plan items.

The services must be clinically relevant to the patient. Health
professionals may be subject to post-payment audits to ensure they are
treating and claiming appropriately.

Chronic Disease Management

Patients with a mental disorder and other unrelated chronic conditions
can be managed under both Better Access and Chronic Disease Management
(CDM) plans. Services provided under each care plan do not count toward
the number of services available under the other care plan.

For example, if a patient has a CDM plan they can access up to 5 allied
health services (including mental health services under item 10956) in
addition to any treatment provided under Better Access.

See Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare for more information.

Eating disorder treatment and management

It is preferable for patients with an eating disorder and other mental
health conditions to be managed under an Eating disorder treatment and
management plan (EDP).

Patients with a MHTP would transition to, or be managed under an EDP,
where access to eating disorder treatment services is clinically
relevant.

Initial services provided under Better Access count towards the total
number of services a patient can access under their EDP.

Under an EDP a patient can only access up to 40 psychological treatment
services (including Better Access services) in a 12 month period.

Note: additional Better Access psychological treatment services do not
count towards the EDP limit of 40 services.

See Treatment and management plans for eating disorders (including
anorexia nervosa) for more information.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online on the Department of
Health website.

Number of allied mental health services under MHTP

Under Better Access per calendar year, patients with a diagnosed mental
disorder can be referred for up to:

-   10 initial mental health services
-   10 additional mental health services, and
-   10 group allied mental health services

A calendar year is defined as the one year period that begins on 1
January and ends 31 December.

The Resources page has information about which items can be used for
group and individual allied health services.

Additional 10 MBS mental health sessions

Who is eligible?

To be eligible, a patient must have:

-   a current mental health treatment plan
-   used all of their initial 10 sessions
-   a referral from their reviewing practitioner (a referral is not
    required when the GP developing a Mental Health Treatment Plan also
    delivers the psychological therapy sessions)

This measure is available from 9 October 2020 until 31 December 2022.

See the Resources page for the link to MBS Online fact sheets for more
details.

Referral requirements

Patients must have a valid referral to access Medicare benefits for
allied health services under a MHTP.

Referrals for allied mental health services can be issued by:

-   general practitioners (GPs) managing the patient under a MHTP
-   medical practitioners managing the patient under a MHTP or shared
    care plan
-   consultant psychiatrists and paediatricians managing the patient
    under an eligible psychiatric or paediatric service

A referral can only be made for a maximum of 6 services for the initial
course of treatment. The patient will need subsequent referrals to
access more services under their MHTP.

A patient can be referred for all 10 additional sessions on one referral
after the initial courses of treatment have been completed.

All claims for allied health services under a MHTP need to include the
date the referral was issued to the patient (known as the referral
date).

The following information is for internal use only:

-   Patients do not need to have a review or consultation item on their
    Medicare claims history to claim more than 6 services. Health
    professionals are responsible for ensuring they are issuing and
    receiving valid referrals. They may be subject to post-payment audit
    to ensure they are claiming appropriately

The Training and Support page has an infographic to support the referral
and treatment process under a MHTP.

For more information about referrals for Medicare see Referrals for
assessing in Medicare.

Telehealth and telephone consultations

Mental health professionals can deliver Better Access services by
telehealth (video conferencing) and by telephone for some services.

The calendar year limits for individual and group services can include
consultations made of:

-   face to face
-   telehealth
-   telephone
-   a combination of face to face, telehealth and telephone

The MBS telehealth attendance items are not payable if the patient is in
hospital. This includes hospital in the home patients.

Benefits are not payable for email consultations.

Health professionals can check MBS Online for item descriptions and
explanatory notes about telehealth and telephone items.

The Resources pages has further information and an external link for the
telehealth and telephone services.

Multiple attendances on the same day

Patients can have multiple attendances on the same day (e.g. one MHTP
and one item 23 consultation) if they are for separate purposes and the
health professional deems it clinically relevant for the patient. This
includes telehealth and face to face attendances.

Health professionals need to submit text with claims for multiple
attendance items. Acceptable text for MHTP items and other attendances
may include:

-   separate conditions
-   unrelated or not a continuation
-   times of each consultation

For more information about acceptable text (including examples), see
Assessing MBS item restrictions in Medicare.

MBS item numbers

Health professionals should be referred to MBS Online for item numbers
and descriptions.

The Resources page has the item numbers that health professionals can
claim for mental health treatment and planning services.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   external and internal websites
-   Department of Health MBS Online
-   fact sheets
-   FAQs
-   item details

Related links

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
