
Medicare cards 011-44150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Medicare cards, including the
reissuing of cards, for eligible customers.

Eligibility

Medicare eligibility is based on Australian residency. Under Section 3
(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973, a person must meet 1 of the
following requirements in order to be eligible for enrolment in Medicare
as an Australian resident and receive a Medicare card:

-   An Australian citizen who resides in Australia
-   A New Zealand citizen who resides in Australia
-   A person with permanent residency status who resides in Australia
    (including return residents)
-   An applicant for permanent residency status who resides in Australia
    (exclusions apply)
-   Covered by a Ministerial order; or
-   A resident return visa holder

A Medicare card gives access to:

-   a range of medical services
-   lower cost prescriptions
-   free care as a public patient in a public hospital

Medicare Card numbers

Medicare cards display a 10 digit number, the last digit indicates the
card issue number. The card issue number goes up sequentially to 9 then
reverts to 1.

Up to 9 people can be listed on a card number with a maximum of 5 people
on the first card and 4 people on a second card. Where there are more
than 5 consumers associated with the same Medicare card number, the
remaining 4 names are embossed on a second Medicare card with the same
Medicare card number as the first card.

When registering a person in Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) and the error message ‘00685 Maximum Individual Reference Number
(IRN) on card’ appears, additional group members cannot be added as the
Medicare card limit of 9 active IRNs has been reached.

CDMS allows for up to 12 members to be associated with a Medicare card
but only a maximum of 9 active members, and 3 non-active members. This
means that a card can have an IRN of 10-12, if certain members (in the
range of IRN 1-9) have previously ended their association with the
Medicare card.

Entitlement type

Where more than 1 consumer is to be associated with the same Medicare
card number, the system shall ensure that each consumer has the same
Medicare entitlement type with the exception of consumers who have the
following Medicare entitlement types:

-   A - Australian Citizen
-   E - Migrant
-   ENZ - New Zealand Citizen

Consumers who have Medicare entitlement types of 'A' or 'E' or ‘ENZ’ can
be associated with the same Medicare card number.

Where the consumer's entitlement type is not one allowed in association
with the entitlement types of the other members on the Medicare card,
the consumer must be transferred to a new Medicare card.

Inconsistent Entitlement types

The Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) does not allow a
Medicare card (new or duplicate) to be produced or a Medicare enrolment
to be updated where there is an inconsistency with the entitlement type.
When an entitlement type is changed from 1 status to another, for
example, 'applicant for permanent resident status'(P) or (Z) to
'permanent resident status (E)', the Service Officer must request a new
Medicare card. If only 1 person is changing their entitlement type, they
must be transferred off the card onto a card of their own.

Individual Reference Number (IRN)

Each individual enrolled on a card is allocated an Individual Reference
Number (IRN) from 1 to 9. This number is against each person listed on
the Medicare card.

By combining the Medicare card number with the person’s IRN number on
the card, each person on the card can be uniquely identified. The names
of the consumers shall be embossed on the physical Medicare card in
ascending order of their card reference number.

Personal Identification Number (PIN)

When a person first enrols in Medicare, they are allocated a Personal
Identification Number (PIN). As a person's Medicare card number may
change if they are transferred or copied to a different card, the
Personal Identification Number (PIN) is used to link the person to all
card numbers to maintain claims history. The PIN allocated when the
person was first enrolled remains the same.

Consumer Identification number (ID)

A Consumer Identification (ID) number is allocated to every consumer on
initial registration in CDMS. This is system generated and cannot be
amended, the consumer ID is like the systems’ key to an individual
person.

Types of Medicare cards

A person is registered for Medicare using the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS). A Medicare card is issued depending on the
entitlement type of the person. There are 3 types of Medicare cards:

Standard Medicare (green) card:

-   Issued to a person who is an Australian citizen, New Zealand
    citizen, Migrant or Diplomat who is residing in Australia
-   All standard Medicare cards (including new enrolments, automatic
    re-issued cards and operator re-issued cards) are issued for a
    period of between 5 and 7 years

Interim (blue) cards:

-   Issued to people who are applicants for permanent resident status
-   Ministerial Orders
-   All interim cards (including new enrolments, re-issued Medicare
    cards) are issued in accordance with the policy and procedures that
    surround these enrolment types

RHCA (yellow):

-   Issued to people from a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA)
    country
-   All RHCA cards (including new enrolments, re-issued Medicare cards)
    are issued in accordance with the policy and procedures that
    surround these enrolment types

See Resources for more information.

Temporary Medicare card

A Medicare card is posted to the group contact and usually takes 3-4
weeks.

Where a person requires the physical Medicare card before it is received
in the mail, the person can access a digital copy of the Medicare card
on the Express Plus Medicare app.

Where a card is required straightaway, Service Officers can print a
temporary card and issue to the customer.

Automatic card replacement

When a standard Medicare card is about to expire a card will
automatically be sent to the group contact's address subject to a check
of the returned mail flag within Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) and the group contact is still current on the card.

If there is:

no return mail flag present:

-   the system automatically reissues a Medicare card and sends it to
    the group mailing address recorded in CDMS

a return mail flag present:

-   the system will not send out a replacement card as the address is
    known to be incorrect. It is the responsibility of the group contact
    to contact Medicare and confirm their address details

Blue interim card automatic reissue

The Medicare blue interim card replacement program will continue to
automatically reissue blue Medicare cards providing the Medicare record
has been linked to Department of Home Affairs and the application has
not been withdrawn or refused within the full cycle of cards.
Thereafter, Medicare cards will need to be reissued manually if
required.

See the Resources page for information about the allowable periods for
interim Medicare cards.

Extending a Medicare card

If there is no change in entitlement type and an entitlement period is
to be extended, Service Officers must change the Group Eligibility End
date in card request and issue a new card. This date will then show in
Entitlement.

A new entitlement type does not need to be added or amended.

Replacement of a RHCA card

Medicare Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) cards are not
automatically replaced. Where a request over the telephone to re-issue a
RHCA card due to being lost or damaged is received the Service Officer
will need to check the expiry date of the Medicare card.

-   If the card is not due to expire for over a month, a Medicare card
    can be reissued to the address given by the customer
-   If the card is due to expire in less than a month the card can be
    re-issued, however the production control address must be used to
    prevent a Medicare card from being produced, while still enabling
    the person to make a claim

Where the RHCA card has expired, the Service Officer needs to confirm
that the consumer continues to meet the relevant RHCA country’s criteria
in order to remain eligible for continued Medicare cover. The person
will need to attend a service centre.

See Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare
and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) for more information.

Replacement of a Medicare card

A replacement card can be issued where the original card is:

-   worn, destroyed, damaged
-   lost
-   stolen
-   outdated, expired

Customers can use different methods to request a replacement Medicare
card. The Process page has further information.

For Medicare cards that have a Business Integrity (BI) flag, see
Suspected Medicare fraud and Business Integrity (BI) flags for more
information.

Business Integrity (BI) flag on a Medicare card

A BI flag can indicate possible fraudulent activity linked to a Medicare
card.

When a BI flag has been applied to a customer's Medicare card, it may
prevent the normal operation of the card, even when a replacement card
has been issued.

See Suspected Medicare fraud and Business Integrity (BI) flags for more
information.

Issue a duplicate card

A duplicate card is a reproduction of the current card showing the same
details. Only a maximum of 2 cards showing the same details can be
issued. A duplicate card can only be issued where there are more than 1
person over the age of 15 years enrolled on the card. Customers can use
different methods to request a duplicate Medicare card.

Card expired for more than a 6-month period

Where a person contacts Medicare for re-issue of their Medicare card, if
the expiry date in CDMS is greater than 6 months, Service Officers will
need to check the person has been residing outside of Australia.

If the person is quoting an expired Medicare number and it can be
confirmed a new card has been issued, see the Process page for new card
requests for expired cards.

Customer suppressed on a Medicare card

The suppressed function has been removed in CDMS. Where a person on a
Medicare card is suppressed, it prevents that person from being printed
on a Physical group Medicare card.

Where a customer who has been previously suppressed requires a Medicare
card, Service Officers are to escalate to Medicare Public Eligibility
Helpdesk. See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

Defence Force

If a government employee or a member of the Australian Defence Force has
been absent from Australia for more than 5 years, they remain eligible
for medical benefits incurred in Australia and are not required to
satisfy the usual process for residency. They must provide documents to
support they are a government employee or a member of the Australian
Defence Force.

If the person has not returned to Australia to reside a card cannot be
issued.

See Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare for more information.

Nursing homes

Replacement of a Medicare card

Where a person is a resident of a nursing home, the administrator of the
nursing home may apply on behalf of the applicant if the following
conditions are met:

the applicant is not enrolled with another person on their Medicare
card, and

there is either no:

-   Power of Attorney
-   Guardianship Order for a person or organisation other than the
    nursing home, or
-   Authorised Representative

To apply, the administrator must provide a signed written request on a
nursing home letterhead explaining why they are applying on behalf of
the applicant, and stating that there is no other person who may apply
on the applicant’s behalf. A request cannot be actioned over the
telephone.

Request for release of Medicare card number or expiry dates

The release of a Medicare card number or the expiry date of a Medicare
card to a nursing home cannot be released as it is for administrative
purposes.

Group contacts

The group contact on a Medicare enrolment record has no particular
status and no advantage over any other person on the enrolment. Persons
are eligible for Medicare benefits solely by virtue of the provisions of
the Health Insurance Act 1973, and whether or not they are the group
contact is irrelevant.

A group contact is to identify a person on the Medicare card who will
receive Medicare correspondance.

Changing a group contact on an existing enrolment can be processed over
the telephone or at a service centre, the person must be enrolled on
that Medicare card and be over 15 years of age. The Process page has
more information.

Note: where the group contact is deceased, the group contact must be
changed to another person on the Medicare card who is over the age of 15
years. See Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment for more details.

Group contact transfers to a new card

-   If a group contact chooses to leave their current card, CDMS
    automatically assigns a new group contact
-   The next oldest remaining person aged 15 years or older on the card,
    becomes the new group contact
-   If the remaining person/s on the card are aged under 15 years, the
    group contact cannot transfer to a new card online

Medicare card issued in error

Medicare cards are often issued in error because a person has been
enrolled:

-   in Medicare but is not eligible
-   on the incorrect Medicare card number
-   in Medicare but has not provided sufficient documents to confirm
    eligibility or identity

Where a Medicare card has been issued in error, Service Officers should
identify the correct course of action to be taken (depending on what
type of error has occurred) to prevent the card from being issued.

Medicare Card extractions

Where a Service Officer identifies that they have issued a Medicare card
incorrectly they can have the Medicare card extracted by completing the
Card Extract request form no later than 12 o’clock midday (AEDST) the
following day.

The extracted card does not need to be returned to the Service Officer
as the enrolment must be rectified immediately and a new Medicare card
issued.

The Process page has information on Medicare cards issues in error. The
Resources page contains a link to the Card Extract Form.

Stop a Medicare card

Medicare cards should only ever be stopped in extreme circumstances as
stopping a Medicare card affects the ability to claim benefits. This
results in medical claims being rejected for all people on the card.

Service Officers must identify the correct course of action to be taken
(depending on what type of error has occurred) to prevent the card from
being issued before stopping a card. All stop cards appear on a daily
report, so detailed comments in the Group Comments field in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) must be entered.

Medicare cards returned to Services Australia

Medicare cards may be returned by the public or health professionals by
post or in person at a service centre.

Returned Medicare cards received are set with a ‘Return mail indicator’
flag in the CDMS.

The indicator on the customer’s record alerts the system not to send
correspondence or cards to that address until the address has been
updated.

Service centres that have a Digital Secure Bin on site are to place
Medicare Cards within the Digital Secure Bin to be disposed of securely.
Service Centres who do not have a Digital Secure Bin on site are to
place shredded and/or cut up Medicare cards in a sealed envelope/box and
addressed to ‘MDC – Mail Distribution Centre’ and placed within the
courier bag. MDC will then dispose the Medicare cards securely.

The Resource page contains information about the different types of
Medicare cards, links to forms and external websites.

Contents

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Medicare number and Medicare card requests for prisoners

Related links

Child enrolments in Medicare

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolments

Using Medicare self service

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
