
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the types of enrolment errors and issues that may
arise where the newborn is already enrolled, enrolled on an incorrect
Medicare card, enrolled on their parent's Medicare card and how to
remove return mail indicator to process newborn child enrolment.

Newborn enrolled in error

Privacy implications require Service Officers to take action to rectify
the error if they identify that a newborn has been added to an incorrect
Medicare card, including:

-   initial (new) enrolment
-   copy or transfer
-   newborn has been enrolled twice on the same Medicare card

Note: the newborn may also be incorrectly registered on the wrong
Medicare Safety Net family registration.

The Process page contains more information.

Applicant (parent) still on original family card

Before enrolling a newborn, Service Officers must check the applicant's
(parent) Medicare card in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) to confirm if the parent is still enrolled on their original
family card (with their parents).

If it is identified that the parent is still enrolled on their original
family card, the Service Officer must not enrol the newborn on this card
unless there are exceptional circumstances.

Every effort must be made to contact the parent to seek their consent to
be transferred from their original family card to another Medicare card
(for example, their own or their partner's). If contact can be made with
the parent and consent is given, the parent can be transferred to
another Medicare card and the newborn can be enrolled onto this card
with the parent.

If contact is unsuccessful with the parent, the newborn is required to
be enrolled on their own Medicare card with the birth mother as the
group contact and a comment placed in Group in CDMS.

The Process page contains more information.

Unless exceptional circumstances apply, it is not usually acceptable to
have a grandparent, parent and child on the same Medicare card together.
Situations when it may be considered are:

-   birth mother under 15 years of age (the Process page contains more
    information)
-   grandparent has guardianship for both the mother and grandchild

If exceptional circumstances apply, Service Officers must escalate to a
Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer Support (LPS).

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare Public
and Medicare Eligibility Local Peer Support (LPS) and the card
extraction request form.

Related links

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Complex eligibility and entitlement type of newborn child enrolments in
Medicare

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Customer enquiries about newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Duplicate Medicare enrolment and Consumer IDs in Medicare

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Lodgement of newborn child enrolments in Medicare at service centre

Medicare cards

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

Newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
