[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

This document outlines information on Medicare services, fees, rates of
benefits and gap benefits.

Benefits for professional services

A professional service is defined as a clinically relevant service
rendered by a medical or dental practitioner, an optometrist or an
eligible allied health professional.

A clinically relevant service is defined as a service that is generally
accepted in the medical, dental, optometric or allied health profession,
as being necessary for the appropriate treatment of the patient to whom
it is rendered. Medicare benefits are paid under the Health Insurance
Act 1973 (the Act) for professional services in accordance with fees set
out in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

The MBS is a publication that is maintained and updated by the
Department of Health and Aged Care. Each professional services contained
in the MBS has been allocated a unique item number. Located with the
item number and description for each service is the Schedule fee and
Medicare benefit, together with a reference to an explanatory note
relating to the item (if applicable).

Services listed in the MBS must be rendered according to the provisions
of the relevant Commonwealth, state and territory laws. The day-to-day
administration and payment of benefits under the Medicare arrangements
is the responsibility of Services Australia.

Fees for professional services

The Act allows the Australian Government to set schedule fees. However,
health care professionals are free to set their own fees for the
professional services they provide.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Gap benefit

The gap is the difference between the Medicare benefit and the schedule
fee and is payable by the patient.

People who have hospital insurance with a registered private health
fund, and incur medical expenses for in-hospital services, can claim
benefits from the fund for any gap amounts, provided Medicare benefits
are payable for the service.

People claiming Medicare benefits for in-hospital services are provided
with a statement that can be used to support a claim on their fund for
any gap benefits.

Health professional charges

Health professionals are free to set their own fees for professional
services. These fees are a matter between the health professional and
the patient; however, the fee must not include any component for other
goods or services that are not part of the specified service (the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) item).

A Medicare benefit must not exceed the medical expenses incurred for
that service. Where the health professional charges less than the
benefit payable, the benefit paid is reduced to the amount charged.

See References for a link to Health Insurance Act 1973, Section 14.

Although a Medicare benefit paid is a percentage of the schedule fee for
a service, the full amount that the health professional charges is
required and recorded as it provides:

-   Evidence that an expense has been incurred
-   Evidence of the out-of-pocket (OOP) amount. The system uses this
    amount to calculate the Medicare Safety Net benefit for that claim
-   A check on the item claimed. For example, if item 'X' has a benefit
    of $30 and $200 is recorded as the charge, the Service Officer is
    prompted to check that the item number keyed matches the item number
    shown on the account

Where an account displays a charge that has not been rounded, follow the
principle 'key as you see' and key the charges exactly as shown on the
account.

Note:

Keying charges that are not rounded does not result in a benefit that is
not rounded, providing the charge exceeds the Medicare benefit payable

When explaining the benefit paid, the Service Officers must not:

-   Make reference to the level of the health professional’s charge
-   Suggest the health professional has overcharged

Payment of Medicare benefit

The obligation to pay medical fees arises out of a contract between the
health professional and the patient or the person responsible for the
patient's medical expenses.

The Health Insurance Act 1973 recognises the contract between the health
professional and the patient; therefore, a Medicare benefit is payable
to the person who incurred the medical expenses for the service.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Rates of benefit

In general, the Medicare benefit is 85% of the fee listed in the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for the service (known as the Schedule
fee).

For attendances provided by general practitioners (GP) (or on behalf of
a GP) to out of hospital patients, the Medicare benefit is 100% of the
listed Schedule fee.

For professional services provided to private hospital patients
(admitted to either a private or public hospital) the Medicare benefit
is 75% of the listed Schedule fee.

Public patients admitted to public hospitals, receive free medical and
hospital treatment funded under state/territory arrangements, therefore
are not entitled to Medicare benefits.

Patients in an accident and emergency department are not considered
inpatient until they have been formally admitted into the hospital.

Medicare benefit exclusions

Not all services attract a Medicare benefit. The Medicare statement of
benefit/receipt provides a declaration for claimants to sign. By signing
the declaration the claimant is agreeing that the service/s they are
claiming are not excluded from Medicare benefits under the Health
Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) or the Dental Benefits Act 2008. Where a
claimant requires clarification on what services are excluded, this
policy assists the Service Officer in providing the claimant with
further information. See Services not attracting Medicare benefits.

The References page contains links to the Health Insurance Act 1973 and
the Dental Benefits Act 2008.

Services not attracting Medicare benefits

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Explanatory Note titled, 'Services
which do not attract Medicare benefits', states that following services
do not attract Medicare benefits:

-   Telephone consultations
-   Issue of repeat prescriptions when the patient does not attend the
    surgery in person
-   Group attendances (unless otherwise specified in the item, such as
    items 170, 171, 172, 342, 344 and 346)
-   Non-therapeutic cosmetic surgery
-   Euthanasia and any service directly related to the procedure,
    however, services rendered for counselling assessment about
    euthanasia will attract benefits
-   Extracorporeal magnetic innervation (EMI)

Medicare benefits are not payable

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Explanatory Note titled, 'Services
which do not attract Medicare benefits', states Medicare benefits are
not payable where the medical expenses for the service are:

Paid/payable to a public hospital

For a compensable injury or illness for which the patient’s insurer or
compensation agency has accepted liability. Note: if the medical
expenses relate to a compensable injury or illness for which the insurer
or compensation agency is disputing liability, then Medicare benefits
are payable until the liability is accepted

For a medical examination for the purposes of:

-   life insurance
-   superannuation
-   a provident account scheme
-   admission to membership of a friendly society

Incurred in mass immunisation, if the vaccine is specifically funded by:

-   other commonwealth or state government programs
-   an international or private organisation

Unless the Minister otherwise directs

Unless the Minister otherwise directs Medicare benefits are not payable
where:

the service is rendered by or on behalf of, or under an arrangement
with:

-   the Australian Government
-   a state or territory
-   a local government body
-   an authority established under Commonwealth, state or territory law

the medical expenses are incurred by the employer of the person to whom
the service is rendered

the person to whom the service is rendered is employed in an industrial
undertaking and that service is rendered for the purposes related to the
operation of the undertaking

the service is a health screening service

the service is a pre-employment screening service

Sporting bodies

Medicare benefits are payable for a professional service provided to a
patient where that patient is employed to play sport.

Sporting bodies are classified as an employer. Professional sports
players who receive an income from a sporting body are considered
employees of that sporting body.

On 30 October 2014, the Minister for Health signed a direction stating
that Medicare benefits are payable for persons employed to play sport.
This direction applied to claims received from 25 May 2014 until 30
October 2017.

A new direction was signed by the Minister for Health on 6 March 2017,
revoking the original direction signed on 30 October 2014. This new
direction stated that Medicare benefits shall be payable indefinitely to
a person where that person is employed to play sport.

See also: Professional services related to Medicare patient claims.

The References page for links to the Health Insurance Act 1973, Section
19 (2) and the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Non-Medicare services

Any of the services specified below are considered a non-Medicare
service when associated with any item between item 3 and item 10943.
These services include:

-   endoluminal gastroplication, for the treatment of gastro-oesophageal
    reflux disease
-   gamma knife surgery
-   intradiscal electro thermal arthroplasty
-   intravascular ultrasound, except if used in conjunction with
    intravascular brachytherapy
-   intro-articular viscosupplementation, for the treatment of
    osteoarthritis of the knee
-   low intensity ultrasound treatment, for the acceleration of bone
    fracture healing, using a bone growth stimulator
-   lung volume reduction surgery, for advanced emphysema
-   photodynamic therapy, for skin and mucosal cancer
-   placement of artificial bowel sphincters, in the management of
    faecal incontinence
-   selective internal radiation therapy for any condition other than
    hepatic metastases that are secondary to colorectal cancer
-   specific mass measurement of bone alkaline phosphatise
-   transmyocardial laser revascularisation
-   vertebral axial decompression therapy, for chronic back pain
-   autologous chondrocyte implantation and matrix-induced autologous
    chondrocyte implantation
-   vertebroplasty

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance (General
Medical Services Table) Regulations 2014, and the MBS.

Related links

Professional services related to Medicare patient claims

Greatest Permissible Gap (GPG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
