-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers about how to
assess inbound documents for correctness and completeness for Medicare
Compensation Recovery. It also describes the information that this
required to register a new claim in the MCRS, signature requirements for
forms and how to unlink documents from a Work Identification Number
(WIN) or manually separate email correspondence.

Check inbound correspondence

Service Officers must check inbound correspondence against existing
compensation claims to match correspondence to the correct claim. An
injured person may have multiple compensation claims in our systems.

Check if the below information matches an existing claim:

-   injured person’s name, date of birth and Medicare card number
-   injury/illness date and description
-   WIN - MCRS
-   notifiable person’s name and address and claim reference number (if
    known)

Otherwise, at first notification if the required information has been
provided:

-   register a new claim, or
-   create a provisional record

If the work item contains documents or information:

-   about more than one claim, see Unlink documents or manually separate
    email correspondence
-   that appears to be a copy of what is already saved to the claim,
    they must also be attached to the claim even when they appear to be
    identical as they may contain additional or different information
    including handwritten annotations

See Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim.

Types of correspondence

All inbound correspondence is scanned (physical mail), digitised and
saved in the MCRS in the order received and actioned. MCRS is the
agency’s case management system for Medicare Compensation recovery
processing. For more details see Mail process and work optimiser.

Inbound correspondence includes all forms of written communication
received by letter, email or fax such as:

-   forms, see Resources for a link to a list of all forms that may be
    received
-   enquiries, or information provided about the claim or injured
    person, see Enquiries and authenticating a customer and Authority to
    access a claim as specific rules apply. For example, claims for
    deceased estates and minors
-   supporting documents such as court or tribunal orders, Medical
    practitioner letters, settlement documents

See

-   Table 1 on the Process page to determine how to action inbound
    correspondence
-   Process for detailed instructions on how to assess each form type,
    including signature and mandatory information requirements

Mandatory checks and form requirements

The 2 most important factors of any work actioned by Medicare
Compensation Recovery are:

-   accuracy of information, and
-   the protection of customer’s privacy

Mandatory checks must be completed when completing document assessment
and accessing compensation claims to make sure that information is
accurate and released to the correct person at the correct time.

When correspondence is received, Service Officers must decide if:

-   the information is notifiable under the Health and Other Services
    (Compensation) Act 1995, and
-   an existing claim has been registered,
-   a new claim must be registered, or
-   a form is valid and complete

See Process for more information on performing mandatory checks.

Mandatory requirements for Medicare Compensation Recovery forms

Medicare Compensation Recovery forms are available to external customers
for different reasons throughout the life of a compensation claim.

Each Medicare Compensation Recovery form has signature requirements and
needs different mandatory information to be given when registering or
processing a compensation claim.

Note: when an amended form is being re-submitted, as it was previously
incomplete, it can be accepted when the declaration is resigned, dated
and valid.

See Process for more details of mandatory and additional information
requirements for Medicare Compensation Recovery forms.

Unclaimed correspondence or mail returned to sender

If mail is returned to sender because it wasn’t claimed by the intended
recipient, in MCRS the RTS button must be turned on to ensure that no
mail is sent to this incorrect address again.

The Service Officer should then contact the claimant, notifiable person
or their respective solicitors to obtain the correct information.

Note: the RTS button is an indicator only and will not stop
correspondence being issued.

See Table 11 on the Process page.

Class Actions and Bulk payment agreement (BPA)

The compensation payer or injured person’s solicitor may advise Services
Australia that a claim is part of a class action.

Where it has been identified that a compensation claim relates to a
class action for which a Bulk Payment Agreement (BPA) exists, do not
register the claim and escalate the correspondence to PM. If the claim
will not settle under the BPA PM will advise that the claim will be
registered in the normal manner in MCRS.

For some class action claims (no BPA), the solicitor may be acting for
the compensation payer and the claimant on a Third party authority form
(MO021).

In these situations there is no conflict of interest in the same
solicitor representing both sides, this is not a privacy breach.

Service Officers must:

register these class action claims as per normal practices using the
details on:

-   'Notice of judgment or settlement' (MO022) form, and
-   'Third Party Authority' (MO021) form

Contact a Local Peer Support (LPS) if required.

Do not register a claim covered by a bulk payment agreement in MCRS.

See

-   Escalations and case notes for more details on how to escalate the
    work item to Programme Management
-   Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim

Unlink documents or manually separate email correspondence

Kofax bundles an email and attachments into a single batch even if:

-   WIN has been misread, or
-   attachments are for several different unrelated claims

A Service Officer must either:

-   remove the attachment from the incorrect WIN and move it to the
    correct WIN in MCRS by unlinking it, see Table 13 on the Process
    page
-   copy and redact each attachment and the cover email, send as
    separate emails to the MCRS mailbox and then invalidate the Enquiry
    case, see Table 14 on the Process page

Missing or mismatch of injured person’s details

When there is a mismatch of information between the details submitted
and Medicare records, in general issue the relevant missing information
letter. In some circumstances additional investigation may be needed.

Injured person’s date of birth

Where documentation has been received with a different date of birth for
the injured person to that in Medicare records:

Complete all mandatory checks and ensure the documentation received has
been correctly matched to the claim/injured person

Phone the claimant to verify the injured person’s correct date of birth,
if:

-   Verified, continue with the claim
-   unable to verify date of birth, but the injured person can be
    confidently identified with all other details on the form, continue
    with the claim

If claimant identifies an error on the Medicare record, advise the
claimant to update the date of birth by:

-   calling Medicare for minor date updates e.g. one day different, see
    Resources for Phone us, Medicare link
-   going to the Services Australia website for information about how to
    update their Medicare details, see Resources for a link to the
    website

Where there is any doubt in locating the correct customer record, return
the document to sender with a letter for details to be clarified before
taking any further action.

Claimant’s name different to Medicare record

Each new claim registered or processed in MCRS is cross-checked with the
injured person’s Medicare record to ensure up to date information is
used.

Correspondence might be received for a new or existing claim where the
injured person or claimant’s name on the document does not match the
Medicare record. Such as a surname change due to marriage.

A name in the MCRS record should be the same as Medicare and not be
updated until any required update has occurred in the Medicare record.

Where the inbound correspondence:

-   can be confidently matched to a Medicare record (such as by the
    Medicare number, DOB or address) use the Medicare name to register
    or process the claim
-   cannot be confidently matched to a Medicare record, phone the
    injured person or claimant to confirm their Medicare details before
    actioning the documents. Service Officers must take care with their
    questions to ensure no details of another person’s Medicare record
    are released

If later contacted by the customer or the stakeholder about a different
name to that submitted on documents, tell them that the Medicare
Compensation Recovery case is kept according to the Medicare card
record.

If a person’s name changes, they should update their Medicare card. Tell
the person that if required they can:

-   update their legal name over the phone on the Medicare program line
    if they have their documents with them, see Resources for a link
-   go to the Services Australia Website, Update personal details for
    Medicare page for more information, see Resources for a link

Correspondence with different claimant address

Where documentation has been received from a compensation payer with a
different address for the injured person or claimant to that on
Medicare, follow the process steps in Table 10 before registering or
actioning the document.

The injured person/claimant's address for Compensation Recovery claims
can be taken from:

documents signed by the injured person/claimant including:

-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Notice of past benefits request
    (MO026)
-   Commonwealth of Australia Declaration Criminal Code Act 1996 (MO028)
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Section 23A statement (MO023)
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery Bank account details collection
    (MO024)
-   Deed of Release documents only if signed by the injured
    person/claimant

documents signed by their legal representative or authorised third party

authenticated inbound or outbound telephony with the injured
person/claimant, their legal representative or authorised third party

Medicare record of the injured person:

-   where the Medicare address is different from that on compensation
    payer documents received, to avoid privacy breaches, follow the
    steps in Table 10 during document assessment to confirm a correct
    address before claim registration or processing the correspondence
    received

Note:

-   Where both postal and residential addresses are provided
    concurrently use the nominated postal address
-   Any return to sender mail received by Medicare Compensation Recovery
    cannot continue to have mail sent to that same address. Unless some
    other confirmation of that address (e.g. confirmed in a police
    welfare check) is provided

Correspondence without claimant address – register abuse claim

For an abuse or psychological injury claim, the compensation payer may
not have all the injured person’s details such as an address.

Where the agency is first notified of such a claim via a notice of
judgment or settlement, follow the process steps in Table 15 to match
the notice to the correct person’s Medicare record.

The Resources page contains:

Systems used to assess inbound correspondence

FAQs for forms

Correspondence types and Kofax labelling priority

links to:

-   external websites
-   signature fact sheet attachment
-   forms
-   Services Australia website
-   Medicare Compensation Recovery contacts

Contents

Notice of past benefits request and notice to claimant – Medicare
Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant and care costs – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge – Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Extensions, statement not substantially correct, decisions and reviews –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of Judgment or Settlement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Related links

Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Mail process and workload management – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Enquiries and authenticating a customer – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Authority to access a claim – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notifiable and not notifiable claims – Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
