
Claims for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare 011-41030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about claims for the Child Dental
Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare.

On this Page:

CDBS claims

Benefits for the CDBS are made under the Dental Benefits Act 2008 and
the Dental Benefits Rules 2014 and include services for out-of-hospital
basic dental services.

CDBS dental items and out-of-pocket costs do not count towards the
Medicare Safety Net and/or Extended Medicare Safety Net thresholds.

CDBS benefit amounts paid

The CDBS benefit paid is up to 100% of the schedule fee. For patient
claims where the dentist charges less than the schedule fee, the
claimant will only receive the amount the dentist charged.

Once the maximum benefit cap has been paid, no further CDBS benefits are
payable for that period. If the child/teenager requires further dental
services for that 2 year period, the person who incurred the cost will
be unable to lodge a claim to Medicare, however, they may be able to
lodge a claim with their private health fund.

CDBS claims for Dentists

CDBS services may only be billed by a dentist or dentist specialist
(either private or public) who has a Medicare provider number.

If a dentist works in the public sector they must bill the service
against the representative public dentist’s provider number.

CDBS services provided can be either bulk billed or privately billed.

Note:

-   A referral is not required for CDBS items
-   When a claim is processed, the Medicare system will automatically
    check that a child/teenager is eligible for CDBS
-   A notification of eligibility is not required to accompany a claim
    for a benefit
-   Eligibility to CDBS is assessed at the beginning of each calendar
    year and is valid for the entire year regardless of when the patient
    became eligible during that calendar year. For example, if a person
    becomes eligible in June 2021, they are eligible from 1 January 2021
    until 31 December 2021
-   The dentist should confirm the patient’s eligibility through Health
    Professional Online Services (HPOS) or Interactive Voice Response
    (IVR), before using the HPOS Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Items
    Online Checker, which can be used to check restrictions for CDBS
    items and patient eligibility based on their CDBS service history.
    If the patient returns as ineligible then they are not eligible for
    the CDBS

Bulk bill claims

Health Professionals can submit their Medicare bulk bill claims
electronically using their practice software or through Medicare Bulk
Bill Webclaim. Medicare Bulk Bill Webclaim can be accessed using Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS). If they do not have HPOS access,
they need to apply for a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) to be able to
access HPOS.

The Resources page contains a link to Submitting Medicare Bulk Bill
Webclaims using HPOS for a guide on how to submit Medicare Bulk Bill
Webclaims.

CDBS manual bulk billing

Bulk bill forms to be used for CDBS bulk bill claims

DB1N-DB Header form

-   the claim header must be used to claim benefits for up to 80
    vouchers (DB2-DB)
-   the DB1N-DB must accompany all DB2 bulk bill vouchers relating to
    CDBS

DB2-DB assignment of benefit form

-   a completed assignment of benefit form is for one date of service,
    one patient and no more than 14 services

CDBS service is manually bulk billed

Where a CDBS service is manually bulk billed the:

-   parent/guardian assigns the dental benefit using a DB2-DB form
-   dentist must complete and sign a DB1N-DB and DB2-DB voucher form
-   dentist is paid directly by Services Australia

Note: if a bulk bill claim breaks the benefit cap amount, the dentist
cannot issue a patient claim for the balance.

If unable to submit an electronic claim, approved bulk billing/Medicare
claim forms can be ordered using the Medicare stationery order form.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare stationery order form
located on the Health Professionals forms page on the Services Australia
website.

Details required on bulk bill forms

The following details must be included on the assignment of benefit
form:

-   patient's name
-   date of service
-   the item number in the Dental Benefits Schedule that corresponds to
    the service
-   dental provider's name and provider number (for public sector
    dentists this is the representative dentist) or the dental
    provider's name and address
-   amount of the dental benefit being assigned to the dental provider

CDBS claims for patients

The list below provides channels and claiming options for claimants
claiming for CDBS:

-   unpaid (the account), or
-   partially paid accounts (the account and receipt), and
-   fully paid accounts

Note: if there is information not provided on the claim form or account,
the same process for an incomplete or incorrect claim form must be
followed.

Unpaid or partially paid accounts

Medicare benefits for unpaid or partially paid accounts can only be paid
by cheque.

The claimant must provide:

-   the account (unpaid), or
-   the account and receipt (partially paid), and
-   a completed and signed Medicare Claim form (MS014). Note: this is
    not required if claiming through the Medicare Online account or via
    the Express Plus mobile app.

The Pay Doctor Via Claimant (PDVC) cheque is posted to the claimant at
the address recorded against the claimant or on the claim form (where
the claimant nominates a temporary address), together with a statement
of benefit for retention by the claimant and the provider.

The claimant is responsible for forwarding the benefit cheque to the
provider, together with the balance of the account, if applicable.

Fully paid accounts

Benefits for fully paid accounts can be paid to the claimant by either:

-   EFT
-   credit EFTPOS (only at point of service with the provider)

Incomplete claim forms or incorrect details

Where the information is not sufficient, return the claim to the
claimant with an explanation or letter stating why the claim cannot be
processed and indicate what further information is required.

Private health fund claims

Where the child/teenager is not eligible to receive a dental benefit
under the CDBS or the dentist or dental practice does not wish to
re-itemise the account, a dental benefit may be claimed from a private
health fund.

Patients with private health insurance covering dental services can
choose to claim their dental services from either their private health
fund or the CDBS but cannot claim through both.

Note: if claiming from a private health fund, the appropriate private
health fund service item must be noted on the account, not the CDBS item
number(s).

For further information about claiming, contact Tier 2 claims in your
state via email or phone Assessing and Benefits.

Reissuing CDBS invoices

Providing dental services under the Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS)
is voluntary and dentists may choose whether or not they wish to
participate.

Re-issuing of paid invoices from non CDBS dental items to CDBS dental
items is at the discretion of the dentist. Dentists are under no
obligation to agree to re-issue these invoices.

The agency can only process and pay dental invoices for services
performed under the CDBS if they are itemised with item numbers from the
Dental Benefit Schedule. Item range 88011–88943.

Under no circumstances should Service Officers amend accounts or
invoices on behalf of dental providers or customers. This can only be
amended by the dentist who performed the service or staff at the dental
practice.

Note: patients with private health cover for dental services can choose
to claim their dental services from either their private health fund or
the CDBS but cannot claim through both.

CDBS dental modifier in Medicare patient history

Using the dental modifier DENT/ALL within the Patient History screen in
the Medicare Mainframe allows a Service Officer to view:

-   Items claimed
-   Rejected items and reason codes.

Note: a 'NO HIST' or 'NO DENT' display message indicates that no dental
services have been claimed.

Medicare Mainframe should only be used to check a child/teenagers CDBS
claiming history. Service Officers should always check CDBS eligibility
details, entitlement periods and current balances in CDMS.

The Resources page details the modifiers for the Patient History 'NHSI'
screen on Mainframe for the CDBS.

Adjustments to CDBS entitlement periods

Eligible children/teenagers can access benefits for the CDBS up to the
specified benefit entitlement cap across a 2 year calendar period.

Note: the child/teenager needs to meet eligibility for CDBS each
calendar year. Once the benefit cap is reached, no further benefits are
paid for CDBS services for the remainder of that 2 year calendar period.

Determine entitlement period

The 2 year calendar period will commence from the calendar year in which
the person first receives an eligible dental service.

The Resources page contains a link to the CDBS page on the Services
Australia website.

The 2 year calendar period is automatically adjusted by the claiming
system and may change due to late lodgement of a claim relating to a
previous calendar year (this includes items that have been rejected with
reason code 637 ('No benefit payable - dental cap reached'). As long as
the service is an eligible CDBS service (select the Eligibility tab),
provided by an eligible provider to an eligible patient (including
services rejected with reason code 637), it will count as the first
service for establishing the new entitlement period.

Example: a child/teenager is determined as CDBS eligible in 2020, has a
CDBS service but does not lodge a claim. The child/teenager is then
determined as CDBS eligible again in 2021, has a service and lodges
their claim in that calendar year. The current entitlement period
becomes 21/22. The entire benefit cap is used for that 2 year
entitlement period.

In 2021, the child/teenager finds their receipt from 2020 and lodges it
with Services Australia. As the dental cap was reached for 2021/22 the
service is rejected with reason code 637 but the claim must be processed
to allow resetting of the current entitlement to 2020/21. If the full
dental benefit cap was not used in 2021/22 then the child/teenager’s
claim (or part of) for 2020 is paid.

Reduced benefit (RSN code 636)

If a child/teenager is under the CDBS benefit cap and an item that is
being processed will break the CDBS benefit cap, the benefit for that
item is reduced according to the child/teenager’s cap balance (RSN code
636 'Benefit reduced - dental cap broken'). Where a bulk bill claim is
submitted and an item breaks the benefit cap amount (the benefit is
reduced), the dentist cannot bill the patient for the
balance/difference.

Release of Medicare card number for CDBS claiming purposes

The Resources page describes how to handle requests for Medicare card
details from the (CDBS patients and dental providers.

The Resources page contains Assessing and Benefits contact details, a
description of the modifier for the Patient History 'NHSI' screen on
Mainframe for the CDBS, how to handle requests for Medicare card details
from CDBS patients and dental providers and links to the Medicare
stationery order form page and CDBS page.

Related links

Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

Provider eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

Inquire CDMS tab fields for the Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
