
Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15020030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about recoverable care costs in
relation to Medicare compensation recovery cases. 'Care costs' include
the recovery of nursing home benefit, residential care subsidy and home
care subsidy.

Care costs

Services Australia recovers payments made by the Commonwealth of
Australia on behalf of an injured person for professional services and
care costs provided in the course of treatment of, or as a result of a
compensable injury or illness through the operation of the Medicare
Compensation Recovery Program.

The term 'care costs' includes all payments covered by division 2 of the
Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995 - nursing home
benefit, residential care subsidy and home care subsidy.

A person without a Medicare card is still liable to repay related care
costs. The References page contains a link to legislation.

How to identify recoverable care costs

When a statement by claimant is returned, it includes a declaration
under the Criminal Code Act 1995 on which the injured person states the
information provided on the attached Medicare history statement is
correct. It also states:

-   whether or not they have entered a care facility, or
-   received home care services in relation to the compensable injury

Note: in cases where a statement by claimant is not returned, no care
costs checks are completed and all services in a Medicare history
statement would be taken as related to the compensable injury or
illness. If care costs were previously identified they will be brought
forward to the new notice of past benefits or notice of charge where all
services would be taken as related to the case.

Automatic system-generated care costs check request

When 'Yes' is answered to the nursing home question while processing a
statement by claimant in the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS),
the system automatically:

-   sends a letter requesting details of care costs to a nursing home
    mailbox for action, and
-   suspends the case for 14 days pending a response

The case will reactivate in the CCMS nursing home queue for action.
Results of the check should have been scanned to the case by this time.
If not, request an urgent manual care costs check request.

Manual care costs check request

When a new or updated care costs amount is needed urgently or when an
automatic request was sent but no care costs check result information is
available on CCMS, send a manual care costs check request.

A manual care costs check may be required when:

-   the case has settled and the end date of the care costs calculation
    is after the date of judgment or settlement. The authorised staff
    member will do a recalculation
-   there are special circumstances for the case, for example the case
    is about to settle and an urgent issue of the notice of past
    benefits has been requested
-   after settlement and the case is nearing the end of the 3 month
    period in which a notice of charge can be issued (nearing the s33D
    or s24(4) date)
-   there have been previous care costs included for a different case
    for the same compensable person
-   to follow up a previous care cost request that was not responded to

The Process page contains instructions on how to request a manual care
costs check.

The Resources page contains a link to the 'care costs check request' -
email template.

How recoverable care costs are checked and calculated

Details of care costs amounts that have been paid by the Commonwealth of
Australia are obtained by APS6 Officers delegated under Instrument
Number DHS-DEL-34 of 2015 to perform this function. Information is
obtained from the following systems:

-   Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)
-   Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP), and
-   Client and Service Provider eAnalysis Reporting (CASPER)

Dates included in calculations

Care costs are calculated from the date of injury or illness until the
date of judgment or settlement. Where a judgment or settlement has not
yet been made, the amount is calculated:

-   up to the date the care costs check is performed
-   the date of discharge from the care facility or service, or
-   the date or date of death

Send a manual care costs check request for a recalculation in cases
where:

-   a care costs calculation has been completed, and
-   Services Australia is later notified that judgment or settlement
    occurred prior to the end date of the care costs calculation

For example, if a care costs check was completed on 1 March 2017 and the
agency was notified compensation was fixed under a judgment or
settlement on 15 February 2017, a recalculation is required as costs
between 16 February 2017 and 1 March 2017 must not be recovered.

Projected figures due to system delays

Due to system delays in reporting benefits paid by the Commonwealth,
figures for any unreported days will be projected based on the rates
used in the most recent payments and then added to the amount for
reported days. This will occur in the following situations:

-   a new request for care costs
-   the case has not yet settled
-   the person is still in care, and
-   the details in the systems are not up to today’s date (for example,
    today is 22 March 2016 but data is only recorded up to 29 February
    2016)

Already in care before date of injury or illness

Where a person was already in care just prior to the date of injury or
illness and, continues in care as a result of the compensable injury or
illness, only the increase in the level of care (if any) after the date
of injury is recoverable.

Home care subsidy is only recoverable from 1 July 2015 onwards. If a
home care subsidy was paid on behalf of a person prior to this date,
those amounts are not recoverable.

The Process page contains instructions on how to calculate the care
costs amount.

Dealing with requests for a breakdown of care costs

A notice of past benefits will only include a total amount for care
costs.

In some cases, especially those where the care costs amount is
significantly large, the injured person, claimant’s authorised
solicitor, compensation payer or the compensation payer’s solicitor may
request a breakdown of a care costs amount. The request can be verbal or
in writing. Record the request in a case note in the Compensation Case
Management System (CCMS). Then request a breakdown of care costs can via
the 'care costs check request' - email template.

The breakdown table is only sent to the person making the request, along
with a copy of the notice of past benefits. If the request was made by
the claimant’s solicitor for whom Services Australia does not hold a
third party authority, the breakdown is only sent to the injured person.

The Process page contains instructions of how to process a request for a
breakdown of care costs.

The Resources page contains a link to the email template for a care
costs check request.

Disputes over the care costs amount included in the notice of past benefits

If the injured person, claimant’s authorised solicitor, compensation
payer or compensation payer’s solicitor disputes a specific benefit or
subsidy or the full amount included in a breakdown of the care costs,
they can ask for a review of the notice of past benefits. The request
must be received prior to the date compensation was fixed under a
judgment or settlement.

Note: a request for review of the notice of past benefits must be sent
to the Team Leader for escalation to Programme Management. A request for
review of the notice of past benefits will not be considered unless it
is supported in writing by the treating medical practitioner. It must
specify:

-   some or all of the care costs do not relate to the compensable
    injury or illness, or
-   the increase in the level of care was not related to the compensable
    injury or illness (where the person was already in care at the time
    of the injury or illness)

Programme Management will consider the evidence and advise of the
decision through the same pathway. Programme Management may consult the
Department of Health and Aged Care for complex cases. The Resources page
contains a link to the escalation template.

The Process page contains instructions of how to escalate a dispute of
care costs.

The Resources page contains information on requesting an updated care
costs check, links to contact information and letters and email
templates.

Related Links

Amended notices and reviews for Medicare Compensation Recovery

General information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare history statement request for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
