
Private Health Insurance Rebate - Premium Reduction Programme 011-19000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the registration process for the Private Health
Insurance Rebate.

Claiming Private Health Insurance Rebate

Applicants can claim the Australian Government Rebate on Private Health
Insurance through:

-   their private health insurance fund as an upfront reduction in the
    cost of the premium, or
-   as a tax offset in annual income tax returns administered by the
    Australian Taxation Office

This information is available to applicants on the Services Australia
website.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Private Health
Insurance Rebate team and a link to the Services Australia website.

Forms

To receive the Private Health Insurance Rebate as an upfront reduction
in their private health insurance premium, applicants must complete an
Application to receive the Australian Government Rebate on Private
Health Insurance as a reduced premium form (MS006).

Insurers will provide the form either in paper, online or in telephony
format that meets programme guidelines. The MS006 form is available to
health insurers and applicants on the Services Australia website.

The form must be lodged with the applicant’s private health insurance
fund.

The Resources page contains a link to the MS006 form.

Registering for the Rebate

The insurer will submit the registration electronically to Services
Australia to register the applicant for the rebate. Services Australia
collects electronic data only. The private health insurer must retain
the form for 5 years in accordance with the legislative requirements.

See Private Health Insurance Act 2007 for more details, the References
page contains a link.

When the registration is submitted, the following validation checks are
performed on the electronic data:

-   Medicare card number
-   First name
-   Surname
-   Date of Birth
-   Gender
-   Medicare eligibility dates

If the rebate registration is unsuccessful, the insurer will receive an
electronic message notifying them of the rejection. If the insurer
cannot resolve the discrepancy at this point in the registration
process, they may either:

-   refer the applicant to Medicare to confirm their eligibility or
    correct their personal details to complete the registration, or
-   contact Services Australia for help to resolve the discrepancy

Services Australia sends rejection letters outlining the reasons to the
applicant. A letter will:

-   be sent if the registration is not completed successfully within 90
    days
-   not be sent if the insurer can correct the discrepancy and resubmit
    a successful registration within 90 days of the first rejection

Notification of an unsuccessful registration is a legislative
requirement.

Letters

There are 2 types of letters that may be sent to applicants if the
rebate registration rejects.

Your Private Health Insurance Rebate application details do not match
our records

The rebate registration data is checked against the Medicare eligibility
data held by Services Australia.

This letter is sent if there is an error in any of the following data
elements:

-   Medicare card number
-   First name
-   Surname
-   Date of Birth
-   Gender

Note: this letter does not contain the details the insurer has sent to
Services Australia in their registration file. The insurer's details are
on the letter in the top right hand corner. See the Process page for
details.

Your Medicare eligibility is needed for your application

This letter is sent if the start and end/or dates fall outside of the
Medicare eligibility dates.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Private Health
Insurance Rebate team and links to the Services Australia website and
MS006 form.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
