
Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10170010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and processes about establishing a
link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR). This link is used to receive a child’s immunisation
status to assess their rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.

Immunisation requirements for family assistance and child care payments

Immunisation requirements apply to FTB and, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for
all children under 20 years of age.

For immunisation requirements and payment impacts, see:

-   Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit Part A supplement
    for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18
-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
    July 2018

Centrelink staff are not able to assess a child’s immunisation status.
The AIR processing team carries out assessments. The AIR do not assess
entitlement to family assistance or child care payments.

Provision of Medicare number for family assistance payments

Customers are asked to provide a child’s Medicare details (Medicare card
number and Individual Reference Number (IRN)) when claiming FTB and CCS
if the child’s record is not already linked to the AIR. Expired Medicare
card numbers may be used, provided the child is or was, listed on the
card and the correct IRN is used.

If the customer is claiming FTB and/or CCS and the child is either:

-   eligible for Medicare enrolment but not yet enrolled, the customer
    must enrol the child and provide the Medicare details to Centrelink
-   eligible for Medicare enrolment but the customer is unable to
    provide the child's Medicare card details (such as where the child
    has entered the customer's care as part of an informal care
    arrangement and/or the customer does not have legal authority to
    obtain a Medicare card for the child), the Service Officer can
    escalate to a Centrelink Service Support Officer (SSO) to obtain the
    Medicare card details. If appropriate, the SSO will obtain the
    number from Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) or refer
    the enquiry to the Centrelink-AIR Liaison Officer
-   not eligible for Medicare enrolment, a name-only matching process is
    used to establish the link. Note: the name-only matching process
    will not link a child who has had a Medicare number at any point in
    time

If the customer does not provide Medicare details for a child who is
enrolled in Medicare, a link between Centrelink and the AIR can be
established using a Medicare number obtained from a Centrelink SSO. If
appropriate, the SSO will obtain the number from CDMS or refer the
enquiry to the Centrelink-AIR Liaison Officer. Customer consent to
establish a link is not required after 1 January 2016.

Note: if a child has multiple Medicare card numbers, any of the card
numbers can be used to establish an AIR link, provided the child is
listed on the card and the correct individual reference number is used.
This is because the multiple numbers should be associated with only one
Personal Identification Number (PIN) in the Medicare system and thus
only linked to one AIR record.

Change of care or multiple carers

A link with the AIR may be established in the record for any customer or
carer for a child who is listed on the customer's Centrelink record. The
FTB immunisation data provided by the AIR is used for assessment of all
customers who are linked to the child.

Note: for CCS a link with the AIR is established separately in Process
Direct. The Medicare Information (MEI) screen must not be used when
attempting to establish a link for CCS purposes.

Once a child’s FTB record is linked with the AIR, the link (and
immunisation status) will remain on the child's record for all carers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Contact details.

AIR and Medicare information in Centrelink system for FTB

On the MEI screen in the Centrelink system, the child is linked with
AIR: field will display:

-   _ (an underscore) if a link has not been attempted
-   AWA if a link has been attempted but no response has been received
-   Y if a link has been established
-   a 3-digit numeric mismatch code if a link attempt has not been
    successful

The Resources page contains AIR Mismatch codes.

The 4 action fields on the right of the screen will always default to N.
If coded Y, they will return to N once the Daily Driver has been run.

Further detail about the child's FTB link status and immunisation
statuses, including details transferred from the AIR, can be viewed on
the Child Immunisation Summary guided procedure. See View and update a
child's immunisation status and assess or update immunisation exemptions
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Note: for CCS child immunisation and link status details are accessed
via Process Direct.

The Medicare Information (MEI) screen (for FTB only)

Information can be recorded by Service Officers on the child's MEI
screen. Details that can be recorded are:

-   child's Medicare number
-   child's Medicare individual reference number (this is the number
    beside the child's name on the Medicare card)

When an FTB link happens

If a child has been matched a link will be established where:

-   an exact, unique match exists - a link is established and the
    immunisation status is received overnight
-   a number of possible matches exist - the AIR staff attempt to match
    the child manually, this process may take up to 14 days and the
    status will not be available until then

Once a link has been established with the AIR, the Medicare number is
removed from the child's record. The AIR provides immunisation
assessments for the child which are used to determine the customer's
entitlement to family assistance. This information is updated each time
the child's immunisation status change on the AIR.

Once the FTB AIR link is established

Once the child’s record is linked with the AIR, the AIR will provide the
child’s immunisation status (and Last Immunisation Update Event (LIUE)
date, if relevant) and the child’s date of birth (as recorded on AIR).
This information is updated each time the child's immunisation status
changes on the AIR.

Note: the AIR does not update the child’s information with Centrelink
each time the child receives a vaccination, only when the child’s
immunisation status changes (for example, the child’s immunisation
status changes from N to Y). If a customer has a question about when a
specific vaccination was received, they should be directed to discuss
this with their vaccination provider or check their child’s immunisation
history statement.

Individuals 22 years of age and over

No data can be transmitted for individuals 22 years of age and over.

If the link is not established

If a link with the AIR is not established the child will be treated as
not meeting the immunisation requirements and any family assistance and
child care payment for the child may be affected.

Services available to customers

[] For customers that are receiving FTB for children not linked with the
AIR, an Immunisation Requirements task will appear in My Profile on
their Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or Customer Online Account.
Customers can use this task to provide the child's Medicare details and
initiate a link request using their Centrelink online account or the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. Once the customer enters the details
a link with the AIR will be attempted.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Families
Override Contact Officers, a list of AIR mismatch code definitions
including suggested actions, information on Medicare numbers and
Medicare PIN association, examples of messages and Customer Issues and a
link to AIR contact details.

Related links

Management of immunisation evidence

Child enrolments in Medicare

Immunisation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement
for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Immunisation reviews and reminders for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or update
immunisation exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Duplicate PIN report processing for AIR Centrelink Liaison Officers

Manual matching process for AIR Centrelink Liaison Officers

Merge or match individual records and SIN records in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Processing Manual Follow-ups (MFU) for Families

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
