
Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare 011-41030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about eligibility for Child Dental
Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in Medicare.

CDBS eligibility

The CDBS covers part or the full cost of some basic dental services for
eligible children when:

-   they are eligible for Medicare
-   they are between 0 and 17 years old for at least 1 day that year,
    and
-   the parent/guardian gets an eligible payment that is specific to
    each child/teenager for at least 1 day in the year, or
-   the child/teenager gets an eligible payment for at least one day in
    the year

The Resources page has links to the CDBS page and eligible payments on
the Services Australia website.

A child/teenager's eligibility for the CDBS is assessed at the beginning
of each calendar year and is valid for the entire year. If the
child/teenager is not eligible at the beginning of the year, and becomes
eligible at a later date they can claim a CDBS service from 1 January of
that calendar year. Lump sum customers will receive eligibility in the
calendar year following the financial year to which their Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part A lump sum claim relates.

The eligibility criteria does not need to be met on the same day,
however the child/teenager must be Medicare eligible at the date of
service.

Note: the child/teenager (or their parent or guardian) should contact
their dentist to confirm if the dentist is participating in the CDBS
before making an appointment.

FTB Part A eligibility for CDBS

A child/teenager’s eligibility for the CDBS varies depending on the way
a parent/guardians FTB Part A claim is paid. There are 2 types of FTB
Part A claims:

-   Instalment customers - includes zero rate and those who have elected
    to defer their instalments
-   Lump sum customers

A parent/guardian or a child/teenager who is aged 0 to 17 year on any
one day of the calendar year and is in receipt of FTB Part A is eligible
to receive benefits under the CDBS.

Partners of the child/teenager who are in receipt of FTB Part A are
eligible to receive benefits under the CDBS, provided they also meet the
age and Medicare eligibility criteria.

For further details about FTB Part A eligibility, see Eligibility for
FTB.

Instalment customers

Child/teenagers are considered eligible for that calendar year when a
fortnightly FTB Part A payment or assessment is received at any time
during a calendar year before 31 December.

Note:

-   Current FTB customers can choose to receive payments fortnightly or
    at the end of the financial year for FTB Part A if they are eligible
    (including zero rate)
-   Eligibility for CDBS is dependent on all eligibility criteria being
    met

Zero rate

Customers who think their income estimate may reach the threshold,
nominate the zero rate option to prevent any overpayments occurring.
These customers are still entitled to CDBS based on their income
estimate however, they are not able to claim CDBS services until after
they have lodged their tax return at the end of the financial year and
received their FTB Part A payment.

Note: if Centrelink stops instalment payments because the customer’s
estimate is too high, the customer will change from an instalment
claimant to a lump sum claimant. The customer will miss eligibility for
the current calendar year due to changing the method of how the FTB Part
A payment is claimed.

Lump sum customers

A parent/guardian who claims FTB Part A as a lump sum for eligible
children will be eligible for the CDBS in the calendar year immediately
following the financial year that the FTB Part A claim relates. The
child needs to be aged between 0 to 17 years on any one day of the
calendar year that the claim relates.

Examples:

If the FTB lump sum claim is lodged and processed between 1 July and 31
December, CDBS eligibility will be granted from the beginning of the
next calendar year for a period of 12 months. Customers that claim their
FTB (A) by instalment will be deemed eligible for CDBS immediately
following their FTB (A) being granted by the agency.

If the FTB lump sum claim is lodged and processed between 1 January and
30 June for the previous financial year the customer will receive CDBS
eligibility as soon as the payment is granted. They will be eligible for
the whole of that calendar year. Customers that claim their FTB (A) by
instalment will be deemed eligible for CDBS immediately following their
FTB (A) being granted by the agency.

A child/teenager must be aged 0-17 years for at least 1 day of the
calendar year in which the FTB (A) payment grants them eligibility. The
Resources page outlines the period of CDBS eligibility for the relevant
FTB Part A claim period.

Note: eligibility for CDBS may be confirmed after the actual period of
eligibility has passed. Under these circumstances, a notification to
confirm CDBS eligibility is not issued.

DVA eligible child/teenager

Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) and Military Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme (MRCAETS) eligible
children/teenagers are only included under the CDBS once their parent or
guardian has consented to the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) to
provide the child/teenager’s details to Services Australia.

DVA is responsible for identifying recipients of the payments, eligible
children/teenagers and seeking consent. Without their parent or
guardian’s consent, these children/teenagers are not eligible for CDBS.

Enquiries about DVA eligibility should be directed to Department of
Veterans’ Affairs. For contact details see Child Dental Benefits
Schedule (CDBS).

Other eligible payments

Customers may be eligible for CDBS based on their eligibility for other
Centrelink payments.

Customers can use the Services Australia website to check what payments
they may be eligible for based on their circumstances. The Resources
page has a link to the Services Australia website.

Second year of patient eligibility

The Process page has instructions on how to view the relevant 2 year
period in CDBS.

Patients eligible for the second year of the CDBS

In the second calendar year, the child/teenager will only be able to
access dental services under CDBS if they meet the eligibility criteria
again.

Patients NOT eligible for the second year of the CDBS

There could be a number of reasons why a child/teenager will not qualify
for eligibility in the second calendar year for CDBS.

Child/teenager is:

-   not eligible for Medicare
-   has lost eligibility for certain Government payments through
    Centrelink which granted eligibility for CDBS in the first year
-   not aged between 0 and 17 years

Issuing a notification for the second year of the CDBS

Children/teenagers who become eligible for the second year of the CDBS
are automatically sent a notification of their eligibility. Notification
letters are also available through myGov for customers that prefer their
mail electronically.

Note: if the maximum benefit cap was used in the first calendar year and
the child/teenager is still eligible in the second calendar year a
notification will still be sent advising of eligibility.

Cap balance/amount for the second year of the CDBS

If the full benefit cap is not used in the first year, the remainder can
be used in the second year providing the child/teenager remains
eligible.

If the maximum benefit cap was used in the first calendar year and the
child/teenager is eligible in the following calendar year, they will not
be able to access services under CDBS in the second calendar year
period. Benefits for CDBS services over the benefits cap will not be
paid.

Note: the remaining benefit cap is not transferable between
children/teenagers under any circumstances.

Release of Information

Information can only be released to the parent or guardian listed in the
child’s record on CDBS and only these people can enquire about:

-   eligibility
-   remaining balance amount
-   notification letters sent

For more details, see Release of information for Child Dental Benefit
Schedule (CDBS)

CDBS notification of eligibility

Children/teenagers who become eligible for the CDBS throughout the year
will be sent a notification of their eligibility.

Customers can confirm a child/teenager’s CDBS eligibility and balance
amount at any time during the year by:

-   [] accessing their Medicare online account at myGov
-   calling the Medicare general enquiries line

When Service Officers speak to customers about their CDBS eligibility
they must always check the customer’s Entitlement Details within
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) and confirm the current
Entitlement Year.

If the current year is not listed under Entitlement Year, the customer
may not be eligible at that time. The entitlement year for a customer
will change as the calendar year changes, see example of CDBS
Entitlement Details.

Issuing of the CDBS notifications

Notifications of eligibility for CDBS are:

-   mailed out to the address recorded with Centrelink or the Department
    of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) or emailed to their myGov account (if
    that is the customers preferred option) in January each year and
    when children/teenagers become newly eligible for the CDBS programme
    throughout the year
-   only issued once a child/teenager meets all the criteria
-   only issued for the current year

Where a child/teenager is living in:

-   shared care arrangement - the parent/guardian with the highest
    percentage of care who is receiving the payments will be sent the
    notification of eligibility
-   equal shared care arrangements - if the percentage of care is equal
    shared care and both are receiving the payments then both
    parents/guardians will receive a notification of eligibility

Eligibility of the child/teenager is determined using customer data from
either Centrelink or DVA and is matched to their Medicare records.
Eligibility data is provided to the Medicare system from:

-   Centrelink daily
-   DVA monthly

Lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers receive a notification of
eligibility in the calendar year following the financial year to which
their FTB Part A claim relates. All other customers will receive their
notification of eligibility in the same calendar year as they are deemed
eligible, see Lump sum customers.

Note: a CDBS notification may not be issued for several reasons, see
CDBS notification not received or issued.

Confirm the CDBS notification status

To confirm the status of a CDBS notification, check the following fields
in the 'Notification Details' tab of the Inquire CDBS Details screen in
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS):

-   Letter type - which will display a status of initial or reissue
-   Contact type
-   Date sent
-   Addressee name
-   Address

CDBS notification not issued or received

A CDBS notification may not have been issued/reissued or received if
the:

-   Child/teenager is newly eligible and the notification has not been
    issued yet. The parent/guardian or child/teenager or their partner
    who claims Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A as a lump sum is eligible
    for the CDBS in the calendar year immediately following the
    financial year that the FTB Part A claim relates. For example, in
    2021 the customer lodged a lump sum claim for the 2020 financial
    year, therefore eligibility for CDBS will be granted in the 2022
    calendar year.
-   Information has not been received from the Centrelink system, DVA,
    or the information is incomplete or does not match Medicare service
    records (referred to as unmatched or mismatched data).

Unmatched data

When a child/teenager's details are sent from either the Centrelink or
DVA system and does not match Medicare data, the child/teenager is not
recognised as eligible for CDBS. This could be due to inconsistencies or
missing details within each program when the data is transmitted to
Medicare.

The following customer details may be affected:

-   full name
-   date of birth
-   gender

Where a child/teenager believes they are eligible for the CDBS but they
have not received a CDBS notification, Medicare must determine why the
data does not match.

If applicable, advise the child/teenager to contact the relevant agency
(Centrelink, DVA or Medicare) to update their details.

If there are no details available in Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)/CDBS, contact the CDBS Help desk.

The Resources page describes the action to take where it is confirmed
that data has been unmatched.

Mismatched data

When a child/teenager's details are sent from either Centrelink or DVA's
system, collect all relevant details, for example, consumer number, CRN
and provide to the CDBS Help desk.

Notification not received enquiries

The Process page describes how to answer enquiries from a child/teenager
(or their parent/guardian) when they have not received a CDBS
notification.

Requests to reissue CDBS notification through CDMS and myGov

CDBS notifications can be reissued when requested by the eligible
child/teenager or parent/guardian.

Customers can request a CDBS notification be reissued by:

-   [] accessing their Medicare online account at myGov
-   calling the Medicare general enquiries line

A Service Officer can reissue a notification through the Notification
Reissue tab on the Amend Child Dental Benefits Schedule Details screen
in CDBS to the customer’s mail preference. If the customer has a myGov
account with an electronic mail preference the letter will be sent to
their myGov account.

The electronic mail preference indicator can be viewed in the Medicare
Online Services Entitlement screens in Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS).CDBS notification

The reissue notification is posted fortnightly to either:

-   the address recorded with Centrelink or Department of Veterans'
    Affairs (DVA) system
-   an address provided by the requesting person once the Service
    Officer has confirmed the address and checked the, return mail flag

myGov notification

To request a CDBS notification:

-   [] once the customer has created a myGov account under the ‘Medicare
    letters online’ selection they can manage or change the preference
    to receive their Medicare letters electronically to their myGov
    account by selecting ‘send my eligible letters to myGov Inbox’
    option
-   once the preference is set all available Medicare letters will be
    sent to their myGov account

To re-print the CDBS notification:

-   If the CDBS notification was emailed to the customer’s myGov
    account, Service Officers are to advise that the notification is
    retained on file for 2 years in the customer’s inbox. Advise the
    customer to log on to their myGov account and use the print option
    available to re-print the original notification for the current
    calendar year

To re-generate the CDBS notification:

-   Service Officers can re-generate a CDBS notification through the
    ‘Amend Child Dental Benefits Schedule Details’ function using the
    Notification Reissue tab in CDMS

Note:

-   The regenerated notifications are emailed fortnightly and is a copy
    of the original notification sent in the calendar year
-   Notifications can only be reissued for the current calendar year,
    they cannot be reissued for previous calendar years or if the
    initial notification has not been sent

Return Mail Flag indicator CDBS

The CDBS Return Mail Flag procedure is to help Service Officers to set a
return mail flag on the records for the teenager or addressee. If
returned mail is received for CDBS then the return mail flag is set in
CDBS only. Details used for CDBS is Centrelink Data not Medicare data.
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) may have the correct
address.

Set a Return Mail Flag indicator

The Process page describes how to set a CDBS Return Mail Flag indicator.

Remove a Return Mail Flag indicator

When the ‘Return Mail Flag’ indicator is on, Service Officers cannot
issue or reissue the CDBS notification.

The ‘Return Mail Flag’ needs to be removed from the CDBS record first.
This measure assures that the customer updates the address prior to
issue/reissue the CDBS notification with Services Australia.

The Process page describes how to remove a CDBS Return Mail Flag
indicator.

The Resources page has contact details for CDBS, a description of the
CDBS eligibility for the relevant Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A claim
period, the action to take where it is confirmed that the data has been
unmatched and links to the CDBS Enquiry form and CDBS page on the
Services Australia website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
