
Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility 011-44070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Medicare eligibility for people under a
Ministerial order.

Active orders

Section 6(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 provides that the Minister
for Health can order that a particular person or group of persons be
eligible for Medicare even though they would not, by usual eligibility
rules, be regarded as eligible.

The References page contains legislation relevant to Active orders for
the purposes of Medicare eligibility.

Fulbright scholars

A Ministerial Order No 75 enables a person whose visit to Australia is
financed by the Australian/American Education Foundation (also known as
a Fulbright scholar) to be eligible to enrol for Medicare.

There is no specific visa which allows entitlement. Documents verifying
the applicant is a Fulbright scholar is the fundamental criteria.

The order does not include dependants.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

The following documents must be included with a completed Medicare
enrolment application form:

-   current passport, travel document or Immicard, and
-   documents from the Australian/American Education Foundation stating
    that the person is studying under the scheme

Where the applicant's visa cannot be confirmed via the Immigration data
link, the applicant must also provide:

-   visa grant letter or copy of the electronic visa

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - date of arrival in Australia
-   end date - expiry date of visa
-   entitlement type - Fulbright Scholar

Secondary movement offshore entry visa XB (subclass 447)

This visa is a Refugee category visa for people who are subject to
persecution in their home country, and are in need of resettlement. The
majority of applicants who are considered under this category are
identified and referred by the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR) to
Australia for resettlement.

Ministerial order No. 793 enables refugees with visa XB (subclass 447)
to be eligible for Medicare.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

One document from each of the following document types, must be provided
for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

valid visa, documentation can be presented:

in the form of a travel document (for example Convention Travel
Documents)

correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
confirming visa subclass 447 has been granted

a Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) screen print (no more than
1 week old)

-   Note: a VEVO check conducted by the Service Officer will not provide
    a start date, only confirmation of status

identification document:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - expiry date of visa
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (Visa 447 Secondary Movement
    Offshore Entry)

Temporary Humanitarian Concern visa (subclass 786)

Holders of a visa subclass 786 Humanitarian Concern (Temporary) visa are
eligible for Medicare under Ministerial order No.800.

Customers will need the following documents. They must provide these
documents for each person on the enrolment form:

current passport or Immicard, and

evidence they have been granted visa subclass 786. This must be:

-   an email or letter from Home Affairs or Migration Agent, and have
    details about the category of their visa subclass and date of
    lodgement (start date). A digital copy on a phone, tablet or laptop
    is acceptable

Service Officer must:

-   complete a VEVO check, and
-   record all documents in CDMS when registering a customer’s Medicare
    entitlement

Note: a VEVO check conducted will not provide a start date, only
confirmation of status. The letter from Home Affairs or the Immigration
data link should confirm the start date.

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - expiry date of visa
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (786 visa Temporary
    humanitarian concern)

Temporary Retirement visa (subclass 410) before 1 December 1998

Ministerial order No.798 enables the applicant of a Temporary Retirement
visa (subclass 410) before 1 December 1998 to be eligible for Medicare
under the conditions of their relevant Reciprocal Health Care Agreement
(RHCA).

The holder of a visa subclass 410, who applied or had their visa issued
before 1 December 1998 and who was a resident of a RHCA country prior to
arriving in Australia has an option to either:

-   enrol in Medicare under the terms of the relevant RHCA, (their
    Medicare record in CDMS must notate RHCA ACCEPTANCE)
-   apply annually for an exemption from the Medicare levy by lodging an
    application for a Medicare Entitlement Statement

New enrolments

410 visa holders, who have not enrolled in Medicare before and had
applied or had their visa issued before 1 December 1998, must complete a
410 Option form to declare whether they are opting to be enrolled in
Medicare or apply annually for an exemption to the Medicare levy. These
forms can be obtained from Medicare Consumers Program Support.

These application requests must be forwarded to Medicare Consumers
Program Support, where a 410 Option form will be sent to the 410 visa
holder for completion.

Medicare Consumers Program Support will action these initial requests.

Eligibility extension

410 visa holders who had applied or had their visa issued before 1
December 1998 and are already enrolled in Medicare (Group comments
should state 'RHCA ACCEPTANCE'), do not need to complete a new 410
Option form. Service Officers can extend their Medicare entitlement for
a period of 5 years or till the end of their visa (whichever comes
first).

Where the 410 visa holder has a Medicare card, but 'RHCA ACCEPTANCE' is
not notated in their Medicare record on CDMS in the comments tab,
contact Medicare Consumers Program Support.

Re-enrolment

410 visa holders, who are re-enrolling in Medicare and had initially
applied or had their visa issued before 1 December 1998, do not need to
complete a 410 Option form. Where they have been residing outside
Australia and their 410 visas do not run consecutively, they cannot be
re-enrolled in Medicare.

If unsure about the 410 visa holder’s possible eligibility, escalate
Medicare Consumers Program Support.

See also:

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Documents required to elect to apply for either enrolment in Medicare or
obtain Medicare levy exemption

Applicants need to provide:

-   their passport
-   valid 410 visa dated prior to 1 December 1998
-   their current 410 visa, and
-   for new Medicare enrolments, a completed 410 option form identifying
    their preferred option

Applicants who elect to enrol in Medicare must also submit a completed
Medicare Enrolment application form with the documents required under
the specific Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for
Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

Entitlement to Medicare

Note: initial application requests to be actioned by Medicare Consumers
Program Support.

-   entitlement type - refer to the relevant RHCA
-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - 5 years from the start date, or expiry date of the visa,
    or the specific terms set out in the specific RHCA criteria,
    whichever comes first
-   comments - 'RHCA ACCEPTANCE' when indicated on the 410 Option form

Note: Medicare cards can continue to be reissued for 5 years at a time
unless the visa expires.

Removal Pending Bridging visa (subclass 070)

Bridging visa subclass 070 was created to enable the release, pending
removal from Australia, of persons in immigration detention who have
been cooperating fully with efforts to be removed, but whose removal is
not reasonably practicable at the current time. This visa is provided to
detainees as they are released from detention centres.

A person who holds a valid visa subclass 070 Removal Pending Bridging
visa and is listed on the Schedule held by the Department of Home
Affairs is eligible for Medicare under Ministerial order No.804.

Note: Service Officers must escalate these applications to Health
Service Delivery Division (HSDD) Eligibility. HSDD Eligibility must
email these applications to Medicare Consumers Program Support for
processing.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

One document from each of the following document types must be provided
for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

valid visa, documentation can be presented:

-   in the form of a travel document (for example Convention Travel
    Documents)
-   correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
    confirming visa subclass 070 has been granted

identification document:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - as specified in the schedule
-   end date - as specified in the schedule
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (070 Visa - Removal Pending)

Unauthorised Maritime Arrivals (UMAs)

Unauthorised Maritime Arrivals (UMA) are persons who arrive by boat and
are released into the Australian community from detention. The
Department of Home Affairs issue them with a bridging visa 'E' (BVE)
while their refugee claims are assessed.

An UMA who is the holder of a Bridging E (Class WE) visa is eligible for
Medicare, under Ministerial order No.807.

Effective from 1 October 2017, all UMAs must have applied for a
Temporary Protection Visa subclass 785 (TPV) or a Safe Haven Enterprise
Visa subclass 790 (SHEV). For any UMA who does not apply or is refused
their application for a TPV or SHEV, will be required to leave
Australia.

All UMAs remain eligible as an UMA under the conditions of their
BVE-050, while their TPV/SHEV application is assessed or they make
arrangements to leave Australia.

To enrol, extend eligibility or amend the entitlement type of an UMA,
refer to the process tab.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

The following documents must be included for each person listed on the
completed Medicare enrolment application form or Centrelink form SU710
or SU691 - Claim for Status Resolution Support Services Payment (see
note):

-   Immicard, and
-   visa grant letter or UMA letter issued by the Department of Home
    Affairs

Immicard - some people may still hold a PLO56 which has been superseded
by the Immicard

Notes:

-   the Department of Home Affairs provides the department with a
    spreadsheet that includes visa information for UMA clients. Service
    Officers can use this information to assist with establishing the
    applicant’s Medicare eligibility, in cases where all the
    documentation is not available. The spreadsheet is distributed daily
    from Medicare Consumers Program Support to service centres and other
    relevant processing teams
-   Service Officers must not refuse an UMA applicant's initial Medicare
    enrolment or extension of Medicare eligibility. Contact HSDD
    Eligibility for further advice
-   when the applicant is unable to produce a letter from the Department
    of Home Affairs, Service Officers must confirm their work and visa
    status through Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO)
-   applicants may attend a Medicare Service Centre with a Red Cross
    case worker or other Humanitarian Settlement Services agency worker
-   applicants may have been placed in emergency accommodation. A 'care
    of' address can be provided as their Medicare address. Service
    Officers should advise the applicant to update their Medicare
    address when they have more permanent accommodation

The SU710 and the SU691 is a joint form that can be used to claim a
Centrelink payment and enrol in Medicare, including registering for the
Medicare Safety Net or the Australian Immunisation Register. These forms
are generally processed by the Status Resolution Support Status team for
both the Centrelink and Medicare components. Where they are unable to
complete the Medicare enrolment, this is referred to a Medicare trained
Service Officer to complete following the standard enrolment process.

Entitlement to Medicare for UMAs with permission to work

-   start date - visa issue date
-   end date - visa expiry date. Where the visa has no expiration date
    then 12 months from the visa issue date, whichever date occurs first
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (Unauthorised Maritime
    Arrival - can work)

Note: UMAs with work rights may have previously applied for a permanent
protection visa. Where Service Officers are aware of this the
eligibility status should be amended. The Medicare record should be
attached to the Immigration data link. Refer to Eligibility and
Enrolments for assistance.

Entitlement to Medicare for UMAs with no work rights

-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - expiry date of visa or where the visa has no expiration
    date then 12 months from the visa issue date, whichever date occurs
    first
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (Unauthorised Maritime
    Arrival - cannot work)

Temporary Protection visa (subclass 785)

A holder of a valid temporary Protection visa (subclass 785) is eligible
for Medicare under Ministerial Order No.799.

Note: a person can only be enrolled with an entitlement type of
Temporary Protection visa subclass 785 (TPV) or Safe Haven Enterprise
Visa subclass 790 (SHEV) when the TPV or SHEV is granted.

Where an UMA has lodged or been granted a TPV, refer to the process tab
for steps on how to update in CDMS.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

One document from each of the following document types must be provided
for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

valid visa, documentation can be presented:

-   in the form of a travel document (for example Convention Travel
    Documents)
-   correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
    confirming a visa subclass 785 has been granted. Where an
    immigration data link is available the email or letter is not
    required
-   a Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) screen print (no more
    than 1 week old)

identification document:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Entitlement to Medicare (current TPV)

-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - expiry date of visa
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order (785 - Visa Temporary
    Protection)

Entitlement to Medicare (subsequent TPV applications)

Where the holder of a TPV has lodged an application for a new TPV prior
to the current TPV expiring, they will remain eligible for Medicare
under the terms of the current TPV. The current one will be ‘open ended’
until the subsequent TPV has been finally determined. Service Officers
are to access VEVO to confirm the applicant has an ‘open ended’ TPV.

Note: TPV entitlement type GC will be transmitted via the immigration
data link from 23 November 2015, CDMS records should be linked when an
exact match is found during the enrolment process or during an amendment
of a CDMS record where a data link is displayed. See Electronic
information linked from Department of Home Affairs for Medicare
enrolments.

Refer to the Process page for instructions on how to update CDMS where
the immigration data link indicates either the lodgement or the grant of
a TPV.

Safe Haven Enterprise visa (subclass 790)

A holder of a valid Safe Haven Enterprise visa (subclass 790) is
eligible for Medicare under Ministerial Order No.809.

Note: a person can only be enrolled with an entitlement type of Safe
Haven Enterprise Visa subclass 790 (SHEV) or Temporary Protection Visa
subclass 785 (TPV) when the SHEV or TPV is granted.

Where an UMA has lodged or been granted a SHEV, refer to the Process
page for steps on how to update in CDMS.

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

One document from each of the following document types must be provided
for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

valid visa, documentation can be presented:

-   in the form of a travel document (for example, Convention Travel
    Document)
-   correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
    confirming a visa subclass 790 has been granted. Where an
    immigration data link is available the email or letter is not
    required
-   a Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) screen print (no more
    than 1 week old)

identification document:

-   current passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Entitlement to Medicare (current SHEV)

-   start date - start date of visa
-   end date - expiry date of visa
-   entitlement type - Ministerial Order (790 - Safe Haven Enterprise
    visa)

Entitlement to Medicare (subsequent SHEV applications)

Where the holder of a SHEV has lodged an application for a new SHEV
prior to the current SHEV expiring, they will remain eligible for
Medicare under the terms of the current SHEV. The current one will be
‘open ended’ until the subsequent SHEV has been finally determined.
Service Officers are to access VEVO to confirm the applicant has an
‘open ended’ SHEV.

Note: SHEV entitlement type GO will be transmitted via the immigration
data link from 23 November 2015, CDMS records should be linked when an
exact match is found during the enrolment process or during an amendment
of a CDMS record where a data link is displayed. See Electronic
information linked from Department of Home Affairs for Medicare
enrolments.

Australian citizens absent from Australia up to 5 years

Ministerial order No.797 allows for an eligible Australian citizen who:

-   has been absent from Australia for no longer than 5 years from the
    date they were last considered an 'Australian resident' (initial
    departure date) to remain eligible for Medicare

Note: the 5 year period does not recommence when an Australian citizen
returns to Australia for a visit (that is, not to reside).

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

When an Australian citizen has been absent from Australia for less than
5 years, they do not need to provide documentation to reconfirm
residency.

When an Australian citizen has been absent for more than 5 years, the
following documents must be included with a completed Medicare enrolment
application form:

-   current passport (of all people listed on the application form), and
-   2 residency documents, or
-   completed Commonwealth statutory declaration

Service Officers can make the Statutory Declaration available to an
applicant on their initial enquiry when the applicant cannot provide
sufficient documentation to confirm residency. For example, the
applicant is now residing in Australia with relatives and is currently
unemployed or is not included on a rental agreement contract and utility
accounts. The information supplied in the Statutory Declaration must
include:

the applicants previous country of residence, and

the applicants intention to reside in Australia, and

steps taken to reside in Australia, for example:

-   the applicant has sold their overseas home
-   sold their overseas home contents
-   resigned from overseas employment
-   bought a house in Australia

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - date of arrival
-   end date - not applicable (open Medicare card)
-   entitlement type - Australian citizen

Contributory Parent visas - (subclass 173/143 and 884/864)

Holders of a temporary Contributory Parent visa (subclass 173) or
temporary Contributory Aged Parent visa (subclass 884) are eligible for
Medicare under Ministerial order No.802.

Offshore Contributory Parent (temporary subclass 173 and permanent
subclass 143)

Parents of an Australian citizen, permanent resident or eligible New
Zealand citizen can apply for a Temporary Contributory Parent visa
(subclass 173) or a Permanent Contributory Parent visa (Subclass 143).
Applicants must be outside of Australia when applying for the visa.

Onshore Contributory Aged Parent (temporary subclass 884 and permanent
subclass 864)

Currently only 'aged' parents of an Australian citizen, permanent
resident or eligible New Zealand citizen can apply for the Temporary
Contributory Aged Parent visa (subclass 884) or Permanent Contributory
Aged Parent visa (subclass 864). Applicants must be in Australia when
applying for the visa.

See also: Applicant for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

When the temporary visa expires and the holder is granted a bridging
visa 'A' (BVA), they remain eligible until the permanent component of
the visa is granted, as long as the permanent component is lodged with
the Department of Home Affairs.

Note: Parents who apply directly for a permanent Contributory Parent
visa (subclass 143) or permanent Contributory Aged Parent visa (subclass
864) without previously being the holder of temporary component of the
visa are not eligible for Medicare until their permanent Contributory
Parent visa is granted. See Parent visa for more information

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

One document from each of the following document types must be provided
for all people listed on the Medicare Enrolment Application form:

valid visa, documentation can be presented:

-   in the form of a travel document
-   correspondence (email or letter) from the Department of Home Affairs
    confirming an application for permanent residency has been granted
-   a Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) screen print (no more
    than 1 week old)
-   a VEVO check conducted by the Service Officer

identification document:

-   passport
-   travel document
-   Immicard

Refer to the Resources page for the entitlement periods for subclass
173, 143, 884 and 864.

De facto partners of Australian citizens or permanent residents

Ministerial order No. 806 enables the term 'de facto' to have the same
meaning as 'spouse'.

The Resources page contains legislation relevant to de facto partners of
Australian citizens or permanent residents for the purposes of Medicare
eligibility.

Spouse, parent or child of a New Zealand citizen

A New Zealand citizen residing in Australia is considered an 'Australian
resident' under the Health Insurance Act 1973. New Zealanders are not
required to hold a Permanent visa and are eligible for Medicare.

Ministerial order No.805 enables a parent, spouse, de facto or child
(non-New Zealand citizen) of an eligible New Zealand citizen (residing
in Australia) who has applied for permanent residency and their visa
condition does not give permission to work, to be eligible for Medicare.

Eligibility for Medicare

-   spouse, parent, de facto or child has applied for permanent
    residency and has work rights

A spouse, parent, de facto or child has applied for permanent residency
and has work rights. A spouse, parent, de facto or child of an eligible
New Zealand citizen residing in Australia is eligible for Medicare when
they:

-   hold a valid temporary visa
-   have a continuing application for permanent residency with work
    rights, and
-   reside in Australia

These applications are no different to any other applicant for permanent
residency.

-   spouse, parent, de facto or child has applied for permanent
    residency and has no work rights

A spouse, parent, de facto or child of an eligible New Zealand citizen
residing in Australia is eligible for Medicare when they:

-   hold a valid temporary visa
-   have a continuing application for permanent residency with no work
    rights
-   reside in Australia, and
-   can provide a document confirming evidence of a relationship with
    the eligible New Zealand citizen

spouse, parent, de facto or child has not applied for permanent
residency:

-   where the spouse, de facto, parent or child of a New Zealand citizen
    who resides in Australia has not applied for permanent residency,
    they are not eligible for Medicare unless they were previously
    residing in New Zealand or a country under RHCA and meet the
    required RHCA criteria

Note: eligible persons covered under the RHCA with New Zealand are not
enrolled in Medicare and do not receive a Medicare card

For more information on RHCA and eligibility criteria, see Reciprocal
Health Care Agreements

See also:

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

New Zealand citizens eligibility for Medicare

The Resources page contains legislation relevant to spouse, parent or
child of a New Zealand citizen for the purposes of Medicare eligibility.

Support for victims of people trafficking programme

Ministerial Order No.803 enables people included in the Support for
victims of people trafficking programme to be eligible for Medicare when
they are:

-   lawfully residing in Australia, and
-   holders of a valid visa, and
-   their names appear on a schedule issued by the Department of Health
    and Aged Care

Documents required to enrol in Medicare

The following documents are required for each person listed on the
Medicare Enrolment Application form:

-   current passport or Immicard
-   letter from the Department of Home Affairs with details of a current
    temporary visa, and
-   letter from the Red Cross

Note: Service Officers must contact Medicare Consumers Program Support
to confirm if the applicant's names appear on a schedule issued by the
Department of Health and Aged Care before processing.

Entitlement to Medicare

-   start date - as specified in the Schedule
-   end date - as specified in the Schedule
-   entitlement type - Ministerial order - Support for victims of people
    trafficking program

Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa (subclass 449)

Under Ministerial Order No. 808 and 815, a person is eligible for
Medicare if they:

hold a Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa (subclass 449), and are an
unauthorised maritime arrival (UMA), or

hold a Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa (subclass 449) that:

-   was granted on or after 19 August 2021, and
-   relates directly or indirectly to security situation in Afghanistan,
    or

are a child born in Australia to a holder of a Humanitarian Stay
(Temporary) visa (subclass 449) that:

-   was granted on or after 19 August 2021, and
-   relates directly or indirectly to security situation in Afghanistan

Note: the Department of Home Affairs, granted Temporary Humanitarian
Stay visa (subclass 449) with a new BVE-050. In many cases, the subclass
449 is only valid for 7 days.

The subclass 449 and the BVE-050 may have been granted on the same date.
The BVE-050 however, only takes effect once the Temporary Humanitarian
Stay visa ends.

Documents to enrol in Medicare

Service Officers can enrol an applicant in Medicare if they:

hold a Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa (subclass 449), and are an
unauthorised maritime arrival (UMA), or

hold a Humanitarian Stay (Temporary) visa (subclass 449) that:

-   was granted on or after 19 August 2021, and
-   relates directly or indirectly to security situation in Afghanistan,
    or

are a child born in Australia to a holder of a Humanitarian Stay
(Temporary) visa (subclass 449) that:

-   was granted on or after 19 August 2021, and
-   relates directly or indirectly to security situation in Afghanistan

The applicant must provide the following documents for each person:

completed Medicare enrolment form (MS004)

proof of Identity

-   Immicard, or
-   Travel document, or
-   Australian Birth Certificate or FA081 (where a child born is born in
    Australia)

valid visa, confirming subclass visa 449 has been granted or BVE-050 by
:

-   email or letter from Department of Home Affairs, a digital copy on a
    phone, tablet or laptop is acceptable, or
-   a VEVO check conducted by the Service Officer

Note:

-   Service Officers must not refuse an applicant’s initial enrolment or
    extension of Medicare eligibility. See Escalation process for
    Medicare Eligibility
-   The Department of Home Affairs provides the agency with a
    spreadsheet that includes visa information for clients. Service
    Officers use this information establish the applicant’s Medicare
    eligibility, in cases where all the documentation is not available.
    The spreadsheet is distributed daily to relevant processing teams
-   The applicant must not be referred back to Department of Home
    Affairs or a letter issued requesting further details. If the
    applicant cannot provide all required document, Service Officers
    must escalate the enquiry
-   Applicants may attend a Medicare Service Centre with a Red Cross
    case worker or other Humanitarian Settlement Services agency worker
-   Applicants may have been placed in emergency accommodation. A 'care
    of' address can be provided as their Medicare address. Service
    Officers should advise the applicant to update their Medicare
    address when they have more permanent accommodation

Entitlement to Medicare

Start date - issue date of visa (subclass 449)

End date - expiry date of the BVE-050 or visa end date

Entitlement type –

-   Ministerial order (Unauthorised Maritime Arrival – can work, or
-   Ministerial order (449 visa Humanitarian Stay Temporary)

Skilled Work Regional (Provisional) visa subclass 491 and Skilled Employer Sponsored Regional (Provisional) visa subclass 494

Holders of the below valid visas are eligible for Medicare under
Ministerial Order No. 812:

-   Skilled Work Regional (Provisional) visa subclass 491,and
-   Skilled Employer Sponsored Regional (Provisional) visa subclass 494

Their subclass visa 491 or 494 must be granted before they can enrol in
Medicare.

After 3 years, holders of these visas can apply for:

-   Permanent Resident (Skilled Regional) visa Subclass 191

This visa will be the permanent resident pathway for the 2 new regional
(provisional) visas. It will begin from November 2022.

The Department of Home Affairs will send electronic data via the
Immigration date link. This has details about the person’s immigration
status.

When a visa subclass 491 and 494 is granted, the holder will get
Medicare eligibility for a period of 12 months.

The system will automatically issue a blue interim Medicare every 12
months. It will do this until either:

-   the visa subclass 491 or 494 has expired, or
-   visa subclass 491 or 494 has been refused

Documents to enrol in Medicare

Customers must provide all of the following documents for each person on
the enrolment form:

current passport, Immicard or travel document

evidence they have been granted visa subclass 491 or 494. This must be:

-   an email or letter from Home Affairs or Migration Agent, and have
    details about the category of their visa subclass and date of
    lodgement (start date). A digital copy on a phone, tablet or laptop
    is acceptable

Complete a

VEVO check

Record all documents in CDMS when registering a customer’s Medicare
entitlement

Where visa details come through via the Immigration data link, link the
applicant

Entitlement to Medicare

Start date - date of arrival for first time entries to Australia or date
visa granted

End date – 12 months from the start date

Entitlement type:

-   Provisional skilled work regional (subclass 491)
-   Provisional skilled employer sponsored regional (subclass 494)

When the Department of Home Affairs refuse an application, the person
will lose:

-   their work rights, and
-   their eligibility for Medicare

During the appeal process the person:

-   does not meet the eligibility criteria as an Australian resident
    described in the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   does not have work rights in Australia

Note: having a relationship to an Australian citizen or permanent visa
holder is not relevant during the appeal process.

Document verification

Identification documents must be verified in the Document Verification
System (DVS) before processing the application. The Process page
contains details on how to verify and record this information.

Service Officers must attempt to identify the applicant via the:

-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO), or
-   Immigration data link

If Service Officers:

-   can identify the applicant via VEVO or the Immigration data link ,
    DVS is not required
-   cannot identify the applicant via VEVO or the Immigration data link
    , verify the documents in DVS prior to processing the application

The Resources page contains a list of the Ministerial order numbers and
effective dates, a link to contact details for Eligibility and
Enrolments and a link to the Commonwealth statutory declaration form.

Related links

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

Applicant for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

New Zealand citizens eligibility for Medicare

Medicare cards

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
