
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains information for Service Officers when issuing a
Lifetime Health Cover (LHC) letter.

Government intent

LHC is an Australian Government initiative that started on 1 July 2000.
It was designed to encourage people to take out private hospital cover
earlier in life.

If someone does not take out and maintain private hospital cover from
the year they turn 31, they will pay a 2% LHC loading on top of their
premium for every year they are aged over 30.

To avoid paying an LHC loading, private hospital cover needs to be
purchased by 1 July following a person's 31st birthday. LHC does not
affect people born on or before 1 July 1934.

LHC and Medicare - who it applies to

In accordance with the Private Health Insurance Act 2007, LHC is
applicable to an eligible person within the meaning of Section 3 of the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

An eligible person means a person who resides in Australia who is:

-   a newly arrived Australian citizen not previously enrolled in
    Medicare
-   a migrant (holder of a permanent resident visa, including return
    residents)
-   a conditional migrant (applicant for permanent residency)
-   an Applicant for Permanent Protection
-   a New Zealand citizen
-   an Applicant under a Ministerial order

Any complaints received from persons covered under a Ministerial order,
where their applicable LHC date is before November 2022, must be
escalated to Medicare Consumers Policy for advice.

Lifetime Health Cover letters

Department of Health and Aged Care mail out letters

In May each year, the Department of Health and Aged Care undertakes a
mail out to inform people about LHC and the implications of not taking
out private hospital. An information letter and fact sheet is sent to
the following people:

-   Persons approaching the age of 31 enrolled in Medicare
-   Newly arrived migrants enrolled in Medicare (with entitlement types
    of Conditional Migrant and Migrants)

The mail out of these letters occurs in the first week of May each year.

LHC letters issued by Services Australia

Eligible newly arrived Australian residents aged 31 or over will not
have to pay an LHC loading if private hospital cover is purchased within
12 months of being enrolled in Medicare.

They need to contact Services Australia to request an LHC letter as
proof of their full Medicare registration date. For LHC the full
Medicare registration refers to the date registered for interim or full
Medicare benefits (blue or green Medicare card). They give this to their
private health insurer as evidence of their Medicare eligibility to
determine whether LHC applies.

Note: for LHC the full Medicare registration date means the date on
which they are registered (processing date) in Medicare, not their
Medicare entitlement date.

See the Process page for information about responding to requests for
LHC letters.

LHC arrangements before 1 April 2007

LHC cover was first introduced in July 2000, however on 1 April 2007 a
number of changes were made to LHC arrangements. The changes included
the applicable date for LHC.

The applicable LHC date for persons who enrolled in Medicare before 1
April 2007 was their Medicare entitlement start date. From 1 April 2007,
their Medicare registration date (processing date) became the applicable
date for LHC purposes.

It is unlikely that a person enrolled in Medicare before 1 April 2007
would be requesting a LHC letter as it would be of no benefit to them; a
person must take out private hospital cover within 12 months of being
registered for Medicare to avoid paying the LHC loading. If a person
enrolled in Medicare before 1 April 2007 requests a LHC letter this
indicates they may have been absent from Australia and therefore a LHC -
Unable to confirm applicable date letter should be used.

The Resources page contains information about Medicare entitlements
types and eligibility to obtain an LHC letter, and links to letters for
confirming a person's LHC status.

Related links

Quality assurance and quality checking for external mail in Medicare

Amend address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
