
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about Medicare claims for deceased
persons.

Determine the claimant

When processing a claim for a deceased patient Service Officers must
first establish who the claimant is.

The claimant is the person who incurred the cost of the service. The
claimant is not always the patient, for example, where a child is the
patient the parent/guardian incurs the cost and is therefore the
claimant.

Medicare benefits must be paid to the claimant and not the patient.

Standard claiming requirements apply when processing claims where the
deceased is not the claimant.

See Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for more
details.

Claimant is not deceased

-   Pay Medicare benefits to the claimant, not the patient
-   Standard claiming requirements apply when processing claims if the
    deceased is not the claimant

See Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for more
details.

Deceased (or their estate) is the claimant

Note: where initial notification that a person is deceased is received,
Service Officers must follow the instructions in Amend deceased persons
Medicare enrolment requirements.

The date of death must not be removed or lifted to process Medicare
claims for a deceased person.

When processing a claim for a deceased claimant (or their estate) the
Medicare benefit can be paid to the executor or the appointed
administrator’s nominated bank account.

Appropriate documentation is required to confirm the identity of the
executor or the appointed administrator. This includes a certified true
copy of either:

-   the Last Will and Testament naming the executor of the estate
-   the Letter of Administration naming the appointed administrator, or
-   probate from the courts

Service Officers must add a comment on the deceased’s record in CDMS to
record notification of documentation by the executor or appointed
administrator. The executor, or the appointed administrator, is not
required to provide a certified true copy of the Last Will and Testament
or the Letter of Administration each time they claim.

The executor or the appointed administrator must submit Medicare patient
invoices along with a completed Medicare Claim form (MS014) including
nominated bank account details.

If there is no proof of identity for the executor or the appointed
administrator, staff must attempt to phone the:

-   administrator, or
-   executor

If attempts to phone are unsuccessful, return the claim with the
Medicare claim needs more information (Z0828) letter. See Resources page
for a link.

Bank account details

The executor or the appointed administrator must provide a temporary
bank account for the payment of the Medicare benefit.

If a financial institution closes a deceased bank account, electronic
funds transfer (EFT) payments automatically reject.

Service Officers must tell the executor or the appointed administrator
if a request is made to use a deceased persons bank account details.

If the deceased bank account is not closed, the Medicare benefit may be
paid into the bank account. However, the executor or the appointed
administrator should check with the financial institution to confirm
access to the funds are possible.

Service Officers must check CDMS for bank account details before
assessing a claim, if the executor or appointed administrator advises to
use the nominated bank account in CDMS.

Stored bank account details for the deceased are not automatically
populated into the Medicare mainframe screen from CDMS.

When the deceased has recorded bank details in CDMS, Service Officers
must key details into mainframe temporarily (T) when assessing the
claim. This allows the Medicare benefit to be paid into the nominated
bank account.

Safety Net

Service Officers must check the Safety Net registration for the deceased
and make sure they are not listed as the Family contact. See Family
registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net for more details.

Medicare benefits payable and not payable

Medicare benefits are payable to the claimant for eligible services
provided before the patient’s death.

Standard claim lodgement timeframes apply.

Medicare benefits are payable when a provider:

-   attends a patient who dies in their presence
-   is called to attend a patient who may or may not be dead
-   is called to attend a patient who was alive at the time of the call,
    but dies before the provider arrives
-   attends a patient and determines that their life is extinct, and
    subsequently issues a death certificate. A Medicare benefit may be
    claimed under an appropriate attendance item

The Resources page has a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
Online website.

Medicare benefits are not payable when a provider:

-   attends a deceased person solely to issue a death certificate
-   issues a cremation certificate

Note: Medicare benefits are not payable for the issue of a death
certificate. An attendance on a patient to determine their life is
extinct can be claimed under an appropriate attendance item. The outcome
of the attendance may be that a death certificate is issued. However,
Medicare benefits are only payable for the attendance component of the
service.

The Resources page has a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
Online website, Medicare claim form (MS014) and Medicare claim needs
more information (Z0828) letter.

Related links

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Claims processing in Medicare

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Amend deceased persons Medicare enrolment requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
