
Medicare online services 011-17112900

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Services Australia self service options as the
preferred service delivery channels for customers to conduct their
Medicare business.

On this Page:

Self service and staff expectations

Self services are available online, via PC's, laptops or smart devices.
For the majority of customers these channels are the quickest and
easiest options for completing most of their everyday transactions.

Staff are expected to:

transition customers to digital channels at every opportunity, unless
the customer is not eligible to register for self service or the staff
member deems it to be inappropriate based on their circumstances

educate customers about the self service options available to them to
complete their business and how to use self service

troubleshoot to identify and rectify why a customer has dropped out of a
digital channel when attempting to complete their business:

-   all staff must undertake basic troubleshooting to determine the
    reason for the drop out, rectify, handoff or educate the customer,
    then transition the customer back to self service to complete their
    business

appropriately escalate self service issues

Customers can register to use self services through:

-   online registration by linking to Medicare from myGov
-   assisted registration by phone or face-to-face. Customers will be
    issued a linking code to be entered once linking to Medicare from
    myGov

Development of services online

The services made available to customers have been developed in
accordance with Australian Government Online Standards, including:

-   security
-   privacy
-   accessibility
-   usability

Some of the primary business drivers in providing these services are to:

-   improve both customer service and the customer experience
-   complement Services Australia existing service delivery channels
-   respond to changes in customer expectations regarding service
    delivery options

Self service video demonstrations and online guides are available from
the online guides and video demonstrations page on Services Australia
website. These can also be accessed from self service terminals.

Note: video demonstrations may not be accessed on Services Australia
staff computers due to network bandwidth issues.

Self Service assistance online

A complete list of customer transactions which can be completed through
Medicare online accounts and the Express Plus Medicare mobile app is
available from the Self Service page on Services Australia website.

A range of step-by-step guides and online tutorial videos for a variety
of common self service transactions are also available for customers
from the Help for online accounts and mobile apps page on Services
Australia website. The Resources page contains a link. The online
tutorials can also be accessed by customers from the agency's YouTube
channel.

Staff can view the online tutorial videos internally through the Digital
Support sub-site page.

The Resources page contains links to the myGov website, self service
information on Services Australia website, Digital Support SharePoint
page, a document to help staff conduct digital conversations with
customers, and links to other internal digital support resources.

Contents

Medicare online claiming

Related links

Access to Medicare self service - set up, checking, cancelling and
enabling

Using Medicare self service

Troubleshooting Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
