
Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT payments 011-43120020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures that Service Officers must follow when
storing, confirming and end dating bank account details for the purpose
of making Medicare payments.

Medicare benefits paid via Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)

Medicare Benefits are paid to customers using Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT).

Payment for Medicare benefits for paid accounts:

-   are deposited into a claimant’s nominated bank account
-   do not need to be in the customer’s name
-   are usually paid into the nominated bank account the next working
    day after the date of processing
-   are held when a claimant has not provided a nominated bank account,
    Medicare payment are released once bank account details are provided

Service Officers must confirm bank account details during every customer
interaction and add comments to CDMS. See Mandatory bank details check
table 1 in Handle Incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS
telephony.

Requirements to store bank account details

The following details apply when storing a nominated bank account with
Medicare:

-   the customer must be aged 14 years and over, unless under special
    circumstances (for example, a child is on their own Medicare card)
-   customers aged 14 years and over can consent to any nominated bank
    account being stored, the bank account does not need to be in the
    customer’s name
-   a customer cannot store, update or remove the bank account details
    of other persons

Medicare benefits cannot be paid via EFT if the:

-   nominated account is a credit card account, or
-   bank details are for an overseas account, or
-   bank account has restrictions on EFT deposits (the customer should
    check with their financial institution if unsure)

Businesses and organisations cannot have banking details stored
permanently in CDMS, unless the customer is under financial management
or other guardianship orders. See POA, Guardianship, Administrative
Orders and Authorised Representative for Medicare.

Customers who are under financial management or other guardianship
orders should not be able to change their bank account details without
the agency first consulting the relevant trustee. Service Officers must
seek advice if they require it. See Escalation process for Medicare
Eligibility for assistance.

Note: a claimant is the person or organisation who has incurred an
expense for services. Their details are used to pay a Medicare benefit.
The account or receipt does not need to be in the claimant's name in
order for the claimant to collect a Medicare benefit.

Claiming for a child

In most cases, children are listed on their parent's or guardian's
Medicare card. When the parent/guardian pays the doctor's account for
the child, the parent/guardian is the claimant and they are entitled to
receive the Medicare benefit. The Medicare benefit is paid into the bank
account the parent/guardian has registered with Medicare. As the child
is not the claimant, the child's consent is not required and they do not
need to register bank account details.

Bank account details are required where:

-   the claimant is aged 14 years or over
-   they are the claimant for that claim, and
-   they want to receive the Medicare benefit by Electronic Funds
    Transfer (EFT)

Note: temporary bank account details cannot be stored in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

See Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for
further information.

How a customer can provide bank account details

Customers can provide a nominated bank account by:

-   [] accessing Medicare Online Accounts via myGov
-   [] using the Express Plus Medicare App
-   contacting the agency (for example, via telephone or attending a
    service centre)
-   completing the bank account details section on the Medicare Claim
    (MS014) form as part of a claim
-   completing the bank account details section of any Medicare form for
    the purpose of Medicare payments

Public/State Trustee, Guardian or Administrator who a hold Financial
Management Order (FMO) for a customer, can nominate a bank account by
sending:

-   a letter on their letterhead, and include the FMO. The customer’s
    name and DOB must be included on the letter

The bank account details are stored permanently by the agency for all
future Medicare payments unless:

-   the customer specifies that it should be temporarily stored
-   the customer is end dated, or
-   it is a business or organisation who is the claimant and does not
    hold financial management

The Resources page contains links to the myGov website, the Bank account
details Collection and Medicare Claim (MS014) forms.

Customer provides bank account details verbally

Bank account details can be used either temporarily (T) in Mainframe or
stored permanently (P) in CDMS.

Service Officers must take care not to permanently store temporary bank
account details when the customer has stated they do not want them
stored.

Bank declaration

When verbally collecting bank account details from a customer either
over the phone or in person at a service centre (this also applies when
collecting bank account details whilst processing a claim for Medicare
benefits) the Bank Declaration must be read to the customer and comments
recorded in CDMS.

If the customer does not accept the Bank Declaration, advise the
customer their claim cannot be processed and paid until this is
accepted.

Note: from 1 July 2016, if a bank account (either temporary or
permanent) is not provided a Medicare benefit will be HELD and only
released once bank account details are provided.

Privacy note and principles

Service Officers on the general enquiries telephony line are not
required to read out the privacy note as callers can select to hear the
full privacy statement at the beginning of the call.

If customers are transferred to the general enquires line from another
business line the privacy statement must be read to the customer.
Service Officers on other inbound telephony lines and in service centres
must read the privacy note to customers and record comments in CDMS.

The Australian Privacy Principles (APP) Guidelines as contained in the
Privacy Act 1988 provides information on the collection, storage and
limits on the use of personal information by the agency.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Privacy Principles
(APP), letters and forms, the myGov website and a table outlining error
messages that may appear when an invalid bank account is used.

Confirming or end date stored bank account details

Where bank details are already stored and a Medicare Claim (MS014) form
is received:

Check the MS014 form before assessing the claim to ensure the current
nominated bank account details are recorded

If existing stored bank account details are incorrect, attempt to obtain
the correct details

-   Bank account details can be updated whilst assessing the claim in
    Mainframe or in the CDMS

Note: when a customer's nominated bank account details are updated
permanently, the old bank account details are automatically end dated in
CDMS. This includes processing via the Medicare Claims processing screen
in mainframe.

If a customer requests to end date stored bank account details, see
Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare.

Claimant Refusal showing in CDMS

If a customer has previously refused to provide a nominated bank
account, this may appear in the customer’s record in CDMS as Reason for
no EFT Details - Claimant Refusal.

Service Officers must perform a mandatory bank details check during
every interaction, including where a customer has previously refused to
provide a bank account. See Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for
Medicare and PBS telephony for more information.

Business and organisation bank account details

A business or organisation:

-   can make a claim for a Medicare benefit to be paid where they have
    incurred the cost of a clinically relevant service
-   cannot have bank details stored permanently in CDMS and will be
    temporarily used for that claim only
-   must complete a Medicare claim form (MS014) for every claim

Note: a claim by a business or organisation cannot be related to a
current compensation claim or to the patient's employment.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Claim form (MS014).

See also Professional services related to Medicare patient claims or
Claims processing in Medicare.

The Resources page contains links to letters and forms, the Australian
Privacy Principles, the myGov website, the Services Australia Your right
to privacy page, information about bank account declarations, and a
table outlining error messages that may appear when an invalid bank
account is used.

Related links

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claim forms

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Professional services related to Medicare patient claims

Unauthorised Medicare activity

Using Medicare self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
