
Telephony for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-20100151

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information for Service Officers about telephony
in Medicare Compensation Recovery when undertaking inbound or outbound
phone calls.

Quality call framework

The Quality Call Framework establishes a single set of quality
expectations to ensure telephone services delivered by Services
Australia (the agency) are of high quality and meet the expectations of
both customers and government.

Staff who undertake inbound and/or outbound phone calls across the
agency, regardless of classification, employment status (ongoing,
non-ongoing, and casual) or work type, will have their call work
evaluated within the framework.

See Quality Call Framework and Quality Call Standards for more
information on the framework and description of call standard
guidelines.

Authenticating a customer

Before disclosing or updating information, the caller’s identity must be
checked by asking the caller to provide details that can be
cross-checked with the customer’s record. It is mandatory to ask the
caller to complete authentication this will:

-   avoid inadvertent disclosure of personal information
-   avoid breach of privacy and
-   prevent intertwining customer records/data. Service Officers must
    make sure they access the correct record

For authentication purposes, Service Officers must never provide
customer information for the individual to confirm. Service Officers
should be aware that other people including the customer’s friends and
relatives are aware of such simple information as the customer’s date of
birth. It is important to explain to the caller that the questions are
being asked to ensure the security and privacy of the information stored
on our records for all of our customers.

The Process page contains steps for Service Officers to complete
authentication questions. The Resources page has a link to
authentication checks summary.

Authentication not established

If the Service Officer is unable to establish authentication when
speaking to the injured person/claimant, authorised third party, insurer
or insurer’s solicitor, they must not release any information or do any
updates made to the record.

If authentication cannot be completed Service Officers must advise the
caller that no information can be discussed or released until the
requirements to verify or establish identity have been met.

Note: general enquiries can be discussed without completing
authentication, however no customer information can be accessed or
provided.

See also Authenticating a Centrelink customer.

Mandatory security questions

Service Officers must perform complete authentication before answering
enquiries or updating information.

Ask Four Category A - Mandatory questions. The caller must correctly
answer at least 3 mandatory questions, before the Service Officer can go
any further with the enquiries or updating information.

If all 4 Category A mandatory questions have been correctly answered
ask:

-   ONE Category B - Additional question

if only 3 Category A mandatory questions have been correctly answered
ask

-   TWO Category B - Additional questions

This is in order to reach the required threshold of authentication. Each
caller will have a different set of questions asked based on the
information available on the customer’s record either in the
Compensation Case Management System (CCMS) or Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS).

The Process page contains steps for Service Officers to perform
authentication.

See also Authenticating a Medicare customer.

Authenticating a customer - inbound calls

A Service Officer must be satisfied the customer record being accessed
belongs to the correct person before assisting with the Medicare
Compensation Recovery case enquiry, providing personal information or
completing updates.

If the Service Officer has any concerns about a customer's authority to
enquire, they should ask additional category B questions until they are
satisfied. Where there is any doubt, the information must not be
released until the authority is established. Where the Service Officer
is unable to complete authentication they should advise they are unable
to discuss or release any information. Advise the caller to obtain their
information and call back.

When authenticating an authorised third party, Service Officers are
required to confirm that a valid Third Party Authority form (MO021) has
been received. When authenticating an injured person's legal
representative (claimant), Services Officers must also confirm receipt
of supporting legal documentation.

The Process page contains steps for Service Officers during an inbound
phone call when Third Party Authority has been received but not yet
scanned to case.

See Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Authenticating a customer - outbound calls

When making an outbound call to the injured person or claimant, Services
Officers must complete authentication before discussing the case or
releasing any information.

When calling an authorised third party, compensation payer or
compensation payer’s solicitor Service Officers may be required to pass
a security check. Service Officers can provide the injured person name,
address, date of birth, date of injury or illness and the other party's
reference number. A number of insurers will ask for the monthly password
which is sent to all staff via their Team Leader. Insurer passwords can
also be located on the insurer spreadsheet.

When making an outbound call Service Officers must:

-   advise they are calling from Services Australia – Medicare
-   identify themselves with their name
-   notify the listener (and any other parties if transferred to) that
    the call is being recorded

Service Officers must use the following script:

-   ‘Before we proceed with this call, I need to inform you that this
    call may be recorded or listened to for quality and coaching
    purposes’

Failure to advise will result in failure to meet Quality Call Listening
standards. See Quality Call Framework quality checking.

If the caller asks for the call not to be recorded, Service Officers
should refer them to Services Australia website Privacy Policy and
advise the caller that the call recording cannot be turned off. If the
caller refuses call recording, Service Officers must terminate the phone
call and issue the appropriate ‘request for more information’ letter.

See Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines.

Verbal consent during phone calls

During telephone conversations with the injured person or claimant
Service Officers may be asked to include another person, such as a
relative or friend. Verbal consent must be obtained to include another
person for the duration of the telephone conversation only.

For the process, see Authority to release information and acting on a
person's behalf for Medicare Compensation Recovery and for engaging an
interpreter, see Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter
(Interpreter Connect).

Challenging situations and customer aggression

Challenging situations may occur when a person’s needs are not met.

Service Officers must not give out their last name or direct phone line.
If requested, staff can offer their unique P number [PXXXXX] for
identification purposes.

In some circumstances it may be necessary for the call to be escalated.
Programme Support Officers (PSO) are trained to handle escalations of a
technical nature (regarding policy or calculations).. If Service
Officers are unable to contact a PSO, the PSO Referral Form should be
used. Escalations regarding a staff member’s potentially inappropriate
behaviour should be directed to the Service Officer's Team Leader.

Note: Service Officers should only escalate calls via warm transfer.

See:

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Level 1 - Manage customer complaints and feedback

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Social work service referral

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Customer aggression - Escalating incidents

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

The Resources page describes examples of the behaviours and/or actions
which are classed as customer aggression.

Telephone protocols

Service Officers may need to ask a caller to hold while:

-   assessing or live processing a case,
-   escalating the call,
-   seeking Programme Support Officer (PSO) assistance or
-   when the call needs to be transferred to another area of the agency

Use the ‘hold’ and ‘transfer’ functions in Interaction Workspace (iWS)
Softphone to support quality service to the caller and enable the call
to be managed correctly and appropriately.

The Process page contains instructions on warm and cold transfer
procedures. See:

Announced and unannounced call transfers

Transferring a call with Interaction Workspace (iWS) Softphone

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS telephony

Service expectations

Service expectations must be managed within the legal, procedural and
administrative constraints of Medicare Compensation Recovery. The agency
must manage the overall outcome and avoid over-servicing.

Examples of over-servicing include:

-   checking on a daily basis for documents to be received
-   retaining incoming correspondence when a letter can be issued
-   over-promising during a phone call
-   calling to advise an item of work has been actioned
-   caller advising they only want to speak to one particular Service
    Officer
-   promising an unnecessary call back
-   live processing a case that does not qualify for priority processing

Priority processing requirements

When a caller requests live or priority processing, Service Officers
must advise that all cases are progressed in date order to ensure
procedural fairness for all customers. Service Officers may then review
the correspondence on file and advise the caller if all necessary
information has been provided.

See the Resources page for Request to have processing expedited and/or
live processed telephony script.

Service Officers have the decision-making delegation to assess if
priority processing may be required based on the callers specific
financial circumstances.

Some other instances that may qualify for priority processing are:

-   administrative error
-   the injured person has a limited life expectancy
-   the injured person is a minor and court sanctioning of settlement is
    imminent
-   court mandated requirements

In these instances, the Service Officer may live process cases if
trained to do to. Otherwise, a 'Follow-up work to be actioned' email
must be sent to the Compensation Team Leader.

See Medicare Compensation Recovery letters and templates.

Subsequent request processing

From 29 November 2021 a subsequent request policy is in place. See the
Background page and Table 5 on the Process page of Assess Medicare
Compensation Recovery correspondence.

Service Officers may receive phone calls after receiving a z2776
‘Subsequent request’ letter or z2782 ‘Subsequent request’ email. The
Resources page contains approved responses to customer enquiries about
this.

Requests for urgent case information - faxing documents to customers

All correspondence is issued via posted mail only. In extenuating
circumstances approval may be granted for documents to be issued via
fax.

Circumstances may include:

-   claimants with a terminal illness
-   court orders or cases relating to a minor

In these instances, Service Officers must advise the caller that
evidence of a court hearing before a magistrate will be required. Once
this evidence has been received, Service Officers may seek approval from
a Team Leader. Pre-trial conferences and mediations do not fit this
criteria and approval will not be granted.

Service Officers must seek Team Leader approval and record the Team
Leader's case note on Compensation Case Management System (CCMS) before
correspondence can be issued via fax.

Note: Mesothelioma and dust disease cases are already flagged and
processed with priority.

Correspondence must never be issued via email.

Case notes

It is mandatory for all case notes to be generated using the
Compensation Recovery Case Notes Macro via SharePoint. The Process page
contains instructions on operating the mandatory Case Note Macro.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, letters and email
templates, authentication question summary and useful links.

Related Links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Quality Call Framework

Quality Call Standards

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Level 1 - Manage customer complaints and feedback

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare and PBS telephony

Transferring a call with Interaction Workspace (iWS) Softphone

Guidelines for using interpreters

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Assess Medicare Compensation Recovery correspondence

Medicare claims history and claims history statement online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
