
Bulk bill late lodgement claims in Medicare 011-43030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about late lodgement of bulk bill
claims in Medicare.

On this Page:

Late lodgement of bulk bill claims

Section 20B(2)(b) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) states that
a Medicare bulk bill claim must be lodged with Services Australia within
2 years from the date of service.

Section 20B(3A) of the Act enables the Chief Executive Medicare (or
their delegate) to consider applications from providers to extend this
period, having regard to all matters considered relevant, including any
hardship that may be caused to the claimant if a longer period is not
allowed.

An application to extend the 2-year lodgement period is known as a late
lodgement.

Where the health professional is incapacitated or deceased, then the
person who holds their legal authority, such as their power of attorney
or executor, can apply for late lodgement.

The decision of the Chief Executive Medicare or their delegate is final.

When a claim is lodged with Services Australia within the 2-year period,
but it is not processed until after 2 years from the date or service,
the claim is not considered a late lodgement. This is because the claim
was submitted before the 2-year allowable period.

Approving the late lodgement application means Services Australia will
accept the claim for processing outside of the 2-year claiming period.
Late lodgement claims are assessed in the same way as any other claim.

Note: the late lodgement policy does not apply to claims that are
submitted late as a result of compliance activity. These claims will
contain a case number issued by the Department of Health and Aged Care.
Health professionals must include the case number on the form when
applying for late lodgement.

Services Australia will not approve applications due to administrative
errors.

Administrative errors include but are not limited to:

-   poor book keeping
-   inadequate staffing/resources/training
-   an issue with software, system or computer malfunctions

The following are some examples of what may or may not be acceptable.

Acceptable

-   hospitalisation or serious long term medical condition and an
    extensive period of recovery (however it would not be acceptable if
    the health professional was still practising during this period)
-   evidence to demonstrate that if a longer period is not allowed,
    there will be impact on the ongoing viability of the practice, such
    as certified copies of bank statements or tax returns
-   a compliance audit on the health professional carried out by
    Services Australia that has resulted in the health professional
    needing to resubmit claims
-   a natural disaster (for example, major fire/flood, cyclone etc.)

Not acceptable

-   a private account has been previously raised and not paid (debt
    collecting)
-   a declined work cover application

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Late lodgement adjustments

Health professionals can only submit adjustments to previously lodged
bulk bill claims over 2 years old where the servicing health
professional can demonstrate that not adjusting the initial claim will
affect the patient's My Health Record.

The Resources page contains a link to the required form ‘Application for
late lodgement of a claim for assigned Medicare benefits (DB019)’.

Application for late lodgement

To apply for late lodgement of a bulk bill claim, the health
professional must submit the following:

-   An application for late lodgement of a claim for assigned Medicare
    benefits form (DB019). Note: to obtain this form health
    professionals must contact the Medicare provider enquiries line
-   A correctly completed original ‘Claim for Assigned Benefits’
    (DB1N/DB1H) form signed by the treating health professional and
    co-signed by a witness
-   A correctly completed original Assignment of benefit form(s), signed
    by the patient, and
-   Evidence to demonstrate the circumstances preventing lodgement
    within the 2 years, or evidence to demonstrate that if a longer
    period is not allowed, there will be impact on the ongoing viability
    of the practice, such as certified copies of bank statements or tax
    returns

Late lodgement applications must be sent to the Medicare Provider
Services. See Bulk bill claims for contact details.

Note: applications for late lodgement cannot be accepted electronically
as the date of service is over 2 years.

The Resources page contains a link to the required form ‘Application for
late lodgement of a claim for assigned Medicare benefits (DB019)’.

Approval of late lodgement applications

An authorised delegate must approve all bulk bill late lodgement
applications prior to processing. The delegate for bulk bill late
lodgement applications is an APS6 Team Leader.

Medicare Provider Services assess late lodgement applications.

See the Process page for information on how to seek delegate approval.

The health professional will receive a letter advising if their
application is successful or not.

Bulk bill incentive and PEI items over 2 years old

Bulk bill incentive and Patient Episode Initiation (PEI) items are not
service items. This is because they are not patient assigned and can
only be claimed in association with an appropriately assigned service
item. Omitting or amending these items from the original claim is an
administrative error.

Omitted or incorrect bulk bill incentive or PEI items with a date of
service that is over 2 years old are not accepted for processing.

As bulk bill incentive and PEI items are not service items, they will
not impact the patient's My Health Record.

Culled History

Prior to assessing and processing a late lodgement claim, Service
Officers must verify the patient history to ensure a Medicare benefit
has not previously been paid.

For most services, Mainframe keeps items visible on patient history for
a period of 2 years. Once the item reaches the cull period, they are no
longer visible in Mainframe and Service Officers will need to recall
these from Cull history.

SAS® Portal allows access to culled history reports:

-   up to 5 years (available upon request)
-   over 5 years are submitted to the Department of Health and Aged Care
    via the portal

Note: the Department of Health and Aged Care can take up to 6 weeks to
return over 5 year culled history.

Inappropriate alterations to Assignment of benefits form

It is an offence under section 128A, 128B and 129 of the Health
Insurance Act 1973 for a servicing health professional to make a false
or misleading statement in relation to a Medicare claim. The servicing
health professional must not, under any circumstances, amend details,
for example, an item number, because Services Australia rejected the
original claim.

The Resources page contains information about the records disposal, bulk
bill adjustment delegates, and links to the DB019. It also provides
contact details for Bulk bill claims and My Health Record.

Related links

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Account requirements for pathology services in Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Bulk bill latter day adjustment (LDA) claims in Medicare

Medicare - Claims - Your Health

Medicare Easyclaim service

Simplified billing claims in Medicare

Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
