
Intertwined enrolment records in Medicare 011-44100020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about intertwined enrolment records
in Medicare.

On this Page:

Intertwined records

An intertwined record is when 2 people with the same or similar personal
details have had their Medicare enrolment records incorrectly updated
with the details of another person, and have:

-   unknowingly used the same Medicare card
-   swapped Medicare cards over time

An intertwined record occurs when a Service Officer does not identify:

-   subtle differences in personal details, and/or
-   unable to find a Medicare card number for the present applicant

The Service Officer selects an incorrect Medicare record. This issues
the applicant with a Medicare card that belongs to another person. When
this occurs it may not be identified for some time. An intertwined
record affects the customer’s:

Medicare enrolment

claiming history

other health program enrolments, e.g.:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   My Health Record

It is very difficult to fix and causes great inconvenience. It affects
the customer’s:

-   privacy
-   clinical safety
-   safety net

The visibility of another person’s information in a My Health Record is:

-   a mandatory reportable data breach
-   to be reported to the Office of the Australian Information
    Commissioner
-   a possible privacy breach

It must be escalated as soon as it is identified.

Avoiding an intertwined record

When subtle differences in details are noticed when a customer is
applying to have their card replaced, additional questioning is
required. This makes sure the correct record is selected before amending
the details and issuing the new card.

Subtle differences may include:

-   date of birth
-   address
-   spelling inconsistencies

In some cases people may have the same personal details, such as:

-   first name
-   last name
-   date of birth

Investigate further to make sure the correct person is selected or
identify if the record is a duplicate.

The following information will help determine if the correct record is
selected:

-   previous addresses can be located by following the path ‘Inquire -
    Personal history summary - filter by address’
-   previous names can be located by following the path ‘Inquire -
    Personal history summary - filter by name’
-   names of persons who they may have been on a Medicare card with
    (e.g. parent’s card) can be found by following the path ‘Inquire -
    Group association - Medicare card numbers which have been associated
    with past and present’
-   names of doctors can be located by following the path Medicare
    claims history screen

Intertwined flag in CDMS

The intertwined flag in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
assists manage potentially intertwined records and reduces privacy
breaches.

The flag generates a warning message that displays on all Medicare
view/amend CDMS screens. These include:

-   caution flag, shows a suspected intertwined record, still to be
    investigated
-   suspend flag, shows a confirmed intertwined record
-   resolved flag, shows an intertwined record has been resolved
-   blank (none) flag, shows this has not been assessed as intertwined

If an intertwined record is discovered

Where an intertwined record is identified or suspected, Service Officers
must complete a search in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS). This will show if an intertwined flag has been set on the
consumer record. If the record has an intertwined flag, a caution or
suspend flag message will display when accessing the record.

If no flag is set, the Service Officer must complete the Intertwined
Referral form for further investigation and resolution, ensuring the
following relevant information for both people is included then click
the SUBMIT button to send electronically to the Medicare Customer Data
Integrity Unit:

-   full name
-   date of birth
-   Medicare card number

Provide other relevant information about the person that may assist such
as:

-   identification documents - take photocopies of any photo
    identification available
-   previous addresses
-   previous states where they may have resided
-   names of any person whom they have been associated with on a
    Medicare card
-   a contact phone number

The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Where the person is aware of the issue Service Officers should assure
the person that the issue will be rectified and they will be notified
once it has been resolved. Service Officers should also apologise for
any inconvenience caused.

See the Resources page for a link to the Intertwined Referral form task
card.

Incorrect vaccination details on record

Where there is no impact to the Medicare enrolment information in CDMS,
the record is not intertwined. Follow the process in Merge or match
individual records and SIN records in Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR).

Incorrect claims on a record

Where there is no impact to the Medicare enrolment information in CDMS,
the record is not intertwined. Follow the process in Medicare patient
claims history or claims history statement has incorrect or missing
information.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for the Medicare Intertwined and Duplicate
    Resolution team
-   a link to the Intertwined Referral form
-   intertwined records FAQ

Related links

Search for a customer in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Duplicate PIN and Consumer IDs in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
