
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) 011-11000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Australian Organ Donor
Register (AODR), including how to register, intent and consent to
register, age restrictions and who can donate.

Government intent

The AODR is a national register that records people’s decisions about
donating organs and/or tissue for transplantation. The register ensures
that, in the event of death, the decision to donate is recorded and
accessible to Authorised Medical Personnel (AMPs).

In November 2000 the Donor Register was first established. In January
2005, Australian State Health Ministers agreed that the AODR would
become a Register of consent, enabling individuals to record their
decision to become an organ or tissue donor after death. A recorded
registration makes it easier for donors’ wishes to be respected.

In July 2005, Health Ministers agreed that the AODR would be the only
national register for organ or tissue donation.

The twin objectives of the national program are to:

-   Increase the capability and capacity within the health system to
    maximise donation rates
-   Raise community awareness and stakeholder engagement across
    Australia to promote organ and tissue donation

On this page:

Australian Organ Donor Register

The Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR):

-   is the only national register that records peoples decisions about
    donating organs and/or tissue for transplantation
-   can be accessed 24 hours a day by AMP who have signed
    confidentiality agreements covering the access and use of personal
    information
-   ensures that, in the event of death, the decision to donate is
    recorded and accessible

For people with serious or life-threatening illnesses, organ or tissue
transplantation could mean a second chance at life. More than 30,000
Australians have received transplants in the last 60 years. Improved
survival rates now mean that most organ or tissue recipients enjoy many
years of high-quality life after their transplant.

Each state and territory has different legislation in regards to organ
and tissue donation. For more information, refer the customer to their
state DonateLife agency. The Resources page provides a link to the
website.

Organ donor registration types

There are 3 types of organ donor records stored in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the public:

Donor Only Entitlement

-   not linked to a Medicare entitlement
-   Donor Only records cannot be created by Service Officers

AODR Entitlement with a Medicare number supplied

-   linked to a Medicare entitlement (where the registrant’s Medicare
    card number is supplied at the time of registering or at a later
    date to link a donor only entitlement)
-   updates made to the registrant’s personal details with Medicare will
    automatically update their organ donor registration

AODR Entitlement without a Medicare number supplied

-   linked to a Consumer ID without a Medicare entitlement
-   this record type can potentially be a duplicate
-   Medicare card and reference numbers are not listed on the Donor
    Decision Details tab
-   has been created due to the registrant either not supplying their
    Medicare number or not being registered with Medicare, e.g.
    temporary residents, DVA clients etc.

Note: the donor entitlement type is located at the top of the CDMS
screen. Duplicate Consumer ID records must be escalated for deletion via
the AODR PSO Team to AODR Policy.

Intent register to consent register

In April 2004 a national meeting of Health Ministers agreed that, in all
states and territories, the expressed wishes of a deceased person
regarding organ and tissue donation should be respected and given
effect.

To support state organ donation legislation, which clearly states that
the expressed wishes of the deceased should be given effect, Australian
Health Ministers agreed that the AODR would become a Register of
consent, rather than an expression of a wish to be a donor.

In accordance with the national reform package for organ and tissue
donation (2008), even if a consumer has registered their wish to be a
donor, their family will still be asked to give consent.

Registrations currently on the AODR are either intent (no signature
provided – unauthenticated registration or 16 years old) or consent
(signature provided – authenticated registration).

Occasionally the register will receive previous versions of forms
including old ‘intent’ forms. To determine if an intent form has been
received, look at the wording of the Organ and Tissue donation section.
Consent forms will say ‘I wish to register my consent...’ and intent
forms will say ‘I wish to register my willingness…’.

When organ and tissue donations can occur

Service Officers should not answer any questions about clinical medical
decisions that would normally be made by a health professional. If a
caller requests more details refer them to DonateLife in their state of
residence. Frequently asked questions are on the DonateLife website. See
External websites on the Resources page.

Organ donation

The way in which a person dies determines whether they are able to
donate organs and/or tissue.

In most cases, a person may only donate organs where they have been
declared brain dead and are being artificially ventilated in hospital.
Brain death is when blood circulation to the brain ceases, and the brain
stops functioning and dies with no possibility of recovery. A series of
tests carried out by 2 independent and appropriately qualified senior
doctors establishes that brain death has occurred.

People are sometimes concerned or confused about the difference between
brain death and being in a coma. A patient in a coma is unconscious
because their brain is injured in some way, but their brain can continue
to function and may heal. Medical tests can clearly distinguish between
brain death and coma.

Organ donation may also be possible after a person's heart has stopped
beating, referred to as 'cardiac or circulatory death', but this is less
common.

Tissue donation

A greater number of people have the opportunity to donate tissue for
transplantation than organs. Unlike organs, tissue may be stored for a
period of time and tissue donation does not require the donor’s death to
have occurred in the same limited circumstances as organ donation for
transplantation to be successful. Eye and tissue donation usually occurs
within 24 hours from the time of death. Corneas can be stored for up to
30 days and are usually transplanted within one month of donation.
Heart, bone and skin tissue can be safely stored for up to 5 years.

Living/Scientific donations and research

The Donor Register is not for:

-   recording decisions about donating organs and/or tissue for
    scientific research purposes, or
-   the manufacture of biological medical products. Separate and
    specific permission is required for donated organs and tissue to be
    used for research purposes

Whole body donations for Medicalre research/science need to be
registered with the nearest university to where the person lives.

The Resources page contains information about the AODR including Living
donation contacts and contact information for the DonateLife and
Services Australia website. This is where Facts and statistics can be
accessed.

Recording donation decisions in a will

It is not sufficient to record a donation decision in a will as there
are very tight time frames around when donation can occur. Delays can
affect the viability of the transplanted organ. To ensure a donation
decision is considered, people should register a signed consent on the
Donor Register. They should also discuss their decision with their
family, partner or friend.

Organ and tissue removal

The removal of organs and tissue is no different to any other surgical
operation and is performed by highly skilled health professionals.

The donor’s body is always treated with respect and dignity. The
donation of organs and tissue does not alter the physical appearance of
the body, nor does it affect the funeral arrangements. Sometimes delays
can occur when interstate retrieval teams are involved.

Who can receive organs?

There is no discrimination in the organ donation process. Donated organs
such as the heart, lungs, liver and pancreas are matched to recipients
by blood group and weight and sometimes age. The determining factors are
where and how a person dies and the condition of their organs and
tissue.

Allocation is a complex process. When an organ (other than kidneys)
becomes available for donation, a DonateLife donor coordinator passes
the necessary information to transplant units in that state. If there is
no suitable recipient, the organ is offered to transplant units in other
states and territories. This is on a roster basis that is designed to
promote equity.

Register or change registration details for AODR

Anyone can choose to donate organs and tissue. While age and medical
history will be considered, no one is too old or not healthy enough. The
Donor Register ensures a person’s donation decision can be verified
anywhere in Australia. There needs to be an Australian address provided
to register. Overseas addresses must not be entered into the register.
See also: Not Resident in Australia letter.

Persons aged 18 years and over can register consent (or objection) on
the Donor Register. See also: Age restrictions on the Resources page.

There are multiple ways to register or update registration details.
myGov and the Express Plus Medicare mobile app require Medicare to be
linked. Online

-   Medicare online accounts through myGov
-   The Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   The online OTA registration form on the DonateLife website (register
    as intent only)

To stop receiving invitations when not yet registered:

-   Select Services via myGov
-   ‘Stop receiving invitations’

See also:

AODR details online.

Paper form

There are several ways to get an Australian Organ Donor Register form:

-   sent with a driver’s licence renewal (in South Australia only)
-   download form from the Services Australia website
-   visit any Service Centres to print a form or collect a brochure
-   call the AODR to have the form/brochure posted or emailed
-   complete the registration section on a Medicare claim form (MS014)

Form codes are available on the Resources page of Processing rules for
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR).

Phone

Registrations can be completed over the phone (intent only). A
consent/intent registration can be ended without a signature at any
point in time once security checks are complete and verified, including
email requests

Objection to donate organs-No Decision

A person can choose to register their objection to donate organs and/or
tissues for transplantation after death by:

-   completing a New registration change or removal of donation decision
    details form and ticking the box register my decision not to be a
    donor, or
-   [] completing a registration via their Medicare online account in
    myGov or the Express Plus Medicare mobile app and selecting the
    option I wish to register my decision not to be a donor, or
-   phone call registering their intent as a no decision for objection
    to donate

Objections to donate are shown as a ‘No’ Decision Type in the Donor
Register and can be known as being a non-donor.

The Resources page has links to the Australian Organ Donor Register
online form and DonateLife website.

Donor registered elsewhere

A donation decision can no longer be registered via driver’s licence
except in South Australia. If someone previously registered via their
driver’s licence in any other state, they now need to join the national
register or update details. The Donor Register is the only national
donor register and is where AMPs search for organ and tissue donation
decisions.

Even if someone has already recorded their donation wishes somewhere
else, it is important to update details by registering their decision on
the Donor Register. They should then have this decision linked to their
Medicare record. This enables Services Australia to keep their personal
details up to date.

See also: Informing family about a donor decision

Access to donor information

Information recorded on the Donor Register can only be accessed by
Authorised Medical Personnel (AMP) who have signed confidentiality
agreements covering the access and use of personal information.

The My Health record shows the organ donor registration if:

-   the donor registration is linked to the Medicare card number, and
-   My Health record is active has not been permanently deleted

Power of Attorney and Authorised Representatives

A Power of Attorney (POA) can place a registration on the Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR) if:

-   POA has been granted the power to make medical, health and personal
    care decisions
-   the documentation states that the POA has authority to make medical
    decisions on the individual’s behalf
-   the documentation is listed and current in Medicare entitlement and
    matches the form

It is important to note that POA documents vary in each Australian
jurisdiction. In addition, POAs and Authorised Representatives are
specific to each individual person and the donor can chose to limit
certain powers. It is important that a document is checked to ensure
that placing the donor on the AODR is within the scope of powers
granted. There is an AODR ‘Power of Attorney’ Letter available where a
person with current eligibility:

-   has a form lodged on their behalf but POA is not yet in CDMS, and
-   no documentation was provided

A POA is no longer valid once the donor is deceased, as the donor's
family, partner or close friends will be asked to confirm that the
donor's decision has not changed since registering on the Donor
Register. For this reason it is not recommended that an Authorised third
party signs a form on behalf of an individual.

Where the family of a donor wishes to obtain:

-   a copy of the AODR registration form, or
-   documentary evidence confirming their loved one's AODR registration,
    Services Australia can consider requests in writing by the executor
    of the deceased person's estate

The request should be addressed and emailed to the Director, Registers
and Customer Support. The Resources page contains a link to the AODR
email address.

Services Australia does not typically provide personal registration
details to third parties without legal authority, such an Executor of a
deceased estate. Documentary evidence is requested to confirm the person
submitting the request is the Executor of the estate or demonstrates
their legal authority.

As the AODR section of Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) does
not have the provision to enter any POA details or authorised persons.
The comments section can be updated with POA details.

Security check for organ donor registration

All organ donor registration enquiries must pass a security check before
registration and donation decisions are confirmed or accessed. Where a
registration is not linked to Medicare confirm the caller’s identity by
requesting their full name, date of birth and current mailing address.

Information cannot be accessed or released to a third party unless they
have a recorded legal document such as Power of Attorney.

Informing family about a donor decision

As part of the national reform package for organ and tissue donation,
the family of every potential donor will be asked to give their consent
to donation if the situation arises. The request will be made by trained
health professionals.

Even if someone has registered their wish to be a donor, their family
will still be asked to confirm the donation decision. Family/next of kin
consent is always sought before donation can proceed.

Where there is no:

-   family
-   next of kin, or
-   authorised persons available to provide consent for donation,
    investigations will be undertaken. This is to confirm whether a
    decision (either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’) has been registered on the Donor
    Register

Each state and territory has their own legislation governing organ
donation. All refer to a Designated Officer (DO) who provides the final
written authorisation for donation to proceed. This includes
consideration by a DO of:

-   the donor’s expressed wish
-   family consent or in some states, can enable consent if there is no
    next of kin

Any enquiries should be referred to the enquirer’s local DonateLife
Agency who are familiar with DO processes in their state.

The Resources page contains the DonateLife website. This includes fact
sheet ‘How to have the discussion about organ and tissue donation’ and
further information.

Correspondence

System generated correspondence

All system generated correspondence take up to approximately 14 business
days to be delivered to the registrant. This includes confirmation
letters of ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ registrations and replacement donor cards.

Manual outbound correspondence

Comments must be added to CDMS for AODR letter templates sent generated
from a phone call. All other manual letters should be electronically
archived and commented on via PaNDA. Self-service options must be
promoted in the first instance prior to actioning manual letters via a
phone call.

Information in the comments field is visible to AMP’s who have access to
the Online Enquiry System via PRODA. Comments must adhere to guidelines
and may also be obtained through Freedom of Information requests.

Common scenarios for manual outbound correspondence via phone call to
the register are:

-   the existing registrant, third party or member of the public would
    like a form posted (Brochure Request)
-   the customer requests a donor card but has an existing intent
    registration (Brochure Request)
-   the customer requests written confirmation that they are registered
    (Confirmation of registration letter)
-   the customer requests written confirmation that they have been
    removed from the Donor Register (Removed from AODR Confirmation
    Letter)

See Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) for
comment guidelines.

Escalation Processes

-   For complaints about policy, a staff member or the Register
    Information Lines escalate to a Team Leader or email Health Service
    Delivery Division Management
-   Where unsure of an escalation, take down all appropriate contact
    information. Advise a call back will be completed and escalate to a
    Medicare Health Programme Support Officer (PSO) via a PSO Referral
    Form

The Resources page contains information about:

-   Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)
-   intent and consent rules to register tables
-   forms
-   contact details, and
-   links to AODR information on the Services Australia website

Contents

Register a new organ donor in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Register objection to donate organs

Amend organ donor registration

End date and remove requests for organ donor registration

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Search organ donor records on behalf of Authorised Medical Personnel
(AMP)

Link Donor Only entitlement to consumer record

Delete duplicate organ donor registration

Batch Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) documents

Action Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) rework transactions

Action Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) returned mail

Order Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) brochures

Request replacement organ donor card

Action public email enquiries for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
