-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information a claimant must provide to receive
Medicare benefits. Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island is covered
under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Claimant

Section 20(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 requires that the
Medicare benefit be paid to the person who incurs the medical expense in
respect of the service.

A claimant is the person who incurred the medical costs for a service
rendered.

The claimant can submit the claim via any claiming channel.

If the claimant chooses to lodge the claim via post, the claimant must
complete a Medicare Claim form (MS014) and sign the declaration. The
Resources page contains a link to the MS014.

The claimant must be identified for each claim processed. The Medicare
benefit is to be paid to the claimant.

Identify claimant for all claims

The Service Officer must ensure that the claimant is identified for all
claims irrespective of any obvious relationship between them and the
patient.

For example, Joanna has seen the doctor. Joanna's friend, Sandy pays for
the services provided to Joanna. This makes Sandy the claimant. Sandy is
entitled to claim a Medicare benefit for incurring the expense. Sandy
and Joanna do not need to be on the same card for Sandy to be paid the
Medicare benefit.

Note: if a person pays for a medical service and is seeking a Medicare
benefit they must be recorded as the claimant.

Receiving Medicare Benefits

The Government announced in the 2015-16 budget that payment of Medicare
benefits will cease to be paid via cheques from 1 July 2016. From 1 July
2016, payments are to be made via electronic funds transfer (EFT).

Funds will be deposited into the claimant’s nominated bank account.
Where the claimant does not have valid EFT details stored in the
Consumer Directory Management system (CDMS) or cannot provide valid
temporary or permanent EFT details at the time the claim is submitted,
the payment for the claim will be held until EFT details have been
provided.

A run will be actioned each night to search CDMS and identify any new
EFT details for a claimant that has a ‘HELD’ payment. Where new details
are found the system will insert these EFT details into the BREFTE
redirect table. These details will be picked up and processed in the
next payment run for payment to the claimant.

All third party claimants (for example, football clubs) will need to
provide temporary bank details on the Medicare claim form (MS014).

The Resources page contains a link to the MS014.

Age guidelines for claiming Medicare benefits

Any persons 14 years and over can claim a Medicare benefit where they
have incurred the cost for services provided to a Medicare eligible
person.

Accounts and receipts

The account or receipt does not need to be in the claimant's name in
order for the claimant to collect a Medicare benefit. The claimant needs
only to confirm that they incurred the cost of the medical service by
signing the declaration on the Medicare Claim form (MS014) or printed
receipt.

Where further identification of a claimant is required, the printed
receipt must be notated with the details of the identification sighted.
The Resources page contains a link to the MS014.

See also: Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing.

Claiming a benefit without a Medicare card

When claiming Medicare benefits at a service centre, the claimant is
required to produce their Medicare card.

This policy covers situations where a claimant cannot produce a Medicare
card when claiming their Medicare benefits.

Note: either a physical or a digital Medicare card is acceptable.

Claimant unable to produce a Medicare card

Prior to a Medicare benefit being paid, two forms of identification must
be provided or a security check performed where either the claimant:

-   Cannot produce their Medicare card
-   Has incurred the expense for a Medicare eligible patient but the
    claimant is not eligible for Medicare enrolment, for example
    grandmother visiting from overseas takes the granddaughter to see a
    doctor. See section on Claimant not entitled to claim Medicare
    benefits

Claimant identification where claimant unable to produce a Medicare card

Photographic identification is preferable, however where this is
unavailable, identification containing the claimant's name and signature
will suffice.

Acceptable identification documents include a current:

-   government issued proof of age card
-   driver's licence
-   passport
-   credit card
-   debit card
-   student ID card
-   security licence
-   employment identification card

Service Officers must:

-   provide a brief notation on the printed receipt (office copy)
    indicating that identification was sighted, for example, ID sighted,
    ID checked
-   record any identification numbers associated with the type of
    identification provided by the claimant, for example, driver's
    licence numbers

Security check

The claimant must pass a security check for any benefit to be paid. See
also: Perform public security check for Medicare.

Claimant unable to provide proof of identity when unable to provide a Medicare card

A benefit is not to be paid where one or more of the following apply.

Where the claimant:

-   is unable to provide acceptable identification
-   did not pass the security check
-   appears to be less than 14 years old, and cannot prove otherwise by
    student ID

Claimant and patient on different card numbers

Where the claimant and patient are on different card numbers, the
claimant's details are captured and recorded during the processing of
the claim.

Note: this process is not available via the Express Plus Medicare mobile
app.

Claimant not entitled to Medicare benefits but incurred the cost for an eligible patient

If a claimant is not eligible for Medicare but incurred the cost for an
eligible patient under Section 20(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973
requires that the Medicare benefit be paid to the person who incurs the
medical expense in respect of the service.

The claimant:

-   Is entitled to receive Medicare benefits if they have incurred the
    cost of a service provided to an eligible Medicare patient.
-   Must provide proof of identity. See information above 'Claimant
    unable to produce a Medicare card' and 'Claimant identification'

The Service Officer can search the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) to see whether the claimant is already registered as a consumer.
The Process page provides steps on creating a claimant in CDMS for the
purpose of receiving a Medicare benefit if that claimant is not eligible
for Medicare.

Signature requirements for Medicare Claim forms (MS014)

The correct policy for the signing of the MS014 is as follows:

-   the form must be signed by the claimant
-   where the claimant cannot sign, an appointed Power of Attorney,
    Guardianship, Administrative orders and Authorised Representative
    for Medicare may sign on their behalf
-   where there is no signature, see Incomplete or incorrect Medicare
    claim forms

Note:

-   The claimant is the person who incurred or is liable for the expense
    of medical services provided
-   There does not need to be any special relationship between the
    patient and the claimant

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised Representative for Medicare

Where the claimant is unable to sign the MS014 form, an appointed Power
of Attorney, Legal Guardian, Administrator or Authorised Representative
for Medicare may sign on their behalf. These orders give an individual
the legal authority to act on behalf of the claimant.

Note: Service Officers need to ensure that the Power of Attorney,
Guardianship Order, Administrative Order or Authorised Representative
for Medicare provide authority for that individual to claim a Medicare
benefit on the claimant's behalf.

Claimant signature differs from claimant details

Where a claimant's signature is clearly legible and obviously does not
correspond with the name of the claimant detailed on the claim form, for
example, the claimant name is Mary Jones and the signature clearly reads
Bob Smith, the claim must not be paid.

Note: a claimant's signature does not need to be legible to be
acceptable. Claimants can use any type of symbol as their signature, for
example, X. Claims should only be returned where there is a difference
in names.

Claiming at a service centre

This information provides Service Officers with information on how to
pay Medicare benefits to claimants when they are claiming at a service
centre.

Claims can be lodged in a service centre via the staff assisted document
lodgement (formerly known as the drop box) or as a face-to-face service.
If claimants choose to lodge a claim via the staff assisted document
lodgement, they will need to complete a Medicare claim form MS014 and
attach to the original account/receipt being lodged for processing.

As a general rule, any persons 14 years and over can claim a Medicare
benefit where they have incurred the cost for services provided to a
Medicare eligible person.

When a claimant or any person 14 years and over and enrolled on the same
Medicare card as the claimant acting on behalf of the claimant attends a
service centre to claim for Medicare benefits, they are not required to
fill in the Medicare Claim form (MS014), provided that the account is
paid in full.

The claimant is always the person who incurred the medical expense for a
service rendered. The claimant must sign the printed receipt when
attending a service centre acknowledging that they have paid for the
medical service rendered.

The claimant is required to produce their Medicare card and present
either:

-   the account and receipt
-   a combined account and receipt

Where the claimant is not the patient, the claimant must either provide:

-   the patient's Medicare card number if available
-   sufficient details to identify the patient

Service Officers must ensure that the claimant details are correctly
recorded. The customer at the counter may not necessarily be the
claimant. Service Officers must ask the customer every time whether they
are the claimant (incurred the expense).

The Process page contains details on how to action an EFT claim lodged
via face-to-face at a service centre.

The Resources page contains information about the collection of Medicare
benefits by a customer enrolled on the same Medicare card and a link to
the MS014.

Paying patient claims using a Medicare card with a previously issued number

This information covers situations where a patient claim is submitted
for payment using a Medicare card with a previous issued number.

Patient claims using a previously issued card number

Claims cannot be paid if the previously issued card number has been:

-   reported as lost or stolen
-   flagged as having fraudulent activity
-   invest flagged
-   expired more than 12 months

These claims must be returned to the claimant.

See also: Medicare cards

Where a patient claim is submitted for payment using a Medicare card
with a previously issued card number, all of the following criteria must
be met before the claim can be paid using the current card number:

-   the claimant's details are an exact match to those contained in the
    Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
-   a current card number has been issued within the last 12 months and
    is not reported as lost or stolen or has an invest or fraud flag
-   the claimant must have paid the account in full

Note: for a reported lost or stolen card where the claimant is at the
service centre and the claimant's identity can be established and
satisfies eligibility, the claim must be paid. Service Officers must
retain the lost or stolen card being used.

The Process page contains information on how Service Officers process
claims made using a previously issued card number and details on how to
action a claim where the claimant is making an EFT claim using a
Medicare card with a previously issued card number.

Claimant is not active on the patient's Medicare card

Where the claimant is not active on the patient's Medicare card but has
incurred the expense, the claim cannot be paid. Advise the claimant to
contact the patient for the new card number. Ask the claimant to inform
the patient they should contact Services Australia in relation to their
Medicare card.

Unpaid claims (PDVC cheques) submitted by a surgery using a previously issued card number

If the claim is bulk lodged from a surgery, Service Officers must
contact the surgery (where possible) and ask that they update the card
issue information on their records. Notate on a VG4 form that the
surgery has been contacted.

Service Officers can disclose information to providers for the purposes
of:

-   processing Medicare claims
-   making appropriate payments in relation to those claims
-   administering any other legislative provisions governing the
    Medicare program

The Resources page contains a link to the VG4 form.

Medicare Easyclaim

Where a new Medicare card has been issued, Medicare Easyclaim has a 75
day grace period for the previously issued card number. This period
begins from the date of issue of the new card number and applies to both
patient and bulk bill claims.

See also: Medicare Easyclaim service

Quality control

If a Service Officer is being quality controlled and work is selected
for quality control and the information on the MS014 form differs from
the information on the QBBI screen, the quality control (QC) checker
must access CDMS to ensure that the claim was paid using a card issue
number issued in the last 12 months. The QC checker must not
automatically record the transaction as an error.

See also: Quality control manuals for patient claims have been removed
from the Medicare Portal. To locate the Quality Checking procedures,
select the link to the Quality Framework page in the Quality Information
Hub.

Minimum payment times

There is a minimum turnaround time for Medicare benefits. These minimum
payment times vary according to the claiming channel.

The minimum payment times relate to the number of days (including
weekends) the benefit is held by Medicare prior to release for payment
to the claimant.

Note:

-   The count for the minimum payment time starts from the date the
    claim is lodged
-   The minimum payment times are decided by Government in consultation
    with peak bodies

Conditions for minimum payment times

Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payments are made on the next working
day, depending on the timelines of individual financial institutions.

The agency does not have any control over these timelines.

The agency releases Easyclaim payments immediately, however individual
financial institutions may not make funds available to their customers
immediately.

The Resources page contains information about the minimum payment times
in days for patient claims, bulk bill claims, simplified billing claims
and payment service standards, and links to letters and forms.

Related links

Perform public security check for Medicare

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

Medicare Easyclaim service

Medicare cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
