-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes for manual claims in the AIR.

Claim types

Recognised vaccination providers can send immunisation information to
the AIR by completing:

-   Australian Immunisation Register immunisation encounter form (IM018)
-   Australian Immunisation Register immunisation history form (IM013)

Immunisation encounter forms, also known as manual encounters, are
recorded on the AIR and may result in an information payment made to the
vaccination provider.

Service Officers must promote reporting or updating immunisation
information through the AIR site or Practice Management Software (PMS).

Immunisation encounter form

The Australian Immunisation Register immunisation encounter (IM018) form
identifies the:

individual's Medicare card and reference number (if available)

individual's Healthcare Identifier number (IHI) if applicable

name, address, gender and date of birth

individual's Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander status

hepatitis B birth dose date

immunisation service date

details of vaccinations given:

-   brand name
-   dose number and batch number
-   date given
-   for COVID-19 vaccines - vial serial number

country of administration for COVID-19 vaccines administered overseas

planned catch up option

details of the vaccination provider

Note: the previous immunisation encounter form IM002 is no longer
accepted. If received, the Service Officer needs to contact the provider
and direct them to the AIR site, practice management software or the
IM018 form.

Country of administration

Service Officers should process the COVID-19 vaccines listed on the
IM013 form.

If the form includes a country of administration (other than Australia)
Service Officers must complete the PSO referral form. PSO will add the
country of administration.

Claim headers

Before a Service Officer processes an immunisation encounter claim, the
Service Officer must key a claim header for IM018 and IM013 forms.

Information keyed into a claim header includes:

-   immunising provider number
-   information provider number
-   claim ID
-   receipt date of claim
-   immunisation date

Headers also identify the:

-   receipt method (e.g. manual (MAN) for immunisation encounter form
    claims)
-   claim sequence number

A header created from the IM018 form will contain one encounter. The
previous immunisation header form IM001, is no longer accepted. If
received, the Service Officer needs to contact the provider and direct
them to the AIR site, practice management software or the IM018 form.

Notification to the AIR of incorrectly recorded information may require
an amendment of the header details recorded for a claim.

Note: only amend a header if a payment for any of the encounters within
the claim has not been made.

If the information keyed into a header is incorrect or is unable to
verify by the AIR, an error message displays. See the Resources page for
a list of header error messages.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander status indicator

Parents/guardians of children under 14 years of age or individuals can
provide their Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander status when enrolling
with Medicare.

Vaccination providers can notify the AIR of an individual's Aboriginal
or Torres Strait Islander status. Supplying this information is
voluntary and the vaccination provider must obtain consent before
recording details on the AIR.

Indigenous status notifications

Vaccination providers may update the individual's Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander status:

-   through the AIR site, or
-   by completing the applicable section of the AIR immunisation
    encounter (IM018) form

In AIR Mainframe, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander status
indicator can be shown as 'Y', 'N' or blank when no information is
recorded.

If an individual has their Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander status
recorded on Medicare CDMS located under the ‘Personal’ section, this
will display on the AIR record. A vaccination provider can only update
the status through the AIR site where Medicare CDMS has no record.

Service Officers must first check Medicare CDMS when reviewing
information received on an IM018 form. If the information on Medicare
CDMS is different, do not update. If there is no information on Medicare
CDMS then the Service Officer must complete the update on AIR Mainframe.

Note: any update to the Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander status
recorded from the IM018 or AIR site will show on AIR Mainframe only and
not transmitted to Medicare for recording on Medicare CDMS.

Notification of hepatitis B birth dose

A child up to 7 days of age usually receives the hepatitis B birth
vaccine while in hospital.

When AIR receives hepatitis B birth dose information, process as a
manual encounter or history depending on how the data was received.

This will ensure the hepatitis B birth dose will be:

-   included in the AIR's assessment of a child's immunisation status
-   reflected in the Completed Schedules field on the AIR Mainframe
    YIIS - Status and Due Overdue Details screen
-   displayed on Immunisation Notifications Reconciliation Report, AIR
    site reports and immunisation history statements

The hepatitis B birth dose will not attract a provider information
(notification) payment.

Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (DTP) and polio

The schedule for DTP and polio changed in 2014.

Children born on or after 1 October 2014:

-   dose 4 of DTP due at 18 months of age
-   dose 5 of DTP and dose 4 of polio due at 4 years of age

Children born before 1 October 2014:

-   dose 4 of DTP and polio due at 4 years of age

Dose 4 given at 18 months of age must be recorded as dose 3.

Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR)

When not all components of MMR have been given:

leave the generic doses of MMR until a full valid dose has been
completed

if the record has single dose/s of:

-   measles, mumps, or
-   rubella, and
-   full MMR e.g. Priorix, then R&Z the single doses and make the full
    dose appropriate dose number

Immunisation encounter form not processed

The only valid reasons for not processing an immunisation encounter form
include:

-   where the data has already been entered, or
-   the information provided is incomplete

If an immunisation encounter form is not processed, Service Officers
must record a comment on PaNDA stating the reason for quality check
purposes as per processing guidelines. See Work Optimiser for staff.

Batch numbers

It is mandatory for providers to report batch numbers for:

-   National Immunisation Program (NIP)
-   COVID-19
-   Influenza

Astra Zeneca and Pfizer vaccines have a lot number instead of a batch
number. Enter the lot number when there is no batch number.

Duplicate or multiple claims

Identify duplicate claims as follows:

-   large batches of data submitted by the same vaccination provider
-   all (or most) encounters in the claim are pended

This information will display on the record in a pended ‘P’ state. See
Process pended claims in AIR.

Processing ODDs (other immunisation data)

Vaccination providers may send immunisation data that is not on an
approved form or online.

The AIR is aiming to reduce the amount of ODDs processing.

From 1 August 2020, return ODDs items received to the provider with a
cover letter (Z2334). This letter advises how this data must be lodged
(no telephone contact will be made with the provider). Note: there are
some rare examples, see Table 10 on the Process page.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to forms, letters and contact details
-   quick reference guides
-   action various selection scenarios
-   frequently asked questions
-   details of header error messages, header fields and action codes
-   details to help process AIR claims, identify data lodgement methods
    and ODDs troubleshooting

Contents

Process daily resolution in Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Related links

Merge or match individual records and SIN records in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
