
Processing claims for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 011-13030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Medicare Provider Branch process claims
for the External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP).

On this Page:

Assessing and processing claims

Medicare Provider Branch receive EBPRP claims on a daily basis.

Claims can be received:

-   By email
-   By post
-   In person, at any service centre

All EBPRP claims are received and processed via the workload and
distribution tool that allocates work electronically. Claims are then
assessed by the EBPRP Processing Team for payment.

Once received and available in the workload distribution tool, the claim
is entered into the EBPRP system.

Work priorities are decided by the Team Leader the day before in
consultation with the workload area.

The Team Leader will advise Service Officers of the work types to be
completed. Service Officers are required to process claims based on
volumes and KPM’s.

All staff should be aware that the EBPRP KPM is 10 working days from
when the claim is received by the department.

For more information refer to Process an EBPRP claim form on the Process
page.

Reject EBPRP claims

Service Officers in the EBPRP Processing Team will reject EBPRP claims
that do not meet the criteria.

Claims may be rejected in the system because:

-   The claim for the breast, left or right or both has been previously
    paid
-   The claim is within the 2 year claim again period
-   The purchase date was before 1 July 2008 (commencement of the
    programme)

Note: if the rejection occurred because the claimant has previously
claimed the same breast within the two year claim again period, they may
choose to submit a discretionary claim.

For more information refer to Reject an EBPRP claim on the Process page.

Incomplete claims

Claimants may submit a claim form and inadvertently not attach all the
required supporting documentation, or not complete the claim form
properly.

Where this occurs contact the claimant and request the missing
information.

For more information refer to Incomplete EBPRP claims on the Process
page.

Pending claims

All claims that have been on hold waiting for further information are
pended to the service officer’s user ID. Pended files are to be reviewed
every day by STAWM and if required given to the Team Leader to follow up
for an explanation. Pended files are reviewed so outstanding claims can
be either updated with requested outstanding information or closed when
the claim is progressed to payment made.

For more information refer to Follow up pending claims on the Process
page.

Discretionary claims and overriding a payment

EBPRP claimants requiring a new prosthesis within the 2 year period may
be eligible for a further reimbursement.

The department can apply discretion for a subsequent reimbursement of an
external breast prosthesis within the 2 year claim again period if there
is a medical condition and/or cancer treatment related reasons for a
replacement prosthesis.

Approval or rejection of a discretionary claim is assessed and
determined by the EBPRP Program Management Team.

Claims for a reimbursement within the 2 year period on medical grounds
must be accompanied by supporting documentation from a health
professional stating the nature of the claimant’s illness, medical
treatment and how this has resulted in the claimant requiring an
external prosthesis within the 2 year time frame. See also External
Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP) 2 year claim again
period.

The Resources page contains EBPRP contact details, discount calculator,
links to forms and letters.

Related links

Claims for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program (EBPRP)

Validate claim form for External Breast Prostheses Reimbursement Program
(EBPRP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
