
Change of address for Medicare enrolments 011-44110030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information about change of address procedures
for Medicare enrolments.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia plays a critical role in providing support to people
with family and domestic violence concerns. The agency gives access to
the services and support they may need. Family and domestic violence can
pose a serious risk to the safety and wellbeing of our customers. It is
important to discuss all options with the customer.

Change of address

Customers should be advised that information used for their Centrelink,
Child Support and Medicare payments and services is not routinely
transferred within Services Australia. The customer may need to contact
either Centrelink, Child Support or Medicare to update relevant
information.

Any adult person enrolled on a card can request an address change. It is
not necessary for the cardholder to request the address change. However,
where the written or verbal request to change an address indicates the
change relates only to an individual on the card or it has come from a
young adult 15 years or older who is on the same card as their parents,
confirmation that the address change applies to all members on the card
must be sought.

Where it has been confirmed the address change is for all persons on the
card, proceed with the address change.

Where the address change does not apply to all persons on the card, the
person requesting the address change must be advised to transfer off the
existing card and onto a card of their own.

Note: it is no longer a requirement to enter both a mailing and a
residential address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).
Where the customer has only provided a mailing (postal) address such as
a post office box, this can be entered in CDMS as the mailing address
without having to provide the residential address.

When changing the address for a Medicare card in the Group Address field
in CDMS, the address will automatically be amended in the Personal
Mailing Address field for each person enrolled on the Medicare card
number.

The Resources page has a link to the form Application to copy or
transfer from one Medicare card to another (MS011).

Note: when processing a change of address, it is not normal procedure to
issue a replacement card as the address is not embossed on the Medicare
card.

Child enrolled on more than 1 Medicare card

A person (15 years and over) may be enrolled on a Medicare card with
children who are also copied onto another Medicare card.

Where a request is received to change the address associated with the
Medicare card and the card number includes children who are also copied
onto another Medicare card, a residential address for the children must
not be entered into the Residential address field in the Personal tab in
CDMS.

Note: residential addresses are no longer required to be entered in CDMS
for any person. Consumers are only required to provide a mailing
(postal) address.

Online requests

[]Customers can change their postal and residential address online by
using their:

-   Medicare online account (MOA) through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Customers who do not have a Medicare online account will need to create
a myGov online account and link Medicare service to it. See How
customers create a myGov account and link services.

Customer will see information about family and domestic violence when
they enter the online service.

Where there are multiple persons on a card, the online service:

tells customers:

-   a Medicare card can only have 1 postal address and if their new
    postal address isn’t for everyone on the card, they need to get a
    new Medicare card and number
-   they can update their new postal address when they apply for their
    own Medicare card

stops customers from updating their postal address if the update isn’t
for everyone on their Medicare card

The Resources page has a link to a user guide to help customers update
their personal details online.

Requests made in person

A change of address request can be made in person at a Medicare Service
Centre, when the applicant provides a:

-   signed written request
-   Medicare claim form - claimant included on Medicare card
-   operator conducts a security check, see Authenticating a Medicare
    customer
-   Medicare card

Note: if the address does not match Australia Post’s Delivery Point
Identifier (DPID) the message 6-NO DPID displays. Service Officers
should check the address details are correct and should update the
record with the DPID address where possible.

Mail requests

A request by mail for change of address must be in 1 of the following
formats:

-   Signed written request - this must include either the Medicare card
    number or sufficient information to identify the person requesting
    the change of address on the Medicare card. Where it is not possible
    to identify the Medicare card number, further contact by phone or
    correspondence must be made with the applicant
-   Medicare claim form - claimant included on Medicare card

Note: where the applicants address does not match the Australia Post’s
Delivery Point Identifier (DPID) address allocated by the system the
message 6-NO DPID displays. Service Officers should check the address
details are correct and should update the record with the DPID address
where possible.

Telephone requests

When a request for change of address is made by telephone:

-   the Service Officer must conduct a security check before changing
    the address, see Authenticating a Medicare customer

When updating an address for another adult on the card, Service Officers
must ask 'Does the change of address apply to everyone on the card?' If
indicated that the address change is only for the person making the
request, do not change the address. Inform the person they must transfer
to a new Medicare card, see Copy or transfer a person or child to
another Medicare card.

Note: if the address does not match Australia Post’s Delivery Point
Identifier (DPID) the message 6-NO DPID displays. Service Officers
should check the address details are correct and should update the
record with the DPID address where possible.

Overseas address

Overseas addresses must not be recorded in the Group Address field or
the Personal Mailing address field in CDMS.

If a request is to change a consumer’s address to an overseas address is
received, the consumer’s eligibility for Medicare should be established.
It may be that the consumer is either:

-   not eligible for Medicare, or
-   is an Australian citizen who is now residing overseas, or
-   an Australian migrant or New Zealand citizen who is enrolled in
    Medicare but is now residing overseas, or
-   a visitor from a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) country who
    has incurred medical expenses whilst being in Australia, but has
    since returned home

Service Officers will need to determine (based on the consumer’s
individual circumstances) if they were eligible for Medicare at the time
of the medical service performed in Australia.

For assistance on how to determine the consumer’s eligibility Service
Officers should contact the Health Service Delivery Division (HSDD)
Eligibility team. The Resources page contains links to contact details.

The Resources page has:

-   links to contact details
-   the form Application to copy or transfer from one Medicare card to
    another form (MS011), and
-   a user help guide to help customers update their personal details
    online

Related links

DPID matching for Medicare enrolments

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Amend address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for
Medicare

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
