
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions required to provide Medicare benefit
estimates over the phone.

On this Page:

Perform security check

Service Officers must confirm the identity of the caller by performing a
security check before answering any enquiries.

Providing benefit estimates over the phone

If a customer contacts Services Australia asking for an estimate on a
Medicare benefit, Service Officers must follow the procedure outlined
within this document.

Note:

-   estimates can only be provided for unprocessed accounts
-   any potential Medicare Safety Net benefits must not be included when
    providing estimates

Pro forma claim

To obtain an estimate, an unprocessed pro forma claim is entered into
the system and assessed based on the item numbers the caller has
provided. The pro forma claim must not be paid (processed). Service
Officers must cancel the claim by pressing [F12].

Service Officers must never provide estimates to a caller who passes the
security check without first entering a pro forma claim into the system.

Considerations when providing Medicare benefit estimates

There are a number of factors to be considered when a Medicare claim is
being assessed, sometimes these cannot be considered at the time the
estimate is provided. For example:

-   patient's history has been updated since the estimate was provided
-   restrictive items
-   composite items
-   multiple operations
-   maximum services already paid
-   different date of service - the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) fee
    for the item may have changed or the item may have been deleted
-   items charged may have been altered
-   some services do not attract a Medicare benefit

Providing estimates for anaesthetic services is difficult as the
appropriate time unit item would be unknown prior to surgery. Service
Officers should advise customers that due to time dependencies,
estimates cannot be provided for anaesthetic services.

MBS Online

The online Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) contains a listing of the
Medicare services subsidised by the Australian government. Customers can
search MBS Online to get an estimate on the Department of Health and
Aged Care website. The Resources page contains a link.

The Resources page contains links to MBS Online, the Telephone Medicare
rebate estimate form, and the Estimate of Medicare benefits payable for
medical services letter.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
