
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to Coronavirus (COVID-19) 011-20031903

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines MBS items related to COVID-19.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) and the MBS

On 11 March 2020, the Prime Minister announced a health plan to fight
COVID-19 to protect all Australians, including vulnerable groups such as
the elderly, those with chronic conditions and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities.

New temporary telehealth and telephone MBS items supported Australians
with access to essential health services if they were unable to see a
health professional face to face during the pandemic.

Temporary pathology testing, MRI and vaccine support services were
introduced to support the pandemic response.

From 1 January 2022, most of these telehealth and telephone services
transitioned to permanent arrangements under the MBS.

Health professionals who can provide COVID-19 items

-   Medical practitioners working in general practice
-   Specialists and consultant physicians
-   Pathologists
-   Radiologists
-   Allied health professionals
-   Nurse practitioners
-   Midwives
-   Approved Dental practitioners

Use MBS Online to find item numbers for each health professional type.
The Resources page has relevant links.

COVID-19 vaccine support services

Vaccine suitability assessments

MBS items (93624-93661) are available for GPs and suitably qualified
health professionals to assess a patient’s suitability to get a COVID-19
vaccine.

The service is free to patients and the MBS items must be bulk billed.

Patients are expected to have a face-to-face assessment before they get
the vaccine. Benefits are still payable if the patient is assessed as
not suitable or decides not to proceed with the vaccination.

The items are categorised by:

-   Practitioner (GP or OMP)
-   Location (Metropolitan MMM1 or non-metropolitan MMM2-7)
-   Time Period (business hours or after hours)
-   Dose

This service:

-   must be bulk billed
-   must be provided face-to-face
-   can be provided by another suitably qualified health professional
    under the supervision of the practitioner
-   must not be rendered at, or arranged by a hospital

To provide a COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment, the vaccine must
be immediately available after the assessment at the same location.

Other relevant health professionals can provide the vaccine assessment
items on behalf of a medical practitioner. In order to bill Medicare for
a vaccine suitability assessment service provided by another health
professional, it remains a prerequisite that a medical practitioner
provide overall, on-site supervision to the health professional
undertaking the service.

Health professionals who provide a COVID-19 vaccination to a patient
must be appropriately qualified and trained to deliver COVID-19
vaccines.

Items 93660 and 93661 enable suitably qualified health professionals to
provide vaccine suitability assessment services on behalf of a medical
practitioner who is not at the location where the service is performed.
These services are performed off-site and not at the medical practice.

The Resources page contains a list of the item numbers and useful links.

Flag fall arrangements

Practitioners can claim a flag fall service item (90005) to travel to
perform a COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment at a:

-   residential aged care facility
-   residential disability setting facility
-   person’s place of residence
-   a place other than at the practice location, not including a
    hospital

This service is to support patients who are unable to attend a medical
practice due to:

-   a medical condition
-   disability
-   dementia, or
-   frailty

Staff at these locations are also eligible for this service.

Billing requirements:

-   only payable for the first patient treated at each location
-   must be co-claimed with a COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment
    service
-   must be bulk billed, and
-   is not eligible for any bulk billing incentive

Note: where an in-depth assessment is performed at the same time, the
flag fall and bulk billing incentive are associated with the suitability
assessment service and payable.

See Resources for a link to the factsheet on MBS Online.

COVID-19 vaccine booster incentive

Temporary item 93666 is available to support medical practitioners
providing vaccine suitability assessment services to patients who
require booster vaccinations.

The COVID-19 vaccine booster incentive item is payable when:

-   a patient receives a booster dose of a COVID-19 vaccine, and
-   it is billed with existing items 93644, 93645, 93646, 93647, 93653,
    93654, 93655 and 93656

The item is not payable for patients receiving a second dose and will be
monitored in post-payment compliance.

A booster dose means a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine that is not a primary
dose. This varies according to the patient. See Resources for a link to
the ATAGI statement on defining 'up-to-date' status for COVID-19
vaccination.

Item 93666 is payable in conjunction with MBS item 90005 (flag fall
service) if all the following are met:

-   the above requirements are met
-   the vaccine suitability assessment service is delivered to a patient
    at an eligible location outside consulting rooms

In-depth patient assessment

GPs and medical practitioners claim items 10660 and 10661 when providing
additional assessment and advice related to the patient’s risk and
benefits for the COVID-19 vaccine.

Billing requirements:

-   personal attendance by the GP or medical practitioner lasting more
    than 10 minutes
-   must be bulk-billed
-   provided with the relevant COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment
    service (93624-93656)
-   can be claimed once per patient per lifetime
-   cannot be claimed with item 93660 and 93661
-   can be claimed with item 93666

See Resources for a link to the factsheet on MBS Online.

Vaccination phases

Patients will be eligible for vaccination in phases. The National
Rollout Strategy details the priority populations and phases. See the
Department of Health and Aged Care website for more information on the
vaccination phases. See Resources for a link.

Age restrictions

Age restrictions were applied to COVID-19 vaccine support services in
the early vaccination phases. The age restrictions have been removed and
all Medicare patients are eligible where the service is clinically
relevant.

Note: people who are not eligible for Medicare may still receive a free
COVID-19 vaccine. For further information, they can contact the health
department in the state or territory where they are living.

For more information on the vaccine roll out see Coronavirus (COVID-19)
vaccines.

Health professional education infographics are available, see the
Training and Support page for more information.

Co-claiming restrictions for COVID-19 vaccine support services

The vaccine support service items can’t be co-claimed with:

-   bulk-billing incentive items (10990, 10991, 10992, 75855, 75856,
    75857, 75858)
-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioner
    immunisation item (10988)

COVID-19 vaccine assessment items may be co-claimed with normal
attendance items (e.g. 23) where the patient attends for an unrelated
condition. The relevant incentive item is still payable for the other
attendance.

Patients presenting with multiple clinical matters requiring attention
should be encouraged to book a separate consultation in addition to
their vaccine assessment. In some cases, this may not be possible or in
the patient’s best interest.

Co-claiming is only allowed where the additional services do not relate
to the vaccine assessment item.

Normal MBS multiple same-day attendance rules apply. For example, MBS
item 10997 for monitoring and support of a person with a chronic disease
by a practice nurse. This item:

is not claimable if the practice nurse:

-   performed the vaccine suitability assessment, and/or
-   provided the COVID-19 vaccine

is claimable if the practice nurse provided a service to manage the
patient’s chronic medical condition

Health professionals should make a note on the account or include
service text for electronic claims. Suitable text may include:

-   time of each attendance
-   separate attendance
-   ‘unrelated to COVID-19 assessment’ on the attendance item

See the Resources page for more information on co-claiming, case
examples and links relating to the COVID-19 Vaccine Suitability
Assessment Service.

Restriction with bulk bill incentives

Health professionals can claim another eligible MBS item with a bulk
bill incentive on the same day/claim.

Before rejecting the incentive item check the claim or the patient’s
history for an eligible bulk-billed item. No text or notation is needed
to support paying the incentive item.

The Resources page has a list of the item numbers for these
restrictions.

Restriction with multiple COVID-19 Vaccine Suitability Assessments

Patients should not require more than one vaccine suitability assessment
on the same day, however a patient's suitability can be assessed more
than once.

A patient is reassessed when they:

-   are originally assessed as suitable, and
-   decide not to proceed with the vaccination at that attendance, and
-   present at a later time/date to get the vaccine

Another COVID-19 Vaccine Suitability Assessment item is claimable for
subsequent assessments:

-   In exceptional circumstances this may be on the same day. These
    exceptional circumstances must be recorded in the patient’s notes
-   The items will restrict when claimed on the same date of service.
    Health professionals will need to include text or a notation that
    indicates the services are performed at separate attendances

Note: the following cannot be claimed on the same day:

-   first and second dose
-   second and booster dose

COVID-19 management support service

Medical practitioners working in general practice can provide a COVID-19
management support service. Item 93715 is:

-   for the assessment and management of a person with COVID-19
    infection of recent onset and confirmed by laboratory testing or an
    approved COVID-19 rapid antigen test
-   to be co-claimed with an attendance item
-   only payable as a face-to-face attendance by the medical
    practitioner
-   not payable for admitted patients

Note: some attendance items are restrictive with item 93715. See QITI
for more information.

MRI mRNA COVID-19 vaccine related myocarditis

Temporary item 63399 for cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
diagnose myocarditis associated with mRNA COVID-19 vaccination is
available from 1 January 2022.

This item is for use in circumstances where myocarditis cannot be
definitively diagnosed using conventional imaging and other diagnostic
tests.

Note: This item is eligible once in a patient’s lifetime.

Pathology items for COVID-19 and PCR testing

Pathologists should claim item:

-   69479 for private inpatients or testing in prescribed labs, or
-   69480 for patients not in hospital or testing not in prescribed labs

These items must be bulk billed if performed out-of-hospital. For
private patients admitted to hospital, health professionals can
privately bill but total charge cannot exceed the Medicare schedule fee.

Items 69479 and 69480 are not subject to episode coning arrangements.

Telehealth and telephone consultations

There are Medicare items for telehealth (video conferencing) and
telephone consultations to support continued access to essential health
care for all Australians if they are unable to attend a practice
face-to-face.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items cover services for:

-   chronic disease management
-   mental health planning and treatment
-   health assessments
-   early intervention services for autism management
-   pregnancy support counselling
-   general consultations, including anaesthesia and obstetrics
-   oral and maxillofacial surgical attendances
-   blood borne viruses, sexual or reproductive health (temporary)
-   nicotine and smoking cessation counselling (temporary)
-   assessment for COVID-19 antiviral treatment (temporary)

The telehealth items are for out-of-hospital patients.

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online factsheets listing the
items.

Telehealth eligibility

Services provided are available to all patients and eligible health
professionals, where safe and clinically appropriate.

Existing relationship rule

Medical practitioners working in general practice should only provide
telehealth or phone services if they have an existing relationship with
the patient.

A health professional has an existing relationship if they meet one of
the following:

-   the medical practitioner who performs the service has provided one
    face-to-face service to the patient in the last 12 months, or
-   the patient has a face-to-face service at their practice in the last
    12 months. This can be a service performed by another doctor or
    health professional located at the practice

The existing relationship requirement applies to telehealth or phone
consultation, unless one of the following exemptions applies.

This does not apply to patients who are:

-   experiencing homelessness
-   under 12 months old
-   in a COVID-19 impacted area (has their movement restricted under a
    State or Territory public health order)
-   receiving urgent after hours care (in unsociable hours)
-   receiving the service from an Aboriginal Medical Service or an
    Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Service
-   living in a local government area (LGA) declared by a state or
    territory government to be a natural disaster area

Some MBS items are exempt from the practitioner existing relationship
requirements for all patients:

-   telehealth and phone pregnancy counselling
-   blood borne viruses, sexual or reproductive health
-   nicotine and smoking cessation counselling
-   telehealth and phone mental health plans, reviews and focussed
    psychological strategies (FPS)
-   telehealth and phone eating disorder treatment and management plans,
    reviews and FPS

Practices that have focused on telehealth during COVID-19 can continue
to provide telehealth services but must have (or establish) the
capability to provide comprehensive and ongoing care for their patients.

Assessment for COVID-19 antiviral treatment by phone (temporary)

Long phone attendance MBS items 93716 and 93717 are available to assess
patient eligibility for COVID-19 antiviral treatment. These items are
for:

-   patients with recent onset of confirmed COVID-19 in last 5 days
-   attendances over 20 minutes in duration (25 minutes for OMPs)

Other non-specific MBS items may also be appropriate for providing
assessments of patients’ suitability for COVID-19 oral anti-viral
medications, for example:

-   ‘Level C’ and other consultations available by video or
    face-to-face, and
-   telephone consultations shorter than 20 minutes

Determination of the appropriate item to claim and ensuring that
relevant clinical requirements are met for a valid claim are
responsibilities of the provider.

See the Resources page for a link to the factsheet.

Blood borne viruses, sexual or reproductive health services (temporary)

MBS items 92715 - 92742 are available for telehealth services related to
blood borne viruses, sexual or reproductive health.

These items:

-   are for General Practitioners (GP) and Other Medical Practitioners
    (OMP)
-   do not require established clinical relationship with the GP or OMP
-   exclude Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) and antenatal care
-   are intended to help patients access medical services where there
    are barriers due to privacy or limited service provision

Nicotine and smoking cessation (temporary)

MBS items 93680 - 93705 are available for face-to-face and telehealth
attendances related to nicotine and smoking cessation counselling, care
and advice.

These items:

-   are for General Practitioners (GP) and Other Medical Practitioners
    (OMP)
-   do not require established clinical relationship with the GP or OMP
-   are intended to help patients access medical services where there
    are barriers due to privacy or limited service provision

The introduction of these items aligns with the Therapeutic Goods
Administration’s (TGA) decision that from 1 October 2021, e-cigarettes
containing nicotine will be a prescription only (schedule 4) medicine.

Out of hours items

MBS telehealth items are available for after-hours attendances.

Should a health professional ask for assistance in determining the
correct item number to use for an after-hours service tell the caller:

-   health professionals are responsible to bill the item that best
    reflects the service that has been provided
-   they should review the item numbers and use their best clinical
    judgement to determine the item descriptor that matches the service
    provided
-   the Department of Health and Aged Care continues to work with
    professional associations to determine what other items may be
    required
-   if they would like further item numbers added to the temporary
    COVID-19 items, they should speak to their relevant professional
    association

The AskMBS Email Advice Service is available for health professionals to
help them understand and comply with MBS requirements.

The Resources page has links to MBS Online and AskMBS.

Better Access - additional mental health sessions (temporary)

An additional 10 individual psychological therapy sessions are available
to eligible people under the existing:

-   Better Access to Psychiatrists
-   Psychologists, and
-   General practitioners (GPs) through the MBS (Better Access)
    initiative

Who is eligible

To be eligible, a patient must have:

-   a current mental health treatment plan
-   used their initial 10 sessions, and
-   a referral from their reviewing health professional (a referral is
    not required when the GP developing a Mental Health Treatment Plan
    also delivers the psychological therapy sessions)

This measure includes face-to face, telehealth and telephone
attendances.

Referral requirements

Patients must have a referral (for a course of treatment) to access
mental health services.

A patient can be referred for all of the 10 additional sessions on one
referral. Once this course of additional treatment has been completed,
further treatment needs to comply with existing processes under Better
Access i.e. a patient can only be referred for a maximum of 6 services.

For more information about the item numbers and referral requirements,
see Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative).

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online and the factsheets, which
have more information about the mental health items.

Assignment of benefit during COVID-19

Health professionals can use the approved assignment of benefit form for
manual or online claiming. The patient or responsible person must not
sign a blank or incomplete assignment of benefit form.

If the patient can’t assign their right to a Medicare benefit for manual
and online claiming, Services Australia can accept a signature on the
assignment form from a third party, for example, the patient's:

-   parent
-   guardian
-   power of attorney
-   other responsible person

Note: the Department of Health and Aged Care have advised there are
temporary options available for obtaining patient signatures during
COVID-19, which are covered below.

Obtaining a signature during COVID-19

If the patient is unable to provide a signature assigning their benefit,
the health professional's written record of the patient’s agreement is
sufficient. Agreement can be obtained by one of the below options:

-   writing
-   email agreement, or
-   verbally (through the technology used in the course of the
    attendance)

For manual bulk bill claims, the assignment of benefit must include
either:

-   a patient signature, or
-   the reason why the patient was unable to sign (for example,
    COVID-19, risk of exposure to COVID-19, verbal agreement,
    telehealth, phone consult)

If the assignment of benefit form is blank it should be returned to the
practice/health professional.

This temporary measure will cease on 31 December 2022.

Record keeping requirements

The practitioner should keep their own record that

-   the patient agreed or acknowledged that the service was provided,
    and
-   the Medicare benefit could be paid directly to the professional

The Department of Health and Aged Care may investigate potentially
fraudulent claims by seeking to verify that the service was provided to
a patient. However, the Department of Health and Aged Care is not
intending to undertake compliance activity directly focused on whether
the assignment of benefit process aligned with the usual requirements.

See the Resources page for more information about email agreements and
processing COVID-19 bulk bill claims.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   MBS items and assessing - FAQs
-   Assignment of benefit requirements during COVID-19 – FAQs
-   COVID-19 vaccine support services
-   Co-claiming examples for COVID-19 Vaccine Suitability Assessment
    services
-   Private patients receiving specialist care in-hospital
-   Services Australia website
-   Department of Health and Aged Care website and MBS Online factsheets

Related links

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Bulk bill incentive items in Medicare

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines

Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) health assessments for specific target
groups (including Indigenous Australians)

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Telehealth bulk bill claims in Medicare

Treatment and management plans for eating disorders (including anorexia
nervosa)

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
