
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about diagnostic procedures assessing
rules in Medicare.

On this Page:

Diagnostic procedures

This section covers miscellaneous services from Category 2 of the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Category 2 services relate to diagnostic procedures and investigations
that aid in the diagnosis of medical conditions.

When searching for information regarding diagnostic procedures in the
MBS, first refer to the item number. This provides a full description of
the item, the item’s schedule fee and if there is an explanatory note
containing additional information regarding the item. You can also
search the MBS using key words.

All relevant explanatory notes must be reviewed prior to Service
Officers providing advice.

If additional clarification of the item description is required, please
refer to your Office Manager, Supervisor or Program Adviser.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

Bone densitometry

Benefits for bone densitometry are only available for the confirmation
and monitoring of established conditions and specific treatments.
Benefits are not available for bone densitometry as a screening measure.

Bone densitometry requirements

The general requirements relating to bone densitometry service are:

referral by a medical practitioner (providers of bone densitometry can
self-determine where the patient has been referred for management)

only tests performed on dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) or
quantitative computerised tomography (QCT) machines are eligible for
benefits

the fee and examination for each item covers the measurement of two or
more sites, interpretation and provision of a report:

-   two or more sites should include the measurement of bone density of
    the lumbar spine and proximal femur
-   if technical difficulties rule out using these sites, other sites
    can be used for measurement except for measurement at either
    forearms or both heels or a combination of the two, as these sites
    are excluded for benefit purposes

clinical indications, conditions and treatments for which benefits are
payable are detailed in the item descriptors and the referral must
specify the indication for the test

Bone densitometry in the Schedule

Bone densitometry services are included under Category 2 of the
Schedule. If, as a result of the bone densitometry service, an X-ray was
considered necessary, for example, X-ray of the hip, the treating
specialist (other than a specialist radiologist) could self-determine
the x-ray. If the practitioner rendering the bone density service is a
specialist radiologist, a separate request would be required for the
X-ray.

For information relating to additional necessary services, see
Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare.

Bone densitometry background information

A bone mineral density test is used to measure the mineral content of a
person. A high mineral content indicates denser and stronger bones.

A standard deviation is a statistical measure that compares the result
of the mineral content against the average bone density for a person of
the same age and gender. This calculation is called a T Score.

In people with T Score above 0, it takes between five to ten years for
bone density to decrease by one standard deviation.

The benefit for most bone densitometry items is restricted to one per 24
months because the patient’s condition is being managed to prevent
further deterioration. As such, unless one of the conditions listed in
the item descriptor or the patient has undergone a significant change in
therapy, the test would be considered unnecessary.

For more information see MBS Online explanatory notes for Category 2.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page on the
Services Australia website.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
