
Nuclear medicine imaging services in Medicare 011-20021124

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines nuclear medicine imaging services in Medicare.

General diagnostic imaging information

For general diagnostic imaging assessing rules see Diagnostic imaging
assessing rules in Medicare.

Overview

Nuclear medicine is a branch of medicine concerned with the use of
radioactive material in the diagnosis, investigation and treatment of
disease. It includes items 61310 – 61650.

These items include:

-   non-Positron Emission Tomography (non-PET) scans (Subgroup 1)
-   PET scans (Subgroup 2), and
-   adjunctive services (Subgroup 3)

The Resources page has links to MBS Online for PET and for non-PET
items.

Temporary nuclear medicine items

Some nuclear medicine items may be claimed for services provided during
specified dates if the patient has a valid referral.

The purpose of these temporary items is to allow patients continued
access to certain nuclear medicine services in the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) during a shortage in supply of radiopharmaceuticals. If
there is a future national shortage in the supply, these items may again
become available.

The Resources page has a table showing the availability dates of the
temporary items.

What the items cover

The benefit allocated to each item covers:

-   preliminary examination of the patient
-   estimation of dosage
-   administration of the dose
-   performance of the scan
-   compilation of the final report

Medicare benefits are payable where the first 4 components are done by
a:

-   specialist or consultant physician
-   person acting on behalf of a specialist or consultant physician in
    the presence of the specialist or consultant physician for the
    performance of the scan

The compilation of the report must be undertaken by the specialist or
consultant physician who performed the first 3 components. Medicare
claims should not be lodged until the completion of all aspects of the
item have been completed.

Request requirements for PET services

Claims for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services (Subgroup 2) must
include details of a valid request.

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about requests.

Consultations with nuclear medicine imaging

Additional benefits for specialist or consultant physician attendances
under MBS Category 1 are only payable where there is a referral for
treatment or examination of a condition.

Health professional eligibility for nuclear medicine imaging

Health professionals must be a specialist or consultant physician who is
credentialed according to:

-   Nuclear medicine credentialing for Medicare
-   Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services for credentialed medical
    practitioners

Multiple nuclear medicine imaging services (DIMSR)

Nuclear imaging services are subject to the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple
Services Rule (DIMSR).

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about the DIMSR.

Radiopharmaceuticals

Radiopharmaceuticals are radioactive substances used in conjunction with
nuclear medicine investigations. Note: the fees for nuclear medicine
imaging items include the costs of radiopharmaceuticals.

Repeat services

Generally, repeat services occur with whole body studies, but could
involve any item in Group I4, with the exception of services where the
performance of the delayed study is incorporated into the baseline fee,
such as:

-   bone scans
-   adrenal studies
-   gastro-oesophageal reflux studies
-   myocardial perfusion studies
-   colonic transit
-   CFS transport studies

The item description and QITI information for 61462 has a list of items
it can be associated with.

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum effective life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about capital sensitivity and claiming MBS items.

See QITI for effective life age of equipment relevant to specific items.

The Resources page contains MBS item numbers for PET scans and useful
external links.

Related links

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Nuclear medicine credentialing for Medicare

Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services for credentialed medical
practitioners

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
