
Medicare information in a My Health Record 011-04040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Medicare details that can be included in an
individual’s My Health Record.

Medicare information in a My Health Record

This covers the below programmes administered by Services Australia:

-   Medicare and Department of Veterans’ Affairs claims (DVA)
-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Repatriation Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (RPBS) claims
-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) history
-   Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) information

These details come from Services Australia databases. The system uses an
individual’s individual healthcare identifier to match to the correct My
Health Record.

See also: Document details in a My Health Record

Individuals can consent to include, or remove, Medicare information from
their own record, or their dependant’s. They can do this at any time.

See also: Consent to include Medicare information in a My Health Record

If an individual requests to remove Medicare information from their or
their dependant’s record due to separating from a relationship, there
are key tasks they should consider to protect their personal
information. See Separating Safely – protecting personal details
102-2200707.

How often is Medicare information updated in a My Health Record

New and amended details are uploaded at least once every 24 hours.

The availability of information depends on:

-   when the individual or the healthcare provider sends the claim or
    details, and
-   when Services Australia completes the claim or changes

Release of information and privacy rules

The My Health Record system has similar rules as release of information
for Medicare.

The My Health Record system operator handles calls about release of
information for My Health Records.

The Resources page contains a link to the My Health Record website.

Related links

The My Health Record system - Your Health

Release of information for Medicare

Consent to include Medicare information in a My Health Record

Document details in a My Health Record

Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
