-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information to assist in determining eligibility
in Medicare for overseas enrolments.

Reciprocal health country

If the customer has come from Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA)
country, they may have access to Medicare. See Reciprocal Health Care
Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) for a current list of countries.

To enrol in Medicare under an RHCA, the person must meet the RHCA
conditions for the country they were last residing in, before coming to
Australia. Exception applies to Italy and the Netherlands.

Note: a person's citizenship is not an indicator of their country of
residence.

Applicants for permanent residency visa or permanent protection visa

A person is eligible to enrol in Medicare if they have applied for a
permanent residency visa or permanent protection visa and:

have permission to work

do not have permission to work but:

-   are in a relationship with a parent, de facto, spouse or child who
    is an Australian or New Zealand citizen, or holds a permanent
    resident visa and resides in Australia
-   were residing in a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) country
    immediately before coming to Australia, and meet the criteria of
    that country they can enrol under RHCA

Note: this does not include a Parent visa.

See Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare for more
details.

Permanent residents

A person is eligible to enrol in Medicare when they have been granted
permanent residency and are living in Australia.

See Permanent residents eligibility for Medicare for more details

Ministerial orders

Section 6(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 provides that the Minister
for Health can order that a particular person or group of persons be
eligible for Medicare. That is, even though they would not, by usual
eligibility rules, be regarded as eligible.

See Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility for more details. A link
to Ministerial order numbers that have Medicare eligibility and their
effective dates can be found on the Resource page for quick reference.

New Zealand citizens

New Zealand citizens who live in Australia are covered under the
definition of 'Australian resident' included in the Health Insurance Act
1973. New Zealand citizens who are visiting Australia are covered by the
Reciprocal Health Care Agreement between Australia and New Zealand.

New Zealand citizens who reside in Australia are eligible for Medicare
if any of the following apply:

-   they intend to reside in Australia
-   they have been or will be in Australia for 6 or more months

See New Zealand citizens eligibility for Medicare for more details.

Australian citizens

The eligibility for Medicare for some Australian citizens will need to
be investigated. These include:

-   customers returning to Australia after an extended period of time
-   missionaries
-   homeless persons
-   residents of Australian dependencies (Norfolk Island, Cocos
    (Keeling) Islands, Christmas Island or Lord Howe Island)

See Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare for more details.

The Resources page contains information about commonly found visas that
may be eligible for Medicare.

Related Links

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

New Zealand citizens eligibility for Medicare

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
