
Medicare Enh1ment Statement (MES) 011-44090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines MES eligibility and processing MES applications.

Government intent

Taxpayers partly fund Medicare through a levy, this is called the
Medicare levy.

The Income Tax Assessment Act 1936 (251U - AustLII) makes the Medicare
levy payable by individuals residing in Australia who are eligible for
Medicare. Persons not eligible for Medicare can apply for an exemption
from the Medicare levy in their income tax return. The References page
has a link to the Act.

Before a person can claim a Medicare levy exemption when lodging their
income tax return with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), they are
required to obtain a Medicare Entitlement Statement (MES).

A MES is issued by Services Australia who will assess the person’s
Medicare eligibility through an application process. If a person has
been assessed as not being eligible for Medicare for the whole or part
of a financial year, a MES is issued.

When the person completes their income tax return with the ATO they must
acknowledge that they have been issued with a MES. They are not required
to provide a copy of the MES with their income tax return unless
requested to do so by the ATO for auditing purposes.

Note: even when a person is issued a MES, they may not be eligible for a
Medicare levy exemption if they maintain a dependant who is eligible for
Medicare. The ATO determines whether a person is eligible for a Medicare
levy exemption (the Resources page has a link).

MES eligibility

A person is eligible to apply for a MES if they:

are an Australian permanent resident (Migrant) who

-   has been living outside Australia for 12 months or more, and
-   has not come back to live in Australia permanently

are an Australian citizen who has been overseas for 5 years or more

are a New Zealand citizen who spends less than 6 months in a 12 month
period in Australia, or who does not intend to reside in Australia

have not applied for permanent residency/permanent protection, or they
have had their permanent residency application

-   withdrawn, or
-   refused and they have not lodged an appeal

do not meet the Medicare eligible under a Reciprocal Health Care
Agreement

Note: these conditions are relevant for the period they are claiming a
MES.

The Resources page contains more information about determining MES
eligibility.

Applying for a MES

A person is required to complete the Application for a Medicare
Entitlement Statement (MS015) form and submit the form with all
certified copies of supporting documents via email or post.

Applicants are required to complete an application form for each
financial year, and must use the current version of the application form
available on the Services Australia website.

The Resources page has a link to the form.

Tax agents

Tax agents can complete and submit a MES application form on behalf of
their client, but the client must:

-   sign or make a declaration on the application form, and
-   answer the questions on the form that indicate their tax agent is
    completing the form on their behalf

Child applications

It is not necessary for a child (14 years or under) to apply for a MES
unless the child is required to lodge an income tax return with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

If an application is received for a child, the application does not need
to be assessed or processed in the database. The application should be
returned with the MES Child Request letter.

The application should only be assessed and processed if the parent has
advised that they will be lodging a tax return for the child.

The Resources page contains a link to the 'MES Child Request' letter.

Processing and system access requirements

MES applications can only be processed by MES trained staff.

MES trained staff require access to the following systems:

-   MES database (including Medicare DB2 access)
-   Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
-   CICS (mainframe)
-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) - excluding general
    layer staff

The Process page contains additional information.

A number of sources must be checked by the Service Officers when
assessing MES eligibility, including:

-   MES application form
-   Searching CDMS including Immigration Data link
-   VEVO - excluding general layer staff
-   Searching MES database

The Resources page contains additional information.

Application outcomes

Once all sources have been checked, Service Officers will make an
assessment and determine the application outcome or escalate where
necessary. There are 4 possible outcomes of a MES application:

-   Approved: the application has been deemed eligible for MES for a
    full or partial financial year. A system generated letter is sent
    via mail to the applicant or tax agent
-   Rejected: the applicant is not deemed eligible for MES for the
    period being claimed. A letter is completed by the Service Officer
    and sent to the applicant via mail or email with the letter attached
-   Pend: further information is required. The Service Officer is unable
    to determine MES eligibility due to insufficient information or
    supporting documentation. A letter is completed by the Service
    Officer and sent to the applicant via mail or email with the letter
    attached
-   Revoked: the application status is approved, however it is later
    identified that a MES should not have been issued or an amendment is
    required. The application can be revoked, subsequently changing the
    status from ‘Approved’ to ‘Revoked'. A letter is completed by the
    Service Officer and sent to the applicant via mail or email with the
    letter attached

The application details are keyed into the MES database, the application
outcome is identified on the MES database.

The Process page contains additional information.

Issue a MES

Once an application is assessed and processed in the MES database, a
number of processes are required before the system can issue a MES. The
following processes are usually actioned by a Team Leader 5 (TL5):

-   Scheduling: the MES database collates all details for all
    applications processed on that day and this information forms the
    ‘schedule’. The schedule is then printed and must be signed and
    dated by the TL5. Note: the scheduling process is usually run early
    in the morning or late in the day. For it to run successfully, no
    amendments or edits can be actioned, as this will cause the schedule
    to fail
-   Certifying: once signed by the delegate, the schedule must be
    certified in the MES database. Once the certification process is
    complete the system will generate each MES (they are printed and
    mailed)
-   Rebuild schedule: in the event that the scheduling process has
    failed, the schedule will need to be rebuilt

The Process page contains more information.

Reprint a MES

Where a MES has not been received, is misplaced, or where an amendment
is required to the original statement, another copy of the statement can
be issued to the applicant or tax agent. In this circumstance, a new
statement cannot be requested through the MES database and a manual
statement is required.

The Process page contains more information.

Overseas Addresses

MES' with an overseas address are extracted by Fuji Xerox before mailing
and sent to the Medicare Entitlement Statement Unit for quality
assurance purposes.

The Process page contains more information.

Return to sender

Where a MES is returned to the agency and marked with 1 of the
following:

-   not at this address
-   not known at this address
-   address unknown
-   return to sender (RTS)
-   insufficient address

They must be actioned accordingly.

The Process page contains more information.

Person enrolled in Medicare identified through the MES assessment process

Where it has been identified that a person who is applying for a MES is
already enrolled in Medicare and the claim period is for the same period
as their Medicare entitlement period (as indicated in Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS)), Service Officers will need to assess the
person’s Medicare eligibility. A person cannot be entitled to Medicare
and MES during the same period.

Where it has been determined that the person has been incorrectly
enrolled and is not, or is no longer eligible for Medicare, but is
entitled to MES for a whole or part period, a number of steps must be
taken to either:

-   amend a person’s Medicare entitlement in CDMS, or
-   consumer end date a person’s Medicare entitlement in CDMS

This process should only be actioned by Service Officers with the
appropriate skill tag. CDMS discrepancy must be escalated to a SME.

The Process page contains more information.

Data transfer with ATO

Services Australia and the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) have a data
transfer arrangement where the agency transfers data twice a year to the
ATO.

This data includes information of approved and revoked MES applications
for a financial year. The Medicare Consumers Program Support - Medicare
Consumers Section - Medicare and Veterans Health Branch in the National
Office is responsible for the data transfer.

The ATO uses this data for auditing purposes.

The Resources page contains tables listing Immigration data link search
results, Medicare Entitlement Statement (MES) work types and escalations
in PaNDA, MES assessment checklist, MES document requirements, MES
eligibility, links to contact details, the Services Australia website,
the relevant forms and letter templates, and the Australian Taxation
Office website.

Related links

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

Amend customer entitlement details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) for Medicare

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
