-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to process a patient claim
that has a charge that exceeds $9,999.99.

Processing charges that exceed $9,999.99

Due to insufficient space in the Charge field in mainframe, the Medicare
system does not allow an amount greater than $9,999.99 to be accepted.
If Service Officers key a higher amount, the system returns the message
1-INV CHG.

When there is:

Only one item number on the account, see the Process page for procedure

More than one item number on the account, for in hospital claims see the
Process page for procedure

More than one item number on the account, for outpatient claims

-   Face-to-Face Service Officers must escalate via Multi-Function
    Device (MFD) listing, see Manage Health Services Scanning
-   Health Service Delivery (HSD) Entry Service Officers must
    re-categorise
-   HSD Experienced / Established Service Officers see the Process page
    for procedure

When multiple services are performed on the same day, by the same health
professional, the multiple operation rule or Diagnostic Imaging Multiple
Service Rule (DIMSR) may apply.

For more information, see:

-   Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare
-   Diagnostic imaging assessment rules in Medicare

For surgical item numbers, the account may have individual charges for
each item number. The schedule fee for each surgical item number is
calculated according to the multiple operation rule. The resulting fees
are totalled and used to calculate the benefit amount. The benefit
calculated and the total charge are written to the patient history
against the item number with the highest schedule fee.

Service Officers must ensure that when processing these claims any
subsequent service lines entered must show a charge equivalent to, or
higher than, the schedule fee for each item number. This avoids an
underpayment being made. Service Officers should check for CHG LOW
return message.

When claims over $9,999.99 have been submitted via digital self-service,
see Process a claim with a minor difference table on Process digital
self-service claims for processing information.

Note: tell customers that due to system limitations, claims for
individual items with a charge greater than $9,999.99 must be submitted
using the Medicare claim form (MS014).

Safety Net

This applies for out of hospital services only.

When an out-of-hospital claim exceeds $9,999.99, Service Officers must
confirm the Medicare Safety Net before processing or escalating the
claim.

When a health professional has charged over $9,999.99, the system will
only calculate the Safety Net benefit up to $9,999.00.

-   Face-to-Face Service Officers must escalate via MFD listing. See the
    Resources page in
    Manage Health Services Scanning
-   Health Service Delivery (HSD) Entry Service Officers must raise the
    proficiency to Established/Experienced
-   HSD Experienced / Established Service Officers, see the Process page
    for procedure

Health Service Delivery Experienced Service Officers are required to
manually calculate the Safety Net benefit for the portion of the charge
greater than $9,999.00 that is the amount keyed in the service line
(0000). A manual Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payment is to be issued
for any difference between the system generated benefit and the manually
calculated Safety Net amount

The Resources page contains contact details for the Assessing and
Benefits team and a link to the Z2261 – Your statement of Medicare
Benefits letter.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
