
Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) 011-10070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and processes for proof of
vaccinations from the AIR.

Proof of vaccination

The AIR produces 3 types of proof of vaccinations:

-   Immunisation history statements
-   COVID-19 digital certificates
-   International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

Immunisation history statements

AIR immunisation history statements help people keep track of their or
their child’s vaccinations.

The immunisation history statement:

shows all vaccines recorded for an individual on the AIR

includes COVID-19 and flu vaccines

can be accessed online through:

-   myGov using Medicare, the Individual Healthcare Identifier Service
    or My Health Record
-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app

can be downloaded on mobile devices and saved to use offline from:

-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   myGov

The AIR produces ad hoc statements when individuals ask for them and
milestone statements when children complete their childhood
vaccinations.

Information on the statements

Immunisation history statements for children under 10 show:

-   their name and date of birth
-   their current immunisation status, including an immunisation
    catch-up if they have one recorded
-   their Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) if they have one
-   any vaccines they have recorded on the AIR, under the National
    Immunisation Program (NIP) age schedule and in the date order given
-   NIP immunisations they still need and their due dates
-   any notices

Immunisation history statements for children and individuals 10 to 19
show:

-   their name and date of birth
-   their current immunisation status, including an immunisation
    catch-up if they have one recorded
-   their IHI if they have one
-   any vaccines recorded on the AIR, in the date order given
-   any NIP immunisations they still need and their due date
-   any notices

Immunisation history statements for individuals 20 and older show:

-   their name and date of birth
-   their IHI if they have one
-   any vaccines recorded on the AIR in the date order given
-   any NIP schedule adult immunisations they are eligible for and the
    date they can have them
-   any notices

The Resources page has a table that describes the information on AIR
immunisation history statements.

Milestone immunisation history statements

These automatically issue to parents and guardians when their child has
all their required National Immunisation Program (NIP) childhood
schedule vaccines. If a child is linked to more than one Medicare card,
statements are issued to the contact person of each card.

A milestone immunisation history statement will not issue when the
mainframe record has:

-   a registration end-date in the past
-   a Return Mail indicator of 'Y'
-   an Opt Out indicator of 'Y'. See Amend individual registration on
    the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

COVID-19 digital certificates

These certificates show COVID-19 vaccines recorded on the AIR and a
COVID-19 vaccination status.

A digital certificate is only available when an individual:

-   has had all required doses of a vaccine/s approved or recognised in
    Australia, or
-   they have a medical contraindication recorded for all COVID-19
    vaccine brands

The COVID-19 digital certificate shows all of a customer’s COVID-19
vaccinations, including any booster doses. This is regardless of whether
or not they contribute to their vaccination status. If 2 doses are
required for a primary course of a COVID-19 vaccine brand and an
individual has had third dose or booster, all 3 will display on separate
line. All vaccines will show on the immunisation history statement.

The COVID-19 digital certificate:

shows the individual's name and date of birth

displays their IHI if they have one

displays the individual’s COVID-19 vaccination status

Shows all of a customer’s COVID-19 vaccinations, including any booster
doses. This is regardless of whether or not they contribute to their
vaccination status

can be viewed through myGov using Medicare, the IHI service or My Health
Record

can be downloaded from:

-   myGov using a mobile device and added to Apple Wallet and Google Pay
    for easy access
-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app and saved to mobile devices or
    digital wallets to use offline

can be pushed into participating state and territory check in apps

Note: each time a customer adds their digital certificate to their Apple
wallet or Google Pay it will save a new version. They can save multiple
versions of their certificate in the wallet to keep a history of their
vaccination proof.

For more information about COVID-19 vaccines, see Coronavirus (COVID-19)
vaccines.

How to get an immunisation history statement or COVID-19 digital certificate

Enrolled in Medicare

[] Individuals can get their or their under 14 child’s proof of
vaccinations by:

-   logging onto their Medicare online account through myGov or the
    Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   signing into their My Health Record through myGov
-   asking a vaccination provider to print a copy from the AIR site
-   calling the AIR general enquiries phone line and asking for one to
    be mailed. It can take up to 14 days for it to arrive
-   visiting a service centre and asking for a copy to be printed. See
    Resources page for a link to Office Locator

Not enrolled in Medicare

[] Individuals who are not enrolled in Medicare can:

-   create a myGov account
-   use the IHI service to register for an IHI and link the IHI service

Once they have an IHI they can:

-   sign in to myGov and select the COVID-19 vaccination status quick
    link
-   log in to the IHI service to access proof of their vaccinations
-   create a My Health Record and access their immunisation history
    statement or COVID-19 digital certificate
-   ask a vaccination provider to print proof of their vaccinations from
    the AIR site
-   call the AIR general enquiries phone line and ask for proof of their
    vaccinations to be mailed. It can take up to 14 days for it to
    arrive
-   visit a service centre and ask for a copy to be printed. See the
    Resources page for a link to Office Locator

Note: a Service Officer cannot cancel an immunisation history statement
requested through mainframe.

If a Service Officer has sent a customer’s information without their
consent, they must:

-   report it using the Privacy Incident Notification form
-   notify an AIR Programme Support Officer (PSO) for them to escalate
    to AIR Tier 3

International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

See International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC).

Proof of vaccination for children and parents/guardians

Proof of vaccination for children under 14

Parents and guardians can get proof their child's vaccination if their
child is under 14.

Vaccination evidence for individuals 14 and over

Individuals 14 and over must get their own proof of vaccination.

Note: individuals 14 and over using a Medicare Online account can see
the names of children (such as siblings) under 14 on the same Medicare
card. Viewing a child’s information without permission is a breach of
privacy.

Before someone 14 or older can view vaccination information online they
must:

Declare that they are:

-   the person to whom this information relates, or
-   a parent who has parental responsibility for the child, or
-   a legal guardian who has parental responsibility for the child

Accept that they:

-   understand giving false or misleading information is a serious
    offence

Parent or guardian requests proof of vaccination for someone 14 or older

Without the individual’s consent, Service Officers and face-to-face
staff cannot give out this information. This includes requests to
provide proof of vaccination in person or by mail.

Someone 14 or older can give consent in person or over the phone for
their parent or guardian to access this information. However, their
consent is only valid for that request.

See Authentication and release of information for Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

Parents and guardians who are 14 or older

Parents and guardians who are 14 or older can get proof of vaccination
for children who are:

-   under 14 on their Medicare card, and
-   for whom they have parental or legal responsibility

myGov messages and SMS or email notifications about COVID-19 immunisation status

Individuals with a myGov account get an inbox message telling them their
COVID-19 vaccination status is available to view. This message is
automatic if they have:

-   received all required doses of a COVID-19 vaccine/s at the right
    interval
-   a myGov account linked to Medicare
-   selected their communication preference to receive messages online
    through myGov

Depending on their notification preference, an SMS or email notification
will also be sent to the individual advising that:

-   they have a myGov inbox message
-   their vaccination status has been updated

The Resources page has examples of messages sent for COVID-19 vaccines.

Long names and only names

Immunisation history statements and COVID-19 digital certificates

Long names or only names may not display correctly on immunisation
history statements or COVID-19 digital certificates.

To display the name correctly:

-   customers can ask for their name to be changed in CDMS, or
-   Service Officers may amend the name on the CDMS record. See Change
    legal name on Medicare record

If a change of name does not correct the immunisation history statement
or digital certificate, a request for manual immunisation history
statement or COVID-19 digital certificate may be required.

Note: International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC) cannot be
used in Australia as proof of vaccinations, they are for international
travel only. Do not tell a customer to request an ICVC if their name
does not display correctly on their immunisation history statement or
digital certificate.

International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

See International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC) for details
about long names and only names in ICVCs.

Unable to access proof of vaccination

Individuals cannot access proof of their vaccinations through any
channel when they cannot be uniquely identified.

For example, someone on a different Medicare card than the one quoted or
with a record with different personal details. In these situations, they
should call the AIR to confirm their identity and update their details.

Customers affected by family and domestic violence

If a customer has safety concerns about accessing or displaying proof of
their COVID-19 vaccinations there are a few options to help.

The customer can:

-   contact a healthcare professional or attend a service centre to
    print their proof of vaccinations for them
-   call the Australian Immunisation Register, update their address
    details and ask for proof to be sent. This can take up to 14 days to
    arrive in the post
-   let Services Australia know if they have concerns about the security
    of their online accounts. They should change their passwords to
    prevent unauthorised access
-   add their COVID-19 digital certificate to a digital wallet. Both
    Apple wallet and Google Pay require a passcode to use. They can add
    extra security with Face ID, Touch ID or an unlock pattern depending
    on device used. These can be changed or updated via the settings in
    the app

See Family and domestic violence for more details including:

-   links to national and state family and domestic violence services,
    the intranet and Services Australia website
-   guides and scenarios for helping customers affected by family and
    domestic violence

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) referrals or customers overseas

[] Customers who are overseas can get proof of their vaccinations online
through:

-   myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app if enrolled in Medicare

If this is not possible, they can request proof of vaccination by
calling the AIR international phone number and passing a security check.

Service Officers should help customers with online options before
actioning requests to email proof of vaccinations.

Service Officers can:

-   request an International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate (ICVC) and
    email it to the customer. See the Email an ICVC table
-   refer requests for immunisation history statements and COVID-19
    digital certificates to an AIR Programme Support Officer (PSO). The
    AIR PSO will escalate the request to AIR Tier 3. See Table 5 on the
    Process page

Emailing proof of vaccination for customers in Australia

Proof of vaccinations are only emailed to customers in Australia in
exceptional circumstances. This includes compelling, compassionate
reasons or customers affected by a natural disaster or emergency.

In the first instance Service Officers should ask customers to try to
get their proof by:

-   logging onto their Medicare online account through myGov or the
    Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   signing into the IHI service or My Health Record through myGov
-   asking for one to be mailed. It can take up to 14 days for it to
    arrive
-   visiting a service centre. See Resources page for a link to Office
    Locator

AIR Tier 3 can consider requests to email immunisation history
statements or COVID-19 digital certificates for customers in Australia.
Service Officers and Programme Support Officers (PSO) must not email
proof of vaccination to a customer in Australia without AIR Tier 3
approval.

For requests to email:

-   immunisation history statements or COVID-19 digital certificates,
    see Table 5 on the Process page
-   International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC), see the
    Email an ICVC table

Note:

-   Do not email proof of vaccinations to AIR PSOs without seeking their
    approval first
-   Escalating a request will not receive an instant reply. The fastest
    and easiest way for customers to request proof is online through
    myGov or by attending a service centre
-   AIR Tier 3 may not approve all requests to email proof of
    vaccinations. It is determined case by case. Encourage customers to
    request proof online

Printing proof of vaccinations

Individuals can:

access a print-friendly version of their proof of vaccinations through
myGov in their:

-   Medicare online account
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   IHI service, or
-   My Health Record

ask for a printed immunisation history statement or COVID-19 digital
certificate from:

a vaccination provider, or

by contacting Services Australia

Note: proof of vaccinations that customers access online are the same as
hardcopies produced by Services Australia. Customers do not need to ask
for hardcopies if they can print copies themselves. Printed proof of
vaccinations can take 14 days to arrive in the mail.

Not all providers can print digital certificates. For example, providers
that report vaccinations to the AIR through their practice management
software can issue an immunisation history statement but can't issue a
digital certificate. Even if they can issue the certificate, providers
may choose not to. Some might help if the customer has an appointment or
they provided the vaccinations. Others can refuse as they may not have
the resources for these requests.

Address details on printed proof of vaccination

For proof of vaccinations that are requested through central printing
and the individual is:

-   under 14, the letter is addressed to the parent or guardian and
    followed by the child’s name. For example, PARENT/GUARDIAN OF JACK
    JONES
-   14 or older, the letter is addressed to the person and sent to the
    address recorded on their AIR registration

Notices on immunisation history statements

One or more notice/s appear at the bottom of immunisation history
statements under specific circumstances.

Immunisation medical exemptions

If a child or individual has an immunisation medical exemption recorded
on the AIR, it will appear on their immunisation history statement.

When there is a:

permanent medical exemption recorded, the notice says:

-   ‘Medical contraindication to (antigen) recorded on (date)’

temporary medical exemption recorded, the notice says:

-   ‘Medical contraindication to (antigen) recorded on (date) to expire
    on (date)’

natural immunity recorded, the notice says:

-   ‘Natural immunity to (antigen) recorded on (date)’

For more information, see Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

School entry

The notice ‘This individual has received all vaccinations required by 5
years of age’ shows when a child has received all NIP childhood schedule
vaccines. This is to help parents and guardians enrol their children in
schools that require proof of immunisation.

The notice shows on an immunisation history statement when:

-   the child is under 14
-   they are fully immunised
-   they have completed the 4year-old NIP schedule

The notice will not show if the individual has an immunisation medical
exemption recorded on the AIR and therefore has not received all
required vaccines.

Vaccine shortage

This notice shows on immunisation history statements when the Department
of Health and Aged Care has certified in writing that the vaccine for
that vaccination is, or all of the vaccines for that vaccination are,
temporarily unavailable.

When there is:

an end date for the vaccine shortage, the notice says:

-   ‘Vaccine shortage for <vaccine brand name> recorded on (date) to
    expire on (date)’

not an end date, the notice says:

-   ‘Vaccine shortage for <vaccine brand name> recorded on (date)’

Vaccine trial

The vaccine shows notice appears on immunisation history statements if
the person is participating in an approved vaccine trial.

When there is:

an end date for the trial, the notice says:

-   ‘Currently participating in a vaccine trial due to expire on (date)’

not an end date, the notice says:

-   ‘Currently participating in a vaccine trial which commenced in
    (date)’

The Resources page has examples of how notices appear on immunisation
history statements.

Mail history

The mainframe YCEN - Mail History Details screen shows a record of
immunisation history statements generated by the AIR system. The
information on this screen includes:

-   date the history statement was requested by a Service Officer
-   date the evidence was sent
-   type of history sent, for example, a milestone statement
-   status, for example FAILED when evidence will not be produced

If a request has FAILED and the parent, guardian or individual cannot
access an immunisation history statement:

-   online, or from
-   their vaccination provider, AIR Service Officers should print a
    statement from the AIR site. Service Officers can contact an AIR
    Programme Support Officer (PSO) for help.

The Resources page has links to:

-   AIR contact details and standard letters
-   Services Australia and external websites
-   PSO Referral Form, Network News Update (NNU) and Office Locator
-   examples of proof of vaccination and details of information shown
-   frequently asked questions (FAQ)

Contents

International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

Processing proof of immunisation requests for Out of Home Care (OOHC)

Related links

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines

Management of immunisation evidence

Merge or match individual records and SIN records in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR)

Enquiries for Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
