
Assess and process claims in Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme 011-18052100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to register, assess and process claims in the
Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS).

Receive and assess claims

Once a claim has been received by Services Australia and is available in
the workload distribution tool, the claim is entered into the DHCAS
(Special Assistance) system.

Claims received with amendments are not accepted. Mail them back to the
claimant to re-submit. This includes amendments made with:

-   white out
-   post-it-notes and stickers, or
-   are unreadable due to crossing out of words

Process DHCAS claims by Medicare Provider branch

Medicare Provider Services receives DHCAS claims on an ad hoc basis.
These claims are received via email, from Services Australia Service
Centres and by mail to the DHCAS mailbox address. DHCAS claims are
assessed and processed by specialised staff within Medicare Provider
Services. All DHCAS claims are received and processed via the workload
distribution tool that allocates work electronically.

Approval for a claim on one occasion does not mean that approval will
automatically be granted in relation to any subsequent claims.

Pharmaceutical claims

A letter from the claimant’s health professional must confirm that the
pharmaceuticals are required to treat a condition or conditions
sustained as a direct result of the relevant adverse event. The
supporting documentation can either be supplied as part of the claim or
kept on file from a previous claim. The letter must be dated within the
last 12 months to be current.

Prescribed pharmaceutical lists or documents that are more than 12
months old are not relevant and a new letter from the health
professional must be obtained before assessing and processing the claim.

The letter must state the relevance of each pharmaceutical prescribed
and the expected duration of the treatment. If there is not a current
letter supplied or on file, then the claim cannot be paid until this is
obtained.

The pharmaceuticals covered under DHCAS vary depending on the
registration categories for each adverse event.

Pharmaceutical claim criteria for claimants registered in the following
adverse events:

-   Balimed 2002 - Category A and B
-   Tsunami 2004 - Category B and BX
-   London 2005 - Category A
-   Bali 2005 - Category A and B
-   Dahab, Egypt 2006 - Category A

These categories are covered:

-   the full costs of pharmaceuticals covered by PBS are payable
-   the full costs of pharmaceuticals not covered by PBS but which have
    been approved by National Standards for supply in Australia are
    payable
-   pharmaceuticals brought into Australia in accordance with the
    Personal Import Scheme for Unapproved Medicines operated by the
    Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) may be approved
-   the cost of dressings and lotions or ointments which are not drugs
    and are not covered by the PBS may be covered with supporting
    documentation from a health professional

Pharmaceutical claim criteria categories for claimants registered in the
following adverse events:

-   Balimed 2002 - Category C
-   Tsunami 2004 - Category C
-   London 2005 - Category B and C
-   Bali 2005 - Category C
-   Dahab, Egypt 2006 - Category B, C and D

Pharmaceutical claims are only covered if provided as part of
psychiatric treatment with supporting evidence by the claimant’s
treating psychiatrist.

Exclusions:

Complementary medicines (also known as ‘traditional’ or ‘alternative’
medicines) are not covered under DHCAS. These include vitamin, mineral,
herbal, dietary supplements, appetite suppressants, aromatherapy, and
homoeopathic products.

Postage on pharmaceuticals will not be covered under DHCAS.

See Assess pharmaceutical claims table.

The Resources page contains a link to the Therapeutic Goods
Administration for an overview of the regulation of complementary
medicines in Australia.

Travel and accommodation claims

Reasonable out of pocket transport costs to allow a claimant and a
support person to attend treatment(s) claimable under DHCAS.

Costs incurred for travel using private vehicles will be paid at the
same rate as employees of Services Australia. Air travel costs are to be
paid at economy rates.

Travel claim document requirements

Claims for out-of-pocket transport costs, where a private vehicle, air,
rail, taxi or public transport are used must be lodged using the
Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme Motor Vehicle, Travel and/or
Accommodation Out-of-Pocket application. Claimants using a private
vehicle will also be reimbursed all associated fees, charges and tolls,
for instance parking fees, bridge, freeway, ferry incurred.

Traffic infringement notices are the responsibility of the claimants and
are not eligible for reimbursement.

Petrol costs for private travel will not be reimbursed – this is covered
under the private vehicle travel allowance rate.

Assessing travel claim is related to treatment

It must be confirmed that the claimant’s travel costs are directly
related to the attendance of the treatment claimable under DHCAS.

To process the claim in full it is preferable that claimants submit all
documentation related to their travel costs at the same time they submit
their claim for reimbursement for goods or services.

Accommodation claim

Reasonable accommodation costs for the claimant and a support person are
also claimable under DHCAS.

Reimbursement is to be for room only - food and beverage costs including
mini bar charges are not covered under the guidelines and are not to be
paid.

Accommodation can only be claimed where the claimant’s usual residence
is in a different town or region located more than 50 kilometres from
the health care provider.

If the claimant is required to attend an appointment with a health care
provider and accommodation is required for more than 10 consecutive
days, approval must be obtained in advance from Programme Management.

See Assess and process a travel and accommodation claim table.

The Resources page contains a link to the Travel intranet page for more
information.

Mental Health Care Claim

Under the Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme (DHCAS) guidelines, a
Mental Health Care report is required from the claimant’s mental health
professional (counsellor/psychologist/psychiatrist) once they have
reached and claimed either 10 initial counselling sessions or have
claimed a further 12 counselling sessions.

The number of mental health sessions can be counted across more than one
provider. For example, if a claimant changes providers after 5 sessions
(in the middle of their initial 10 or further continuing 12 sessions),
the count does not start again with the new provider.

The Mental Health Care report must include:

-   confirmation that the counselling sessions are related to the care
    of a condition arising directly from the relevant DHCAS adverse
    event
-   a statement of the services provided to date
-   issues being addressed, for example Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
    (PTSD), depression, specific phobia
-   an outline of existing treatment/care plan and its objectives or
    milestones
-   progress to date (including number and types of sessions)
-   list of prescription medications prescribed
-   likely future progress and an estimate of how many additional
    sessions may be needed, and
-   any further information that is considered relevant

Before processing a mental health care claim, the claimant’s record must
be checked to verify services have been approved for payment.

See Assess and process a mental health care claim table.

Allied Health Claims

Allied health professionals are trained professionals who are not
doctors, dentists, or nurses. They can help manage physical or mental
health through services that include diagnosis, treatment or
rehabilitation. Services provided by qualified health professionals from
the following fields are classified as Allied health care:

-   Chiropractic
-   Counselling
-   Physiotherapy
-   Optometry
-   Psychology
-   Occupational therapy
-   Massage therapy (remedial massage)
-   Audiology
-   Podiatry

DHCAS will cover out of pocket costs for allied health claims from a
registered allied health care professional. The claimant must have
claimed services through Medicare, travel or private health insurance
first.

Medical

DHCAS will cover out of pocket health care expenses associated with
medical treatment(s). Health Services (Medical) may include:

-   Services covered by Medicare (out of pocket component)
-   Surgery
-   Pathology
-   Psychiatric (see Mental Health Care claims)
-   GP or Specialist Consultation
-   Pharmaceutical
-   Hospital costs not covered by public patient arrangements or private
    insurance
-   Medical reports requested by DHCAS from the treating Health
    Professional

Out of pocket expenses include expenses which are not covered, or only
partially covered, by Medicare, the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
and/or any other relevant Australian state, territory government
schemes, travel or private health insurance.

Hospital claim

Hospital claims relate to the costs that are not otherwise covered by
public patient arrangements or private health insurance.

Hospital charges will only be covered if:

the registered person is covered by private health insurance applicable
benefits (including hospital cover) and has elected to be a private
patient

waiting for a public patient for the relevant health service is
unreasonably long or would cause hardship

the distance the registered person would have to travel to receive the
hospital services as a public patient would be unreasonable or would
cause hardship

services are likely to be covered by insurance and can be paid for by
DHCAS in advance if:

-   getting the insurance benefit might take a long time
-   it causes hardship to the claimants or their family
-   coverage by insurance is uncertain
-   the registered person transfers to Services Australia their rights
    to the relevant insurance benefit, or if this is not practicable
-   makes an undertaking to pursue the insurance benefit and on
    receiving it, repay the benefit to Services Australia

a person registered under category BX (Tsunami) is not eligible for
public hospital services and the state/territory or public hospital does
not agree to waive charges

Refer to Team Leader if a Programme Management determination is required
for high cost (>$10,000) claims, pre-approval and claims outside of
standard guidelines. Programme Management pre-approval is often
requested by claimants for hospital claims.

See Assess hospital claim table.

Overpayments and debt recovery

Debt recovery is undertaken after it has been identified that a claimant
or a service provider has been overpaid and is required to return the
outstanding funds to Services Australia.

There can be various reasons that a claimant or service provider may be
incorrectly paid, these can include:

-   the claimant or service provider has contacted the agency and
    enquired as to why they have received the payment
-   the overpayment was identified during the Quality Control process or
    other assurance
-   the Service Officer processed the claim incorrectly or the records
    were accidentally mixed during processing
-   the Service Officer processed the wrong vendor for the claim

See Overpayments and debt recovery table.

The Resources page contains links to mental health care sessions list,
checklist and category and services table, relevant forms, the Services
Australia website, the Department of Health and Aged Care, Therapeutic
Goods Administration, DHCAS provider letters and travel information.

Related links

Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme eligibility criteria and document
requirements

Lodge a claim in the Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme

Payment process for the Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
