
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to change a name on a Medicare
record in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Acceptable documents to change a Legal name

To comply with the National Identity Proofing Guidelines and aligning
Services Australia’s programs, if a customer has changed their legal
name, they must provide one of the following original and unaltered
supporting documents:

-   Australian marriage certificate - (Australian ceremonial
    certificates are not acceptable)
-   Australian birth certificate
-   Australian Certificate of Name change
-   Reissued Australian birth certificate in the new name
-   Birth certificates for Northern Territory (NT) with Aboriginal
    Population Record (APR)

See also, Table 1 on the Process page.

Change of name overseas: Australian visa holders who do not have
Australian citizenship, who ‘return’ to Australia and ask to change
their legal name must provide:

-   A foreign passport with a current Australian visa (verified)

See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility for help.

Customers can change their legal name by:

-   Calling us
-   Email or mail the request and supporting documents, or
-   In a service centre

The Process page contains information on processing a change of legal
name.

Note: if a customer provides an Australian Passport or Australian
Citizenship Certificate in their new name along with a foreign Marriage
certificate or foreign birth certificate, these matters need to be
escalated to Medicare Consumers Program Support.

See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility.

Recording names in Medicare

At Group the name recorded can be either the:

-   person's legal name, or
-   preferred name

To record a preferred name at Group, documentary evidence that the
person is known by that name is required. See the Process page for more
information.

At Personal the legal name must be recorded. Supporting documents must
be provided to change a person's name.

When a name is changed at Personal, the name must be changed at Group
and a new Medicare card issued.

If a customer’s name has been previously changed at Personal and not at
Group, this is sufficient to allow a name to be amended at Group without
the customer having to provide documentation again.

If the customer requests to change their married legal name back to
their birth or maiden name, and this name was recorded as a previous
name in CDMS, no supporting evidence is required.

Note: where a person has more than one recorded name, for example,
previous name, an arrow will display before the family name.

Child under 15 years of age

A child under 15 years of age must be known by their legal name at Group
and Personal. If it is identified that a newborn has a long name, the
name can be shortened to enable enrolment on the family Medicare card.
This must only be made at Group, the legal name of the child is still
recorded at Personal. See shortening a long name on the Process page.

Note: the exception to this rule is where a child is under 15 years of
age and is undergoing a change of gender. The child’s name can be
updated in Group. Documentary evidence that the person is known by that
name is required. See Change a name for a child under 15 years of age.

Adopted child

If eligible for Medicare and pre-adoption, the child may be:

Enrolled on their own Medicare card under their legal or given name.
This name is provided by the government agency:

-   By Court Order, or
-   In writing on the agency's letterhead

Note: this name is held at personal in CDMS

-   Known by the name of the adoptive parents at Group. The government
    agency or accredited non-government organisation is the group
    contact

See also: Adopted child enrolments in Medicare.

Long name enrolments

Where a person has a legal name that is long, they would usually need to
be on their own Medicare card. Medicare does allow names to be
shortened. This makes sure all family members are on the same card.

A name is considered long when any of the following applies:

-   the last name has more than 18 characters
-   the first given name has more than 12 characters, or
-   the first name, initial and family are more than 25 characters in
    total (includes spaces)

For a long name enrolment record, it is not possible to:

-   add another person
-   transfer or copy another person
-   transfer or copy to another enrolment

There are 2 options for long names:

-   enrol them on a Medicare card of their own, or
-   shorten their name so they can be added to the family Medicare card

The Service Officer must discuss the options with the applicant and ask
what they prefer.

Note: if a name is hyphenated and they want to remove 1 of the names, it
is considered a name change. Supporting documents must be provided. See
Acceptable documents to change a legal name.

If the applicant wants to shorten their name, it must only be done at
Group. The legal name is still recorded at Personal. The Process page
contains information on processing short and long names.

Updating a long name enrolment

A long name enrolment must be updated when:

-   created incorrectly, or
-   the group contact has had a name change and the long name record is
    no longer needed

Once a long name record has been updated, and it is no longer considered
a long name, it is then possible to:

-   add another person
-   transfer or copy another person
-   transfer or copy the person to another enrolment

Only name enrolments

An 'only name' enrolment is where the applicant has one name only. There
is no last name and first name. The Process page has more information.

Married name

Where a person marries, they can choose to:

-   take on their spouse’s family name, or
-   both partners can hyphenate their family names

Supporting documents must be provided to change a legal name. See
Acceptable documents to change a legal name.

Note: both partners must make their own application for a change of
legal name.

Minor or major variations in name

Minor name variations

If advised that a name has been spelt incorrectly, or needs updating,
where the change is a minor variation it can be changed without
documentation.

Below are examples only:

-   Marie should be Maree
-   Brown should be Browne
-   Cook should be Cooke
-   Ashlee should be Ashlie
-   Removing or adding a middle initial or middle name

Major name variations

Where the change is a major variation to their recorded legal name,
customers are required to provide supporting documentation to verify the
required changes. (These documents do not include situations where a
customer is changing their legal name).

Below are examples only:

-   change the spelling of a name
-   change hyphenated names to non-hyphenated and vice versa
-   moving a name from first name field to middle name field
-   customers first name has been entered in the surname field, and
    surname entered into the first name field

Customers can do a major variation to recorded legal name:

-   by calling Services Australia
-   by emailing or mailing the request and supporting documents, or
-   in a service centre

See also: Table 2 on the Process page.

See Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility for help.

Indigenous Australians

See Indigenous enrolments in Medicare.

Application for transfers or copy that include a name change

Where transfers or copies include a name change this is done after the
transfer or copy is processed. This stops an incorrect replacement card.
Customers are required to provide documentation to change their name.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in (Document Verification
Service (DVS) prior to processing application.

The Process page contains details on how to verify and record this
information.

The Resources page contains result codes, data tables and country codes.

Related links

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments

Change of address for Medicare enrolments

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

System functionality of the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
