-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about the lodgement and processing of
claims for Medicare benefits.

Patient claims

A patient claim is a claim submitted for the payment of a Medicare
benefit after a medical service is provided to the patient.

The Medicare benefit is paid to the person who incurs the cost (has
fully paid the account/invoice), and is known as the claimant.

If the account/invoice is unpaid or partially paid the benefit is paid
to the health professional by cheque (Pay Doctor via Claimant (PDVC)).

The patient and claimant do not have to be the same person or be on the
same Medicare card.

Customer contacts Services Australia

When a customer contacts the agency by phone about their claim, suitably
skilled Service Officers must attempt first contact resolution. Try to
process all claims regardless of date of lodgement.

Note: all financial hardship and vulnerable customer claims must be
processed at first point of contact. Service Officers not skilled in
this work type must escalate to Local Peer Support (LPS) for assistance.

Patient and claimant

The following descriptions are provided to differentiate between patient
and claimant:

-   Patient - the person to whom a medical service has been provided.
    Note: the patient is identified on the health professional's invoice
-   Claimant - the person who incurred, or is liable for, costs
    associated with the medical service rendered

As the claimant has paid for the service provided to themselves or
another person, they are entitled to receive the Medicare benefit.

A claimant may also be a business or organisation and, if on behalf of
the patient, they have incurred the expense they are entitled to receive
the Medicare benefit. For example, a sporting body, see the Process page
for details on how to process a claim for a business or organisation.

An organisation funded for the provisions of medical services under
section 19(2) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 is unable to claim a
Medicare benefit.

Medicare benefits for Patient claims can be submitted by either:

-   post
-   in person at a service centre
-   digitally
-   phone
-   using an Access Point

Medicare benefits can be paid by:

-   Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) for fully paid accounts, or
-   At point of service, credit EFTPOS via Medicare Easyclaim
-   PDVC cheque

If claims are lodged digitally via self-service channels, the patient
must be on the same Medicare card as the claimant.

Progress of Medicare claim lodged

Where the claimant calls or enquires about the progress of a patient
claim lodged within the relevant timeframe, Service Officers are to
confirm receipt of the claim and status (received/paid/rejected etc.).
Service Officers are not to process the claim, advise the claimant we
will assess and pay any Medicare benefit owing as quickly as possible.

If a customer indicates they are in financial hardship, the Process page
explains how to process these claims.

See the Resources page for a link to the Services Australia website with
the relevant timeframe for claiming a Medicare benefit.

If the claim was received outside the relevant timeframe:

-   via online or through the App, see Enquiries received via telephone
    for digital self service claims
-   by mail or at a service centre, process the claim, see the Process
    page

Manual EFT payment

Manual EFT payments are required in the following instances:

-   Safety Net payments for outpatients with individual charges over
    $9999.99
-   Safety Net partial payments
-   Stale Safety Net cheques
-   Stale cheques that cannot be processed on the system
-   stop on a cheque but BILI is not actioned and cheque goes stale
-   patient claim late lodgement over 7 years
-   cheques manually cancelled by finance operator number 08448

All manual EFT payment requests are prepared by Medicare Provider
Services (MPS) and actioned by Accounting Operations.

The Process page contains details on how to request a manual EFT payment
for MPS Service Officers.

Statement of benefit

A statement of benefit (printed in service centres, or a system
generated receipt) provides customers with a summary of their claims and
the total Medicare benefits paid. It is also confirmation of payment.

Service Officers should only issue a statement of benefit when requested
by the claimant or patient. This applies to all Medicare claiming
channels.

There are some exceptions; a statement of benefit must be issued when:

-   it has been ticked on a completed Medicare claims form
-   requested by the claimant during a telephone claim
-   when the customer attends a service centre or calls the Medicare
    enquiry line and requests one
-   for all Express Plus Medicare mobile app claims
-   to a business or organisation where they have incurred the cost
-   the claim includes in hospital services

If a claimant or patient requests a duplicate statement of benefit,
Service Officers must make sure the statement is issued only to the
claimant or patient for that service.

Statement of benefits for accounts/invoices processed via Simplified
Billing

A duplicate statement of benefit cannot be issued to the patient if the
service was billed to Medicare via the Simplified Billing channel.

These statements can only be issued to the relevant Health Fund or
Billing Agent that lodged the claim with Medicare.

If a Health Fund or Billing Agent is requesting a statement of benefit
see, Statement of benefit for Simplified Billing in Medicare.

Manual statement of benefit

A manual statement of benefit is a letter Z2261 manually completed by
Service Officers and can be issued to customers for claims:

-   with a service date over 7 years
-   adjustments that cannot be actioned in mainframe or result in an
    overpayment
-   Safety Net adjustments
-   Safety Net payments for claims over $9999.99
-   for claims where a manual payment has been made

A requested manual statement of benefit letter is to be addressed to the
claimant/patient.

The letter contains a field where the applicable reason code is entered.

See, Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims
processing in Medicare for more details on reason codes.

If the manual statement of benefit is for an adjustment of any type,
then place details from the previous assessment lines with RSN 888 and
the revised adjusted lines.

If the service(s) is for an inpatient service, if eligible, the claimant
can forward this statement to their Private Health Fund to claim further
gap benefits.

Where there are any outstanding overpayments recorded on a patient's
history related to this service, a Service Officer can issue a statement
of benefit to the claimant. Service Officers are not to withhold the
statement until the overpayment has been repaid or, contact debt
recovery to enquire on the status of the overpayment.

See Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing for
more details.

Accounts/Invoices

The account/invoice is the most important element when processing
patient claims. These documents contain the essential details that allow
a Medicare benefit to be paid.

For a claim to be processed the account/invoice and/or the receipt must
be provided. The account/invoice can either be paid or partially paid
(confirmation of payment must be included either by receipt or noted on
the account/invoice) or unpaid (only the account/invoice is required).

For details on what is required on an account/invoice or receipt for the
claim to be processed, see Account and receipt documents for Medicare
claims processing.

Australian ORGAN donor Register (AODR) via MS014

If a MS014 claim is received to process and the Organ donor registration
section is completed you must refer to Register a new organ donor in the
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR), to follow and action
accordingly.

Payment of benefits via EFT

Following the Government announcement in the 2015-16 Budget, payment of
Medicare benefits to claimants by cheque stopped from 1 July 2016. Pay
doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheques will continue as legislated in the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

Payment of benefits for paid accounts/invoices will be deposited into
the claimant’s nominated bank account. For a processed claim where the
claimant has not provided a bank account, the payment for the claim will
be held until EFT details have been provided.

If a claim is processed at a service centre or via phone claiming, the
claimant does not need to complete and sign a claim form. See Patient
claims requirements for payment of Medicare benefits.

Held EFT payments for children under 14 years of age (health
professional error)

If a health professional submits a claim online and selects a child
under 14 years of age as the claimant and no EFT details are recorded,
the benefit will be held. The Service Officer is to determine who the
correct claimant is.

If a customer (other than the child) contacts Medicare and claims to be
the claimant, the Service Officer is to determine if the customer is the
actual claimant and the health professional has transmitted the child as
the claimant incorrectly.

To determine if the customer is the claimant, the Service Officer must
ask the customer the following questions (following a security check):

-   what was the date of service
-   who was the health professional
-   how much was paid for the service

If the customer successfully answers these questions, the claim should
be adjusted to reflect the correct claimant.

Unpaid or partially paid accounts/invoices

Medicare benefits for unpaid or partially paid accounts/invoices can
only be paid by cheque. The claimant must present both:

-   the account/invoice or receipt
-   a completed and signed Medicare Claim form (MS014)

Medicare benefits for unpaid or partially paid accounts/invoices are
paid via a computer generated Pay Doctor via Claimant (PDVC) cheque
drawn in favour of the health professional who is entitled to the
Medicare benefit.

The PDVC cheque is posted to the claimant at the address recorded
against the claimant or on the claim form (when the claimant nominates a
temporary address), together with a statement of benefit for retention
by the claimant and the health professional.

The claimant is responsible for forwarding the benefit cheque to the
health professional, together with the balance of the account/invoice,
if applicable. They can then present the account/invoice receipt at a
service centre to show the service has been paid in full. The claim can
then be substantiated and will accumulate towards the Medicare Safety
Net threshold for all out of hospital services.

See also: Verify services for Medicare Safety Net.

These requirements cannot be varied as they are supported by the Health
Insurance Act 1973, Section 20(2).

See also: 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

Incomplete claim forms or incorrect details

The information supplied on the account/invoice or receipt should be
used to uniquely identify both the patient and the claimant.

When identification is not possible, return the original document to the
customer, together with the appropriate letter. Photocopy the original
account/invoice documents and retain onsite for future reference
attached to a photocopy of the letter.

The Resources page links to letter templates.

See also:

-   Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits
-   Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claim forms

Permanent address change during claim processing

If a permanent address change is actioned during claims processing, by
Medicare Claim form (MS014), telephone claiming or in person at a
Medicare Service Centre, and the claim is later reversed, the amended
address must not be reversed with the claim. The claimant's address must
remain updated in CDMS.

Payment times for Medicare benefits

There is a minimum turn-around time for Medicare benefits to be paid.
These minimum payment times vary according to the claim type and relate
to the number of days (including weekends) the benefit is held by
Services Australia before release for payment to the claimant or health
professional.

Payment of claims when Mainframe is unavailable

This information is for situations where the Medicare system mainframe
is not available in service centres. Customers should not be penalised
when the Medicare system is not available.

Service Officers should advise customers that the system is down and
they can either:

-   fill in a Medicare Claim form (MS014) and the claim will be
    processed as soon as the system is available into their nominated
    back account by electronic funds transfer (EFT)
-   lodge the claim through their myGov account if applicable or on the
    Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Medicare benefits for fully paid accounts/invoices can only be paid by
EFT with funds deposited into a nominated bank account. Where the
claimant does not have valid EFT details stored in the CDMS or cannot
provide valid temporary or permanent EFT details at the time the claim
is submitted, the payment for the claim will be held until EFT details
have been provided.

Helping claimants

See Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms.

Patient claims submitted more than 2 years after date of service

The Process page contains a table outlining the situations and the
action required when patient claims submitted for payment are over 2
years old from the date of service.

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) claims where claimant has left the country

Contact Local Peer Support (LPS) for help with processing a patient
claim when:

-   claim is received via the PaNDA work tool
-   claimant has an RHCA entitlement, and
-   has already left the country

The Resources page has details for processing control lines and links to
forms, process map, letter and the Services Australia website.

Contents

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

Adjustments for Medicare patient claims

Assistant surgeon accounts processing in Medicare

Charges $10,000 or more (greater than $9999.99) for Medicare patient
claims

Goods and Sales Tax (GST) charged to Medicare patient claim accounts

Greatest Permissible Gap (GPG)

Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims for Medicare

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare Claim forms

Medicare benefits for professional services

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Medicare patient claims history or claims history statement has
incorrect or missing information

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Printed receipts confirming payment of Medicare benefit

Professional services related to Medicare patient claims

Radiation oncology accounts with multiple fields in Medicare claims

Release of claims information in Medicare

Quality assurance for external mail in Medicare

Medicare Two-way and claims processing

Related links

90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque Scheme

Medicare benefits for professional services

Referrals for assessing Medicare

Process digital self service claims

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
