-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details regarding assignment of benefit forms,
account and receipt documents for the processing of Medicare claims.

Account documents

Account documents, for example invoices, claimant accounts, receipts and
assignment forms are the most important element in paying a claim. These
documents contain essential details when processing a claim for a
Medicare benefit and act as evidence for Services Australia. This is why
it is essential that the agency retain all documentation associated with
claims for Medicare benefits.

Lodgement advice

Lodgement advice is an advice that the claim has been lodged by the
health professional's practice on behalf of the claimant. This can also
be referred to as a statement of claim.

Where a claimant attempts to claim Medicare benefits using their
lodgement advice and/or their statement of claim notice in person at a
service centre:

Service Officers must check the patient's claim history, to see if the
service has been assessed

If the service has been assessed advise the claimant:

-   their claim has already been lodged by the health professional's
    practice, and
-   they cannot claim the benefit again

Where the service is not present on the patient's history, process the
claim using the details on the lodgement advice

Where a claimant is not present at a service centre:

-   and submits their lodgement advice notice to claim Medicare benefits
-   Service Officers can process the claim and reject with RSN code 162
    as a duplicate claim if the service is present on patient's history

If the claim is not present on the patient's history:

-   process the claim using the details on the lodgement advice

Alterations to accounts or receipts

Where alterations have been made on an account or receipt and the
Service Officer is unsure if the information correctly reflects the
service rendered:

-   contact the health professional's practice for verification, and
-   complete processing notes verifying information

If the Service Officer:

-   confirms with the health professional that the amended account is
    not true and correct
-   they must refer to their team leader or manager for escalation to
    the Fraud team

Note: if the health professional cannot be contacted, the claim must not
be paid. The Service Officer must return the original document to the
claimant, together with the appropriate letter. See also: Quality
assurance for external mail in Medicare.

Services not claimable for Medicare benefits

Where a service is:

-   not claimable, Service Officers must return the claim to the
    claimant, together with the appropriate letter. Copies of letters
    must be maintained on a dedicated file within the service centre for
    non-digital claims. See Quality assurance for external mail in
    Medicare for more details
-   rejected by the agency, Service Officers must retain all paperwork
    associated with the claim

The Resources page contains a link to the Standard Letter Templates.

Accounts/receipts requiring additional information

Where the submitted account and/or receipt does not include all required
details, the claim cannot be paid until the additional details are
received:

-   For manual patient claims, Service Officers must try to contact the
    health professional to ask for more details
-   For digital self-service claims, Service Officers must try to
    contact the health professional to ask for more details. If contact
    cannot be established the claim must be rejected with the
    appropriate reason code

The Process page explains:

-   how to ask for more details for manual claims/digital self-service
    claims, and
-   which reason codes to use for digital self-service claims when
    contact cannot be established

Responsibility to provide account information

Section 19(6) of the Health Insurance Act 1973, states that the
responsibility to supply the necessary information on account documents:

-   rests with the health professional
-   does not rest with the patient

Health professionals or staff acting on their behalf are responsible:

-   for the accuracy, and
-   completeness of the information included on the account, receipt or
    assignment of benefit form

If account information is incomplete, see ‘Accounts/receipts requiring
additional information’ above.

Service Officers in doubt about the validity of the claim being
processed, must escalate the matter to their team leader or manager. The
References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Account requirements

Account or receipt documents for patient claims require specific
details.

Itemised account or receipt

If a health professional bills a patient for medical services, the
patient requires an itemised account or receipt to allow the payment of
a Medicare benefit.

Health professionals must provide an account, receipt or assignment form
that identifies:

Name of patient

Date of service

Amount charged

Amount paid

Amount outstanding

Service details:

-   an item number only, or
-   an item number and description, or
-   a description to identify the service

Health professionals are free to create their accounts/receipts in a
format that identifies the above listed information. As an example,
health professionals may include the following to indicate an account
has been paid:

-   Nil balance
-   Balance owing $0.00
-   Total Due $0.00

Note:

-   Where an account shows indicates the amount paid is the same as the
    charge for services rendered, the account must be considered paid
-   Printed accounts may include charges and fees for prior invoices or
    upcoming procedures. These amounts must not be included when
    determining if the listed items on the account are paid or unpaid

A health professional may provide a description only of the service
sufficient to identify the item number. It is important to keep in mind
that it is only the health professional who can accurately describe that
service. That neither the patient's description of the service, or the
fee charged for the service performed, must be taken as a reliable
indication of the actual service involved.

Where a Service Officer cannot determine the item number, they must
attempt to contact the health professional for clarification.

Note: the item numbers or descriptions of services:

-   as set out in the Australian Medical Association (AMA) List of
    Medical Service Fees
-   do not always provide a description of the service sufficient to
    allow positive identification of a service

The Resources page has a link to the Health Insurance Regulations 2018.
See Part 3 - Medicare benefits - Division 5 for more details.

Services rendered to inpatients

Health professionals are required to identify services rendered or
requested:

-   while the patient was an admitted patient of a hospital, or
-   an approved day hospital facility

Part 3 - Medicare benefits - Division 5 of the Health Insurance
Regulations 2018 states that this can be identified by either:

-   the service description, must indicate that the service was rendered
    as part of an episode of hospital treatment. For example including
    the word 'inpatient' in the service description, or
-   a briefer description of the service may be used together with the
    item number and an asterisk (*) or the letter ‘H’

The following terms are commonly used to identify these services:

-   The letter 'H' immediately after the item number
-   Including the words 'in hospital' in the service description
-   Including the word 'inpatient' in the service description
-   Including the words 'admitted patient' in the service description
-   Including the word 'admitted' in the service description

Medicare benefits for services performed to an in-patient of a hospital
are assessed at 75% of the Schedule fee.

Note: health professionals are required to identify hospital substitute
treatments by including in the service description:

-   the words 'hospital-substitute treatment' or
-   HST

See also: Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims for Medicare.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Regulations
2018.

Health professionals details required on account or receipt documents

Part 3 - Medicare benefits - Division 5 of the Health Insurance
Regulations 2018 states that the below health professional information
is required on the account, receipt or assignment form:

-   the name of the person who rendered the service and the address of
    the place of practice where the service was rendered, or
-   provider number of the health professional who rendered the service

As per the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS), more details may be
provided on account documents. However the above requirements outline
the minimum details.

Some accounts show the name of more than one health professional. The
name of the health professional who actually performed the service is
not always shown. If documents need more details, see Account documents
on this page.

Note: if the rendering health professional cannot be positively
identified, claims must not be paid.

Provider numbers on accounts

The provision of provider numbers on the account is not mandatory.

The claim can be processed if the Service Officer can establish:

-   the service attracts Medicare benefits, and
-   the practitioner as a registered health professional at the address
    the service was given

Health professionals must be encouraged to supply provider numbers as:

-   this allows quicker processing of claims, and
-   reduces the likelihood of errors

Locum details

If a locum renders a service:

-   on behalf of another health professional
-   the account documents must indicate it is a locum service either by
    the word 'Locum' or the letters 'LT' (Locum Tenens)

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Regulations
2018.

Referral details required on account or receipt documents

Where a service is referred, the Health Insurance Regulations 2018
states that the following referral details are needed on the account,
receipt or assignment form:

-   the name of the referring health professional
-   address or provider number of the referring professional
-   date on which the patient was referred
-   period of validity of the referral

When processing claims that require a referral, Service Officers must
enter the date the referral was issued, rather than the date the
referral was first used. The Resources page contains an example to
support staff.

Note: where referral details are missing from account or receipt, see
Incomplete, invalid, or no referral details supplied below for more
details.

Patient details required on account documents

The name of the person receiving the service (the patient) must be shown
on all accounts.

If the name of the patient is not clearly stated on the account
documents or cannot be uniquely identified. For example, 2 people with
the same surname and initial are on the Medicare card. Do not process
the claim. If documents need more details, see Account documents on this
page.

Note: where an account is received listing the patients name as newborn,
baby of, or a similar variant, the claim can still be processed so long
as it is clear which patient received the services. If it is not clear
whom received the services, for example, twins, the claim is to be
rejected and returned with the appropriate letter.

Claimant details

A claimant is a person, business or organisation who incurred the
medical costs for a service rendered.

It is not a requirement for the claimant's details to be stated on the
account and/or receipt.

The account does not need to be in the claimant's name in order for the
claimant to receive the Medicare benefit. By accepting the Medicare
claiming declaration, the claimant is confirming that they incurred the
cost of the medical service.

Under no circumstances must the claimant be asked to return to the
surgery to have the account or receipt changed into the claimant's name.

See also: Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits.

Account reference (ACRF)

For accounting purposes, certain health professionals may request
account reference details to be included on their Medicare statement of
benefit. This allows the doctor's surgery to determine which account the
Medicare benefit has been paid for.

The patient's account or receipt contains an account reference number.
This number can be up to 11 alpha and numeric characters. This number
can be referred to as the:

-   account number
-   receipt number
-   folio number, or
-   invoice number

Note: ACRF lines are keyed when the account is unpaid, using payee code
2.

The message 1-ACRF REQ is displayed when an ACRF line is required. This
message prompts the Service Officer to key the ACRF line immediately
after the services for the health professional.

Once the patient's account has been processed, the account reference
details are recorded on the patient's history and are printed on the
statement of benefit.

Scanned, emailed, faxed, handwritten and photocopied accounts and account receipts

Scanned, emailed, faxed, handwritten or photocopied accounts or account
receipts may be used for processing. If Service Officers have any
concerns about the validity of an account or account receipt, they must
phone the health professional to verify the details. For quality control
purposes, complete processing notes verifying details.

Scanned accounts and account receipts for Medicare Two-way claims

The agency can accept scanned claiming documentation if it has been:

-   received from a private health fund, and
-   certified as a true copy of the original

Note: claiming documentation includes accounts, account receipts and
claim forms.

Emailed accounts and account receipts

If a claimant presents emailed accounts or account receipts for
processing. Service Officers must assess the document to confirm it
complies with the minimum claim requirements.

Faxed accounts and account receipts

Faxed accounts or account receipts are only acceptable when the fax is
transmitted:

-   directly to the agency from the health professional's practice
-   from a state government body, such as state trustees

Note: certified copies received directly from state trustees are
acceptable. However, a completed Medicare Claim form must clearly
identify the state trustee as the claimant. The benefit must be made to
the bank account of the state trustee. Payment must not be paid into a
personal bank account.

If state government body bank details are not supplied on the claim
form, return the original document to the state trustee, together with
the appropriate letter.

Handwritten accounts and receipts

Handwritten accounts, receipts or assignment forms can be accepted for
assessment if the documentation contains all the required details as set
out under Account requirements on this page.

Photocopied accounts and account receipts

If a Service Officer believes that the claimant has provided a
photocopied account or account receipt:

-   they must try to contact the practice, and
-   request the account or account receipt be faxed to the agency, or
-   complete processing notes verifying information all required service
    details in order to pay the claim and attach it to the claim
    documents

If the Service Officer is unable to contact the practice:

-   to confirm that the account or account receipt is valid
-   they must tell the claimant, if in person, that a duplicate account
    or account receipt is required

Note: if a claim has been received through the mail or digital channels
and:

-   the practice cannot be contacted, or
-   the Service Officer cannot confirm that the account or account
    receipt is valid
-   return the supplied documents back to the claimant with the
    appropriate letter

See Quality assurance for external mail in Medicare for more details.

The Resources page contains links to Standard Letter Templates.

Post office, internet BPAY, credit card, EFTPOS and direct bank transfer receipts

Regulation 49 of the Health Insurance Regulations 2018 states:

-   the total amount paid in respect of the service must be included on
    the health professional's receipt
-   a Medicare benefit can only be paid in favour of the claimant if
    there is a receipt showing the total amount paid for the service

A claim is to be treated as a paid patient claim if:

-   an unpaid account is supplied along with acceptable proof that the
    claimant has made payment
-   via post office, internet BPAY®, credit card, EFTPOS or direct bank
    transfer

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Regulations
2018.

Accepted proof of payment

The following documents are acceptable as proof of payment:

Post office receipts

Internet receipts including:

-   BPAY
-   BPOINT
-   PayPal
-   Online bank transfer

Thermal credit card or EFTPOS receipts

Bank transfer receipts

The claimant must produce both the health professional's
account/invoice, and a printed copy of the appropriately detailed
payment receipt. If both the account /invoice and a printed copy of the
receipt are not provided, Service Officers must:

-   contact the health professional and confirm payment has been
    received (only if the claimant has provided proof of payment on a
    mobile/smart device), or
-   advise the claimant that the claim can only be paid in favour of the
    health professional unless an appropriate receipt is supplied

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
proof of payment and advice on taking/scanning clear photos and
documents.

Details required in the receipts

Receipts must detail the following information to be accepted as proof
of payment:

A link between the payment and either the:

-   invoice
-   account
-   health professional, or
-   practice where the service was rendered, and

The actual amount paid, and

The date of payment, and

A receipt or confirmation number

Note: bank transfer receipts are only acceptable if the health
professional's account or invoice includes:

-   a Bank State Branch (BSB) and account number for payment, and
-   the details match those on the bank deposit receipt

Not enough details on proof of payment or missing proof of payment

If there are not enough details on the proof of payment or the Service
Officer thinks that the proof of payment supplied by the claimant may be
fraudulent. Contact the health professional and confirm if the payment
has been received. Service Officers must complete processing notes
verifying details.

If the health professional confirms payment was not received, advise the
claimant that the claim can only be paid in favour of the health
professional unless they can provide proof of payment. If the claimant
disputes non-payment, return the original document to the claimant and
advise them to contact the health professional.

If the health professional cannot be contacted:

-   return the original document to the claimant and
-   advise the claimant to contact the health professional to get a
    detailed receipt

If the health professional cannot confirm that the service being claimed
took place and the Service Officer believes that the claim may be
treated as fraudulent, refer to the External fraud intranet page. The
Resources page contains a link to the page.

Retaining or returning account documents

Returning accounts or account receipts when no Medicare benefit is
payable

Where there is no Medicare benefit payable on an account or account
receipt:

-   Service Officers must cancel the claim or delete the service line/s
    (for that account only), and
-   return the claim to the claimant with the appropriate letter

See Quality assurance for external mail in Medicare.

This policy impacts claims that do not attract a Medicare benefit. For
example, when the item is not covered by Medicare.

Note: do not send letters to claimants as they automatically receive a
statement notifying that the claim was not paid, when either the:

-   services are suspected duplicate (162 reason code), or
-   maximum number of services have already been claimed (160 reason
    code)

Returning accounts or account receipts when the account or account
receipt contains both Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) and non-MBS items

Where a claim is processed:

-   and the account or account receipt contains both MBS items and
    non-MBS items
-   the agency must retain the documentation associated with the claim

A copy of the account documents must be returned to the claimant
together with the appropriate standard letter.

Note: if there is no Medicare benefit payable (regardless of whether it
contains both MBS and non-MBS items), Service Officers must:

-   either cancel the claim or delete the service line/s (for that
    account only), and
-   return a copy of the account or account receipt and Medicare Claim
    form (if applicable) to the claimant, together with the appropriate
    standard letter

Returning account or account receipts by claimant request

Where a claimant wishes to retain:

their medical accounts or account receipts and they are present at a
Service Centre:

-   the Service Officer must copy and return all paperwork associated
    with the claim

If the claimant is not present at a service centre:

and has specifically requested their medical accounts or account
receipts, the Service Officer

-   retains all paperwork associated with the claim, and
-   returns a certified copy of the accounts or account receipts to the
    claimant with the 'Documents enclosed' standard letter

The Process page contains details on how to certify a copy of account
documents.

The Resources page contains a link to the Standard Letter Templates
page.

Incomplete, invalid or no referral details supplied

The Health Insurance Regulations 2018 provide details of what is
required for a valid referral. The following information outlines the
requirements where an account has incomplete, invalid or no referral
details supplied.

Obtaining correct referral details

If a claim is submitted with incorrect, invalid or no referral details.
Service Officers must try to contact the practice where the service was
provided to get the correct referral details.

Note:

-   if the health professional cannot be contacted, the Service Officer
    may choose to contact the referring health professional to get the
    correct referral details
-   if no details are presented on the account and the claimant is in
    receipt of a valid referral, Service Officers must follow the
    process on the Process page

The Process page contains details on how to record referral information
where correct referral details have been obtained.

Referral details not obtained

Service Officers must not reject the claim in the first instance.

Under no circumstances should Service Officers guess the details of the
referring practitioner.

Note: patient claims history is not an acceptable source for referral
details. The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) details the account
requirements, including the information that is to be included on
accounts and receipts by a specialist or consultant physician, for a
patient who has been referred.

The Process page contains:

-   details on how to action accounts where referral details cannot be
    obtained and the claim is for a single service
-   scenarios and instructions where referral details cannot be obtained
    and the claim is for multiple services

Multiple services or multiple accounts or receipts

If referral details cannot be obtained and the claim is for multiple
services, it is not practical to return the claim to the claimant.

The Process page contains details about how to process multiple services
or multiple accounts.

Bulk bill claims

If a bulk bill claim is submitted with incomplete, invalid or no
referral details. Service Officers must reject the claim using the
appropriate reason code.

Service Officers must use the help key F1/cursor on the claims
processing screen where required. This help message will help Service
Officers in determining what action must be taken and the appropriate
rejection code.

If more guidance is needed, Service Officers must seek help from their
team leader or manager.

See reason codes in Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for
claims processing in Medicare.

Non-referred services

If a service is provided without a current or valid referral, the
service is deemed as a non-referred service.

The Process page contains details:

-   on how to action a non-referred service, and
-   details if a Service Officer is unable to verify the service was
    non-referred

Escalating inappropriate digital images

The definition of digital image is anything that is provided to Services
Australia in a digital image form such as:

-   photographs
-   pictures
-   written documents
-   GIFs
-   Memes, and
-   Text

Sometimes customers may upload inappropriate or aggressive material that
is not relevant to the agency’s functions. These images must not be
retained on a customer’s record but cannot be deleted.

Notional charges

A notional charge can be used where the:

-   health professional has raised a total charge to cover a group of
    services
-   services are rendered by the same health professional
-   services are for a patient/s enrolled on the same Medicare card
-   services dates are the same or different

Exception - this policy does not relate to manually keyed radiation
oncology items.

The Resources page contains a table showing a notional charge example.

Notional charges and health professional's discounts

Health professionals may offer a discount to the notional charge stated
on the account. There are 2 types of discounts that can apply:

-   Conditional
-   Unconditional discounts

Note: if the account shows:

one charge for the services, this charge becomes the notional charge
under which the services are processed

individual charges for each service and the health professional has
applied:

-   an unconditional discount, this discount charge becomes the notional
    charge under which the items are processed
-   a conditional discount, the Service Officer must key the full
    charge, not the discounted amount

Conditional discounts

A conditional discount applies where the patient must pay the account
within a specified time in order to receive the discount.

Where the account is:

-   paid within the specified timeframe, Service Officers must key the
    discounted amount as a notional charge. The Process page contains
    details about how to process conditional and unconditional discounts
-   unpaid and a Pay Doctor via Claimant cheque is to be issued, Service
    Officers must key the undiscounted amount as the notional charge.
    See the 'Accounts' section in Claims processing in Medicare

Unconditional discounts

An unconditional discount applies when the health professional accepts
the discounted charge as full payment, regardless of when the account is
paid.

These accounts are usually recognised by wording to the effect 'Medicare
benefit will be accepted as full payment' or 'your refund cheque will be
accepted as full payment'.

Note: unconditional discounts where health professionals have indicated
that the Medicare benefit is accepted as full payment only apply to
out-of-hospital services.

By changing the charge to equal the benefit there is no need to
substantiate the claim for Medicare Safety Net purposes, as the patient
has no out-of-pocket expenses.

The Process page contains details about how to process conditional and
unconditional discounts.

Rejected items under a notional charge

If an item or items on an account where a notional charge applies is
rejected, contact the surgery and request an amended account that states
the individual charges for each item.

Note: Service Officers must key the rejected item/s as the last service.

Miscellaneous items

The Legal Services Division has advised that the agency does not have a
function under the Human Services (Medicare) Act 1973 to:

-   collect and process information for the purpose of the Income Tax
    Act 1986, or
-   for any services that do not attract a Medicare benefit

By entering miscellaneous items into the system, the agency is acting
outside its legal function.

Service Officers are advised that it is not their responsibility to
determine if a miscellaneous item is considered to be clinically
relevant in accordance with the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Service Officers must not:

-   record details of miscellaneous items appearing on an account or
    receipt, or
-   key either 'MISC', '0000' or '99' for any miscellaneous charges

If an account does not contain an item number or a description
sufficient to identify the service, it is considered to be a
miscellaneous service and must not be keyed. The same applies to
accounts with the wording 'miscellaneous'.

Miscellaneous items examples

Below are examples of miscellaneous items:

-   Non-claimable pathology, for example, Thin Prep
-   Facility fees
-   Bandages
-   Medications
-   Any charge on an account that is not for a clinically relevant
    service (MBS item). For example the account indicates a service
    charge, admission fee, call out fee

This list is by no means exhaustive and other miscellaneous items may
appear on an account.

The References page contains links to the Human Services (Medicare) 1973
legislation.

The Process page contains details about how to process accounts with
miscellaneous items.

MBS items over $9999.99 (charges over $10,000)

The use of '0000' is only acceptable where the charge is over $9999.99
for a clinically relevant service. The Medicare payment system is unable
to accept amounts greater than this figure.

For more details and process steps, see Charges $10,000 or more (greater
than $9,999.99) for Medicare patient claims.

Incorrect processing of in-hospital services

Section 129AC of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) states that
where, as a result of a false or misleading statement:

-   an amount paid, purportedly by way of benefit, or
-   payment under the Act, exceeds the amount (if any) that should have
    been paid
-   the amount of the excess is recoverable as a debt due to the
    Commonwealth from the person by or on behalf of whom the statement
    was made

Therefore, where an account is submitted to the agency for processing
and the item is either:

-   incorrectly marked as an outpatient service, or
-   not specified as an in-patient service, and
-   the benefit is processed at 85% of the schedule fee

Debt recovery must be sought from the health professional who issued the
account, not the patient.

All processed claims where Medicare benefits have been overpaid, whether
they are less than or more than $100, must be sent to Assessing and
Benefits for recovery action.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973
legislation.

Gap statements

If a claim has been incorrectly processed at the 85% (outpatient) level
instead of the 75% (in-patient) level:

-   Service Officers can issue a manual statement of benefit letter
-   a manual statement of benefit will allow for the patient to claim
    the 25% gap from their private health fund, if eligible, and
-   recovery action must be pursued

Note: Service Officers are not required to wait until the overpayment
has been repaid before issuing a manual statement of benefit.

Barter arrangements

Medicare benefits are not payable where a health professional accepts a
barter arrangement in settlement of their account.

Barter arrangements do not meet account requirements. See the Account
requirements section above.

A barter arrangement may also be known as:

-   bartering
-   exchange
-   barter exchange
-   trade exchange
-   countertrade exchange

Bartercard is an organisation that works on a form of barter trade. This
is where members buy goods and services from other members with their
value being credited and debited in what are termed 'trade dollars'. No
money changes hands.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973
legislation.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details for the Medicare claims helpdesk
-   a link to the Standard Letter Templates
-   an example of an account showing a notional charge
-   links to forms, and
-   the External fraud homepage

Related links

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Hospital Substitute Treatment (HST) claims for Medicare

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare Claim forms

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

Indicators, codes, modifiers and control lines for claims processing in
Medicare

Charges $10,000 or more (greater than $9,999.99) for Medicare patient
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
