
Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments 011-44110020

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information about how to action a change of
gender or sex for Medicare enrolments.

On this Page:

Customer requests change to gender or sex in CDMS

Where a person requests that their sex or gender be amended in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS), they must provide
documentation that meets the Evidence standards before any change to
their sex and/or gender records can be made. Any evidence that is
submitted by customers, must be sighted and checked to ensure it meets
the necessary requirements.

Evidence of sex or gender change

A person can provide one of the following forms of evidence to establish
or update their gender classification:

-   Statement from a Registered Medical Practitioner or Registered
    Psychologist verifying gender
-   Valid Australian Government travel document, such as a valid
    passport, showing the preferred gender
-   State or territory birth certificate showing preferred gender
-   State or territory Gender Recognition Certificate or Recognised
    Details Certificate showing a state or territory Registrar of Birth,
    Deaths and Marriages has accepted a change in sex

Updating records

Customers who identify their gender as being either male or female can
request a change to their Services Australia records. Currently, the
agency’s ICT systems do not have a separate field to record a person's
gender. It is acceptable to record the person's gender (male or female),
in the Sex field, subject to evidence being received.

Customers who identify as non-binary or indeterminate gender (X)

Currently, the agency’s ICT systems cannot accommodate customers who
want their records updated to reflect their gender as non-binary or
indeterminate gender (X). However, systems are progressively being
updated to include a non-binary/indeterminate gender (X) option. Until
this option is available, amend the customer's CDMS record by
documenting that the customer identifies their gender as
non-binary/indeterminate gender (X). Key 'customer identifies as gender
X' in the Comments field at Personal level. Assist customers to make
other complementary updates to their records that relate to removing
their title and amending their name, if applicable.

The agency’s ICT systems do not currently:

-   support the application of changes to name, title, sex and/or gender
    across all Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support customer records,
    however a new process is being developed
-   include a non-binary/indeterminate (X) gender option for selection,
    however systems are being progressively updated to include this

Note: where a person's sex has been recorded incorrectly on CDMS, go to
Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details.

Requests to enrol a newborn with indeterminate sex

Where a parent wishes to enrol their child as an indeterminate (X)
gender, they will need to provide evidence which reflects the
indeterminate status.

The agency’s ICT systems cannot currently accommodate customer records
to reflect a non-binary or indeterminate (X) gender classification,
therefore, once acceptable evidence has been provided, the parent will
need to choose either male or female option for their child's gender to
be recorded in CDMS in order to complete the creation or change of a
customer record with the current system limitation.

The Comments field at Personal level will then need to be updated to
record that the newborn is indeterminate (X) by recording the text
'customer identifies as gender X'.

Request to enrol a person with non-binary or indeterminate gender

A person can enrol with a non-binary or indeterminate gender (X),
subject to evidence being received. Because the agency’s ICT systems
cannot accommodate customer records to reflect their gender as
indeterminate/non-binary, the customer will need to choose either male
or female to be displayed on their record in CDMS until gender X option
is available.

The Comments field at Personal level will then need to be updated to
record that the person identifies as a non-binary or indeterminate (X)
gender by recording the text 'customer identifies as gender X'.

Note: see Script for request to enrol a newborn with indeterminate sex.

The Resources page contains:

Script for request to enrol a newborn with indeterminate sex

Links to Services Australia:

-   Our Service Commitments
-   Updating personal details on a Medicare card
-   Updating your gender details with us
-   Providing supporting statements as evidence for patients updating
    their gender classification

External link to the Australian Government Guidelines on the Recognition
of Sex and Gender

Related links

Newborn child enrolment in Medicare

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
