
Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare 011-42080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about diagnostic imaging assessing
rules in Medicare.

Diagnostic imaging

Diagnostic imaging is the use of ultrasound, computerised tomography,
radiology and nuclear medicine imaging to help make or confirm a
diagnosis.

Diagnostic imaging services are listed under Category 5 of the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Medicare benefits for diagnostic imaging services are dependent on the:

-   requesting practitioner’s registration type (are they eligible to
    request the service?)
-   providing practitioner’s registration type (are they eligible to
    perform the service?)
-   equipment used to take images (is it registered with Medicare for
    the right location and modern enough?)
-   patient’s registration with Medicare (are they enrolled?)
-   patient’s Medicare claims history (do they have any previous claims
    that restrict with this one?)

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page.

Provide diagnostic imaging services (health professional eligibility)

Diagnostic imaging services are eligible for Medicare benefits when they
are provided by a:

-   medical practitioner
-   person who is employed by a medical practitioner
-   person who is acting under the supervision of a medical practitioner
    in accordance with accepted medical practice, see Professional
    supervision

The health professional who provides the service is the practitioner.
Eligible health practitioners are generally specialists in radiology or
another field. Check the individual item rules in QITI to see which
health professionals can claim the item.

A specialist radiologist will be registered with one or more of these
specialty codes:

-   046
-   047
-   118
-   410

The practitioner must provide a report to the requesting health
professional.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page.

Professional supervision for diagnostic imaging

For some MBS items the supervising medical practitioner does not need to
be at the entire service. They must have direct involvement in at least
part of the service.

To meet the supervision requirements (defined in GN.12.31 of the MBS)
the supervising medical practitioner must:

-   have established consistent quality assurance procedures for data
    acquisition
-   personally analyse the data and write the report

Check the relevant explanatory notes for diagnostic imaging services for
the professional supervision requirements.

Account requirements for diagnostic imaging services

Accounts, account receipts or assignment of benefit forms for diagnostic
imaging services must include:

-   the patient’s name
-   date of service
-   amount charged
-   total amount paid
-   any amount outstanding
-   whether the service was performed as an in-patient or out-patient
    service
-   the Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) of the diagnostic
    imaging premises or mobile facility where the service was provided
-   the equipment used to provide the service
-   details of the professional service
-   name of the health professional
-   provider number

Accounts for R-type diagnostic imaging must also include:

-   date of request
-   requesting practitioner's name
-   requesting practitioner's provider number
-   address of the requesting practitioner

The account may also need to include specific text to support why the
claim should be paid without a request. See Exemptions from request
requirements table on the Resources page.

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum effective life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN)
registration for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO) for
more information about equipment registration, and prior eligibility for
remote area exemptions.

The Resources page has a link to the Equipment, Medicare and diagnostic
imaging information on the Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Request requirements for diagnostic imaging services

In the MBS, services that:

-   require a written request are identified with the symbol R
    (requested)
-   do not require a written request are identified with the symbol NR
    (not requested)

There are some exceptions to the request requirements, see Exemptions
from request requirements.

Before the service, the practitioner must receive a written request that
is:

-   signed, and
-   dated

This allows Medicare benefits to be paid for an R-type diagnostic
imaging service.

The practitioner making the request is:

-   referred to as the 'requesting' practitioner
-   responsible for deciding that the service is clinically necessary

Who can request diagnostic imaging services

Health professionals must be eligible to request the specific R-type
service for Medicare benefits to be paid. Use QITI or MBS Online to
check which items a specific health professional can request. The
Resources page has a link to the explanatory note in MBS Online.

Request on behalf of

A valid request can be made by a medical practitioner on behalf of a
treating practitioner. For example, by a resident medical officer at a
hospital, on behalf of the patient’s practitioner.

Information required in a request

A written request for a diagnostic imaging service does not have to be
in any particular form. It must contain:

-   sufficient information in terms that are understood by the
    profession
-   clear information identifying the item of service requested

Requesting practitioners are responsible for making sure there is
adequate information in their requests.

The written request must have:

-   the patient's name
-   the requesting practitioner’s name and either address or provider
    number
-   the date on which the request was made
-   a description of the requested service (pre-admission,
    post-discharge or out-patient service sufficient to identify the
    item to which the request relates)

Note: as diagnostic imaging is covered by separate legislation the
general arrangements applying to in-hospital referrals cannot be used
for diagnostic imaging requests.

Request to specified practitioner

It is not a requirement that the written request must specify the name
of a particular practitioner. If a practitioner is specified in a
request, another practitioner can accept the request if approached by
the patient to perform the service.

Request to self-employed paramedical professional (for example, radiographer)

Benefits are not payable when a medical practitioner refers patients to
self-employed paramedical personnel. For example radiographers or other
persons, who:

-   bill the patient, or
-   the practitioner requesting the service

Request for more than one service

A single request can be used to order a number of diagnostic imaging
services. All services provided under a single request must be rendered
within 7 days after rendering the first service.

Requests by non-medical (allied health) practitioners

Certain (R) type services can be requested by:

-   dental practitioners
-   chiropractors
-   physiotherapists
-   osteopaths
-   podiatrists
-   participating nurse practitioners, and
-   participating midwives

The Resources page has a link to the MBS Explanatory note IN.0.6. This
details which items can be requested.

Where a request made by a practitioner falls outside of the range of
services they are permitted to request, benefits are not payable for the
service(s). The only exception would occur where a corresponding NR item
existed for the requested service.

Retention of requests and records

Practitioners must retain written requests and records for services they
render for 2 years commencing on the day the service was rendered.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page.

Exemptions from request requirements - self determined services

There are a number of situations which are exempt from the general
written request requirements.

Specialists or consultant physicians can self-determine some diagnostic
imaging items, if they are treating the patient under their speciality
(not as a specialist in diagnostic radiology).

Where the specialist or consultant physician determines that the service
is required but does not have a specific request for that service from a
health professional, appropriate text is required to support the claim.

Examples of acceptable text include:

-   'self-determined'
-   'self-deemed'
-   'SD'

Claims lodged electronically may require a processing indicator to
identify the item was self-determined. The use of a processing indicator
will allow the system to apply the exemption for the normal request
requirements.

The processing indicator will differ depending on their claiming
software/system. Health professionals should contact their software
supplier if they are unsure how to claim for self-determined services.

The Resources page contains a list of situations where requests are not
required and text requirements.

Choosing an item number and services included

Health professionals should claim the item number that best reflects the
service or situation. Items with general descriptions should only be
used where a specific item does not exist or does not match the
situation completely. The full requirements of the item must be met
before it is claimed.

Multiple diagnostic imaging services

Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rules (DIMSR) apply when these
services are claimed for the same:

-   health professional
-   patient
-   date of service

Note: as a guide, a separate attendance is interpreted as being a gap of
3 hours between services. The DIMSR applies to services provided on the
same day, whether they were provided at the same or a different
attendance.

Health professionals should claim the MBS item(s) that specifically
describes the service provided. There are diagnostic imaging items that
include multiple body areas in the one service. These should be claimed
if all elements of the service described in the item have been provided.

For example:

-   A health professional does an ultrasound scan of a patient’s breasts
    (both). Item 55061 should be claimed (for bilateral scan), not 2x
    55059 (for unilateral scan)

There are a range of situations where claiming multiple diagnostic
imaging services would be appropriate based on the patient’s
presentation. The DIMSR applies regardless of the situation.

See Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services assessing in Medicare for
information about restrictions for MRI scans.

The Resources page has information about assessing text with claims.

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used
for text fields.

Claiming consultations with diagnostic imaging services

Specialists in radiology (specialty codes 046, 047, 118 and 410) cannot
claim consultation items with diagnostic imaging services on the same
day, unless they are also registered as another type of specialist. Rule
B of the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rules (DIMSR) would apply
in this instance.

Some diagnostic imaging items in Category 5:

-   Group I1, Subgroup 6, can’t be claimed with consultation items 52-57
    and 104-105
-   Group I3, Subgroup 1-9 can’t be claimed with consultation items
    52-57 and 104-105

Use the QITI assessing information system to check if a specific
diagnostic imaging item restricts with a consultation item. Follow the
6-CON RST/6-CON HIST return message instructions when processing claims
to resolve co-claiming restrictions.

The Process page has steps to resolving restrictions between diagnostic
imaging and consultation items.

Note: this rule was introduced on 1 May 2020. Follow system instructions
for claims with a date of service before 1 May 2020.

Consultations and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services

Consultation items 52-57, 104 and 105 cannot be claimed with MRI items
at the same attendance.

There is an exception to this rule where the providing practitioner
determines that a consultation is necessary for the treatment of the
patient’s condition.

See QITI Assessing Ruling and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services
assessing in Medicare for more information.

Note: health professionals need to include supporting text on their
claims outlining why the consultation was needed.

Rule A for multiple diagnostic imaging services

Rule A:

-   applies where a medical practitioner provides 2 or more diagnostic
    imaging services for the same patient on the same day
-   reduces the schedule fee for each subsequent service by $5.00 (the
    first service has the highest schedule fee)
-   applies if the services are additional to those originally requested

The Resources page contains an example of Rule A.

Rule B for multiple diagnostic imaging services

Rule B applies where a medical practitioner renders at least one R-type
diagnostic imaging service and a consultation for the same patient on
the same day.

There is a deduction to the schedule fee for the diagnostic imaging
service with the highest schedule fee as below:

if the schedule fee for the consultations is:

-   $40.00 or more - reduce by $35.00, or
-   is less than $40.00 but more than $15.00 - reduce by $15.00, or
-   is less than $15.00 - reduce by the amount of that fee

The deduction under Rule B is made once. If there is more than one
consultation:

-   the consultation with the highest schedule fee determines the
    deduction amount
-   there is no further deduction for additional consultations

A 'consultation' is a service provided under an item from Category 1 of
the MBS, items 1 to 10816 inclusive.

The Resources page contains examples of Rule B.

Rule C for multiple diagnostic imaging services

Rule C applies where a medical practitioner renders an R-type diagnostic
imaging service and a non-consultation (medical) service for the same
patient on the same day.

When this rule applies, the schedule fee of the diagnostic imaging
service with the highest schedule fee will be reduced by $5.00. A
deduction under Rule C is made once only. There is no further deduction
for any additional medical services.

Notes:

For Rule C, a non-consultation or medical service means any below item
from the MBS:

-   Category 2, items 11000-12533
-   Category 3, items 13020-51318
-   Category 4, items 51700-53460
-   Cleft lip and palate services, items 75001-75854

The deduction under Rule C is made only once, regardless of the number
of medical services involved. Where there is more than one medical
service, the deduction is always made to the diagnostic imaging service
with the highest schedule fee. There is no further deduction for
additional medical services.

The Resources page contains an example of Rule C.

Application of 2 or more multiple services rule

In some claiming scenarios, more than one or sometimes all the rules
apply.

The Resources page contains examples of the multiple services rule.

Remote area exemptions and the multiple services rule

The Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rules (DIMSR) does not apply to
any diagnostic imaging services covered by a health professional's
remote area exemption. Health professionals must apply for a remote area
exemption using the Application for remote area exemption for R-type
diagnostic imaging services for a medical practitioner form (HW065)
form.

A health professional with a remote area exemption will have spec code
145 on their Provider Directory System (PDS) record. Health professional
remote area exemptions apply to specific MBS items. See Provider
eligibility for R-type diagnostic imaging services for Medicare for
information about remote area exemptions.

The Resources page has a link to the form.

Diagnostic imaging processing indicators

The Resources page contains a list of diagnostic imaging services and
processing indicators.

The Resources page contains:

-   a list of acceptable text for diagnostic imaging claims
-   information on who can request diagnostic imaging services
-   exemptions for request requirements
-   Rule A, B and C
-   examples of where the different rules apply, consultation fee and
    additional services
-   links to external websites, and
-   a link to form HW065

Contents

Computed Tomography (CT) services assessing in Medicare

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services assessing in Medicare

Nuclear medicine imaging services in Medicare

Ultrasound services assessing in Medicare

X-rays (diagnostic radiology) services assessing in Medicare

Related links

Referrals for assessing in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Provider eligibility for R-type diagnostic imaging services for Medicare

Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) registration
for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

Medicare online claiming

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
