
Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines types of compensation claims that are notifiable
and not notifiable for the purposes of Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Requirement to notify

The compensation payer (usually the insurer) must notify Services
Australia (the agency) if in respect of an injury or illness:

-   a settlement is made, where the amount of compensation fixed is more
    than $5,000 (including all costs)
-   a judgment is made where the amount of compensation fixed is more
    than $5,000 (not including costs)

A claim is not notifiable if in respect of an injury or illness, it

-   settled for $5,000 or less (including all costs) or
-   reached judgment for $5,000 or less (excluding costs). Judgment
    documents may be required to determine the amount of damages
    excluding costs

If it is not clear, refer the case to Programme Management to determine
if the case is notifiable.

Where Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to letter template - z2654
Compensation claim not notifiable.

Compensation is defined as:

-   a payment of damages
-   a payment under a scheme of insurance or compensation under law
-   a payment (with or without admission of liability) in judgment or
    settlement of a claim for damages or a claim under an insurance
    scheme
-   any other compensation or damages payment, other than a payment
    under a scheme to which the recipient has contributed, that is made
    in respect of an injury to a person (whether or not the payment is
    made to that person)

If Service Delivery determines a compensation payment made under a
scheme that the injured person has contributed (for example,
superannuation):

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to letter template - z2654
Compensation claim not notifiable.

Compensation does not include:

-   a payment by an individual who is not insured or indemnified for
    liability in respect of the injury in question, and who is not
    required by law to be insured or indemnified
-   a payment in the nature of criminal injuries compensation
-   an amount paid that is not required to be paid by or under an
    Australian law
-   a payment of a kind, or in circumstances prescribed by the
    regulations

Refer these cases to Programme Management to determine if the case is
notifiable. If Programme Management confirm the case is not notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

Case with settlement amount for legal costs only

In some compensation cases, the settlement amount may not include
payment for the compensable person's injury or illness but only the
legal costs associated with pursuing the compensation claim.

In compensation cases such as these, the agency does not need to be
notified. When notification has been received the agency must seek
evidence to support that the compensation case settled for legal costs
only.

Evidence such as the Terms of settlement, Deed of release or the legal
costs invoice can be submitted to the department in order for a decision
to be made.

These cases are to be referred to Programme Management to determine if
the case is notifiable. If Programme Management confirm the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - escalation to Programme Management
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 4 of the
Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

School accidents

School accidents can include injuries sustained:

-   on any school premises
-   during school excursions, or
-   during approved work experience

Schools are not legally required to carry insurance for accidents.
Therefore, any compensation payment arising from a school accident must
be considered on its individual merits.

Injuries sustained by a teacher during the course of their employment
would be considered to be workers compensation and not a school
accident.

Notifiable claims

A school accident is notifiable if:

-   the school is insured against the accident which gave rise to the
    claim
-   the school has an insurance policy that covers payment for medical
    expenses incurred by the injured person
-   the matter is a common law or public liability claim, or
-   an amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5,000 by
    a judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs)

Claims that are not notifiable

A school accident is not notifiable if the school:

-   holds an insurance policy that does not provide for any payment of
    medical expenses, or only covers payment of medical expenses which
    are not eligible Medicare or nursing home benefits or residential
    and home care subsidies
-   is not insured or indemnified in respect of the injury or illness,
    and is not required by law to be so insured or indemnified

Refer these cases to Programme Management to determine if the case is
notifiable.

If Programme Management confirm the case is not notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - Escalation to Programme Management
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

Loss of dependency and loss of consortium

Loss of dependency and / or loss of consortium claims are made by a
dependant or spouse of an injured or deceased person for the loss of a
reasonable expectation of a benefit, for example, financial support,
companionship, love, affection, comfort, mutual services or sexual
relations.

If the judgment or settlement payment is only for loss of dependency or
loss of consortium, the claim is not considered to be a payment of
compensation as the payment is not being made for personal injury. Any
compensation payment arising for loss of dependency or loss of
consortium must be considered on its individual merits.

Notifiable claims

A loss of dependency or loss of consortium claim is notifiable:

-   any part of the settlement or judgment (separate or in conjunction
    with the claim for dependency or consortium) includes an amount paid
    that relates to compensation for injury or illness sustained by the
    dependants or spouse, for example, depression
-   the dependants or spouse pursue a claim or a continuation of a claim
    for the deceased person's injury or illness under the estate of the
    deceased

See:

-   Deceased estates and Medicare Compensation Recovery claims
-   Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Claims that are not notifiable

A loss of dependency or loss of consortium claim is not notifiable where
the payment is:

-   for past and future loss of benefits, services and finances
    including companionship, love, affection, comfort, mutual services
    or sexual relations
-   in relation to a death benefit of the deceased spouse, including a
    payment to a spouse or injured person under a superannuation or life
    insurance policy the recipient has contributed to

If it is not clear, refer the case to Programme Management to determine
if the case is notifiable.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - Escalation to Programme Management
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

Criminal injuries

Criminal Injury Compensation is paid by a State or Territory of
Australia to victims of crime for injuries sustained as a result of
criminal activity committed directly against them.

Where a State or Territory Act specifically excludes medical costs, the
claim would not be captured and is not notifiable. This is even if an
amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5000 by a
judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs).

If it is not clear, confirmation regarding the particular State or
Territory Act should be obtained and all documents should be referred to
Programme Management to determine if the case is notifiable.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains a link to:

-   email template - Escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 4, Health
and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Sporting injuries

Where it is identified that a compensation matter relates to a sporting
injury, the case is to be referred to a Programme Support Officer and
will be escalated to Programme Management for further consideration.

If Programme Management confirm the case is not notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z22654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

Overseas accidents and compensation payers located within Australia or overseas

An injured person, whether within Australia or overseas, who becomes
eligible for compensation for an injury or illness sustained overseas
may be liable to repay the Commonwealth amounts owed for Medicare
benefits, nursing home benefits, residential care subsidies and home
care subsidies (care costs) that have been paid by the Australian
Government.

Sections 7 and 8 of the Act require any compensable person to repay to
the Commonwealth amounts paid as Medicare benefits where that person
becomes eligible for compensation in the form of a judgment, settlement
or reimbursement arrangement, regardless of whether the:

-   compensation is payable by a compensation payer within Australia or
    overseas
-   the judgment or settlement or reimbursement arrangement is made
    within Australia or overseas
-   the injury or illness in respect of which the compensation is
    payable occurred within Australia or overseas

Where the injury or illness occurs outside Australian jurisdiction, the
agency will determine whether the claim for compensation is notifiable
under Australian law and the Act when the settlement or judgment, deed
of release, court order or reimbursement arrangement is received. For
example, compensation payments awarded by a foreign equivalent of bodies
or persons established under Australian Law (such as Comcare) are not a
‘compensation authority’ for the purposes of the Act unless those bodies
can be described as courts. The Australian Government is limited in its
legal ability to exercise authority beyond its normal borders in other
countries.

Note: Australian jurisdiction covers all States and Territories
including the Australian Antarctic Territory, the Jervis Bay Territory,
Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Heard and McDonald Islands,
Norfolk Island, Coral Sea Islands and Ashmore and Cartier Islands.

The agency cannot enforce the recovery of any amounts owed upon a
compensation payer located outside of Australian jurisdiction where the
accident and injury or illness has occurred overseas. If the
compensation payer voluntarily pays an amount owed to the Commonwealth
in part or full, any shortfall in the amount owed may be pursued by the
agency from the compensable person.

If the Notice of charge is not paid by the compensation payer, the whole
charge is recoverable from the claimant. If an advance payment is made
by the compensation payer, the claimant will be responsible for any
shortfall.

Each compensation case must be assessed on its individual merits. If a
Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation case should be
registered, advice should be obtained from a Programme Support Officer
and the case can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z22654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - Escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 7 and 8 of
the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Medical negligence claims

Medical negligence claims are generally due to a:

-   delay in diagnosis of an injury or illness
-   failed or negligent medical procedure

Under section 23 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act
1995, if an amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than
$5,000 by:

-   a judgment (excluding costs), or
-   a settlement (including costs), the claim is notifiable. See: Notice
    of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Recoverable services under a medical negligence claim should:

-   not include the failed or negligent medical procedure
-   not include the service that eventually diagnosed the injury or
    illness, in the case of a delayed diagnosis
-   include subsequent corrective services resulting from the failed or
    negligent procedure or the delay in diagnosis

Wrongful deaths

Wrongful deaths are usually the result of an accident caused by the
misconduct of another person or company. For example, wrongful death
claims are lodged for:

-   malpractice (for example, professional negligence by a doctor or
    health care worker)
-   unsafe premises
-   unsafe working practices
-   unsafe machinery, operations or faulty equipment

Australian State and Territory legislation make provisions for wrongful
deaths, for example, worker's compensation. Claims lodged under State or
Territory legislation may also be pursued by the estate of the deceased
or family members under other legislation, for example common law.

Note: claims lodged for wrongful deaths should not be confused with
fatal injuries or claims lodged under the legislation specific to
criminal injuries.

Notifiable claims

Claims are notifiable if they include claims for medical services for
the:

-   deceased injured person
-   family member making the claim

A claim may be lodged under both workers' compensation and common law
for personal injuries sustained by either the deceased or family members
and these claims are notifiable.

Claims that are not notifiable

Wrongful death claims are not notifiable when the claim is not for
personal injury. For example, the family or estate of a deceased:

-   worker, who dies as a result of a car accident while driving a
    company vehicle, the estate may lodge a claim for wrongful death
    against the employer because the employer failed to maintain the
    vehicle in proper mechanical repair
-   person, who was attacked in the car park of a shopping centre may
    sue the shopping centre management or owners for failing to provide
    adequate security in the car park

Note: a claim may also be pursued under Criminal Injury Compensation as
well as wrongful death.

If a Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation case should be
registered, advice should be obtained from a Programme Support Officer
and the case can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z22654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contacts links to:

-   email template - escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

Transport Accident Commission

The Transport Accident Commission (TAC) is a Victorian Government owned
organisation that will pay all reasonable medical treatment costs, above
a certain threshold, for personal injuries sustained in a transport
accident in Victoria. It is a no-fault scheme and medical benefits will
be paid to an injured person regardless of who caused the accident. A
claim against the TAC can also be made if a Victorian resident or person
is injured in an interstate accident that involves a Victorian
registered vehicle.

If the injured person lives in Victoria and the accident happened in
Victoria, the claim is likely to be Medical Excess only and Services
Australia does not process or register these claims. If the injured
person lives in any other Australian State or Territory, the claim is
likely to be proceeding under common law. Common law claims must be
registered as they are governed under different legislation to Victoria
for motor vehicle accident claims.

Notifiable claims

A claim against the TAC is notifiable if:

-   an amount of compensation has been fixed for more than $5,000 by a
    judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including costs)
-   the injured person lives outside Victoria and it’s an interstate
    claim involving the TAC

Claims that are not notifiable

A claim against the TAC is not notifiable if:

-   The injured person lives in Victoria and the accident happened in
    Victoria. These are mainly Medical Excess claims that do not proceed
    to judgment or settlement
-   The claim is subject to a reimbursement arrangement made within 6
    months from the date the injured person lodged the claim

If a Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation case should be
registered, advice should be obtained from a Programme Support Officer
and the case can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the TAC website and information to assist Service Officers in
    determining whether a TAC case is required to be registered
-   email template - escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2410 Return of Transport Accident Commission
    paperwork letter

See: Notice of reimbursement arrangement for Medicare Compensation
Recovery.

Managing TAC telephone enquiries

Where a TAC case is registered on the Medicare National Compensation
Recovery Information (NCRI) mainframe screen, any patient claims
presented for payment are flagged with a return message and are unable
to be processed until the Service Officer (whether in a branch office or
on-line claims) contacts Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Process page contains steps to assist Service Officers for all TAC
related telephone enquiries. Medicare staff handling TAC enquiries call
Medicare Compensation Recovery (General) for assistance.

Workers compensation - redemption and permanent impairment payments

Victorian legislation

A judgment or settlement for $5,000 or more is not compensation if the
payment was made on or before 30 June 2006 under Subdivision 1, 2 or 3
of Division 3A of Part IV of the Accident Compensation Act 1985 (Vic)
which includes the:

-   Transport Accident Act 1986
-   Workplace Injury Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2013, and
-   Accident Compensation Act 1985

Where it is identified a compensation settlement relates to a payment of
this kind, the case is to be referred to Programme Management for
further consideration. Claims made under these arrangements must now be
exhausted for the purposes of Medicare Compensation Recovery.

All other States and Territories

State and Territory workers compensation schemes can specifically
preclude the payment of any medical benefits in relation to an injury or
illness under claims made for incapacity.

Where it is identified a compensation settlement relates to a workers
compensation incapacity payment and there is a dispute in relation to
whether the claim is notifiable, the case is to be referred to Programme
Management for further consideration.

For cases assessed as not notifiable by Programme Management, a z2654
Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter should be issued after
approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer, returning any
documents received by the agency.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - Escalation to Programme Management
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

Insurance details not provided

Where a company name or medical practitioner’s name is given as the
notifiable person this can be accepted to register the case if the
request is signed by the notifiable person or their solicitor. Some
large companies are self-insured.

If signed by any other party, contact the person submitting the request
to ask for insurer or agent details. Where there is

-   no insurer or agent, register the case as per the details provided,
    see Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims for information
    about case registration
-   an insurer or agent, request these in writing and issue a z2279
    ‘More information is needed to register compensation case / Medicare
    history statement request ‘letter

Section 4 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995
defines that a case would not be notifiable if compensation was payment
by a person not insured and not required by law to be insured.

Where the notifiable person is listed as an individual(s) contact the
person submitting the request to ask for insurer details and/or
requirement to be insured. Where advised that the claim has:

-   insurance but these details are not disclosed by the defendants
-   no insurance, but the defendant is required to be insured, or
-   unknown insurance details and also unknown if required to be insured
-   register the case as per the details provided as notifiable person
    (e.g. the address might be provided as c/- a notifiable person’s
    solicitor), see Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims for
    information about case registration

As the case progresses to settlement, the notification requirements
should become clearer.

Notifiable claims

Even if the notifiable person is an individual, group or company, a
claim is notifiable, where they are:

-   insured even if not required to be, or
-   not insured but are required to be

Where there is more than one notifiable person, see Payments, refunds
and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Not notifiable claims

If an individual is not insured and is not required to be insured, then
the claim is not notifiable.

After settlement, where in doubt for cases where there is no insurer
involved, refer to Programme Management to determine if the case is
notifiable. If Programme Management confirm the case is not notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents and money received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - escalation to Programme Management
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

The References page contains a link to legislation - section 4 of the
Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Persons not entitled to claim Medicare benefits

If an amount of compensation has been fixed for greater than $5000 by:

a judgment (excluding costs), or

settlement (including costs) it is not notifiable if the injured person
is not eligible to receive:

-   Medicare benefits, as the injured person does not hold a Medicare
    card, unless there are recoverable care costs

If a claim is assessed as not eligible for Medicare benefits, the
Service Officer allocated this work by the Team Leader (TL6) in the
Brisbane Processing Centre must:

-   return any advance payment received to the compensation payer, and
-   issue z2280 - Compensation claim cannot be registered letter

This letter asks the injured person to advise the agency if they have
entered care resulting from the compensable injury or illness, as these
are notifiable. The payment must initially be returned to the payer. If
it is later returned to the agency with the request that it be
redirected to the claimant, this can occur.

If a Service Officer is unsure if a compensation case is not notifiable,
contact a Programme Support Officer.

Note: Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) exist between Australia
and residents or citizens of other countries and provide immediate
necessary medical treatment during their temporary visit. To access
Medicare services provided out-of-hospital, visitors need to enrol on
Medicare and may become entitled to receive eligible benefits.

See: Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains links to email and letter templates.

The Process page contains steps to assist Service Officers manage
requests for persons not entitled to claim Medicare benefits.

Non-compensation payments

Ex-gratia payments

An ex-gratia payment is a payment made 'out of good will', when there is
no obligation or legal liability to do so. It is not considered a
compensation payment under section 4 of the Health and Other Services
(Compensation) Act 1995 if:

-   a person receives an ex-gratia payment for an amount greater than
    $5,000 for a judgment (excluding costs) or settlement (including
    costs)

The injured person is normally not required to sign a deed of release
that extinguishes their rights to future compensation in relation to an
ex gratia payment.

Ex-gratia payments can include payments for financial assistance for
people affected by natural disasters or other emergency events. Some
examples of ex-gratia payments made for financial assistance can
include:

-   Disaster health care assistance
-   Australians affected by past terrorism acts overseas
-   Natural disasters

Notifiable claims

If any of the following documents are received with conditions attached
to the payment that extinguishes the injured person's right to seek
further compensation or releases the compensation payer's liability to
make future payments, the payment is most likely a compensation payment,
not an ex- gratia payment.

-   Deed of release signed by the injured person
-   Terms of settlement signed by the injured person
-   any other document signed by the injured person

In this circumstance the case is notifiable to the agency if the amount
of the payment is greater than $5,000 for a judgment (excluding costs)
or settlement (including costs).

If a Service Officer is unsure as to whether a compensation payment is
notifiable, the case must be referred to a Programme Support Officer for
advice and can be escalated to Programme Management for further
consideration if required.

If a Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation case should be
registered, advice should be obtained from a Programme Support Officer
and the case can be escalated to Programme Management.

If Service Delivery or Programme Management determine the case is not
notifiable:

-   get approval from a Team Leader or Programme Support Officer to
    issue a z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable manual letter, and
-   return any documents received by the agency

The Resources page contains links to:

-   email template - escalation to Programme Management - via TL5 or PSO
-   letter template - z2654 Compensation claim not notifiable

The References page contains a link to legislation relevant to what
compensation does not include for the purposes of Medicare Compensation
Recovery - section 4, Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995.

Act of grace payment and waiver of debt applications

There are no provisions for Services Australia to approve act of grace
payments or waiver of debt applications.

Applications for an act of grace payment or a waiver of debt can only be
administered by the Department of Finance.

Further information is available on the Department of Finance website.

The Resources page contains a link to the relevant information.

The Resources page contains links to useful contact information, email
templates, Transport Accident Commission (TAC) website, forms, letters
and scenarios to assist staff in determining if a TAC case needs to be
registered in the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS).

Related links

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Deceased estates and Medicare Compensation Recovery claims

Register Medicare Compensation Recovery claims

Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
