
Ultrasound services assessing in Medicare 011-20021142

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about ultrasound services in Medicare
and assessing claims.

General diagnostic imaging assessing rules

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items for ultrasound services

Ultrasound services are in Category 5, Group I1 of the MBS. The item
range is 55028 – 55895.

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online.

Information for health professionals

There is an education guide on the Services Australia website about
providing ultrasound services for health professionals.

The Resources page has a link to the education guide.

Ultrasound scans

Ultrasounds create a real-time picture of inside the body using sound
waves.

Common types of ultrasound include:

-   Abdominal
-   Transvaginal
-   Doppler ultrasound
-   Echocardiogram
-   Bone sonography
-   3D ultrasound
-   4D ultrasound

The Resources page has a link to the Health Direct website for more
information about when ultrasounds should be used.

R-type and NR-type ultrasound services

Ultrasound services that:

-   require a written request are identified with the symbol R
    (requested)
-   do not require a written request are identified with the symbol NR
    (not requested)

R-type services are only eligible for Medicare benefits if the providing
practitioner received a signed and dated written request before
commencing the service. There are exemptions to this rule detailed in
Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare.

Musculoskeletal ultrasounds – unilateral and bilateral

In the MBS:

-   unilateral refers to 1 side or 1 body area (for example, left arm)
-   bilateral refers to both sides or 2 body areas (for example, both
    arms)

The Resources page has a table with unilateral and bilateral
musculoskeletal ultrasound MBS items.

For items 55856 to 55895 for the same body area:

-   unilateral items cannot be claimed twice on the same occasion
-   a unilateral item cannot be claimed with a bilateral item on the
    same occasion
-   a unilateral item cannot be claimed with a bilateral item on the
    same day at a different time

Professional supervision

R-type ultrasound services (except for 55600 and 55603) must be
performed under the professional supervision of a:

-   specialist or consultant physician, or
-   medical practitioner

They must be available to monitor and influence the conduct and
diagnostic quality of the examination, and personally attend the patient
(if necessary).

Exceptions are in:

-   an emergency
-   a location that is at least 30km by the most direct road route from
    another practice that can deliver services with the appropriate
    professional supervision requirements

Multiple ultrasound services at same attendance (DIMSR)

Generally only 1 ultrasound service can be claimed per attendance. The
exceptions to this are:

-   if the ultrasounds are for contiguous body areas with different set
    up requirements
-   if the ultrasounds are for non-contiguous body areas
-   there is a minimum of 3 hours between ultrasounds (they are for
    separate attendances)

Health professionals must include text with the claim indicating which
exception applies. The Process page has information about assessing
claims with text.

The Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rules (DIMSR) applies to the
amount of Medicare benefits payable if multiple ultrasound services are
provided:

-   on the same day
-   by the same health professional
-   to the same patient (during 1 or more attendances)

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used in
text fields with claims.

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for information about
the DIMSR.

Contiguous body areas

The term ‘contiguous’ or ‘non-contiguous’ can be used to support claims
for multiple ultrasound services in the same attendance.

In Medicare, contiguous is interpreted as being ‘in contact, adjacent or
uninterrupted’, whether the areas comprise different body systems or
not.

For example:

-   the full left arm and left shoulder would be considered contiguous
    body areas
-   the lower left arm and the left shoulder would be considered
    non-contiguous body areas

The Process page has steps to process claims with text indicating
contiguous or non-contiguous body areas.

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used in
text fields with claims.

Multiple Vascular Ultrasound Services Rule (MVUSSR) – items 55238-55296

This is a fee reduction process that applies to the schedule fee when
more than 1 vascular ultrasound item is claimed:

-   for the same patient
-   by the same practitioner
-   on the same date of service

This rule applies even if the scans are performed at different
attendances on the same day.

When more than 1 vascular ultrasound service is provided by the same
practitioner, on the same date of service, the below fee reduction
formula applies:

-   100% of the Schedule Fee for the item with the highest Schedule Fee
-   Plus 60% of the Schedule Fee for the item with the second highest
    Schedule Fee
-   Plus 50% of the Schedule Fee for each additional item

Where there are multiple vascular ultrasound items performed that have
the same fee value, the item with the lower item number will be taken to
have a higher value.

The Resources page contains examples of the rules.

Application of both MVUSSR and DIMSR

When a health professional performs a further DI service that is not
vascular ultrasound, the Diagnostic Imaging Multiple Services Rule
(DIMSR) will apply in addition to MVUSSR.

Where MVUSSR has applied, the affected vascular ultrasound items are
treated as 1 combined service.

This means a fee reduction in relation to DIMS will apply only once per
day for vascular ultrasound items even if more than 1 vascular
ultrasound item has been claimed for that date of service.

When calculating Medicare benefits for vascular ultrasound services the
below will apply:

-   Firstly, the MVUSSR (MVUSSR – 100%, 60%, 50%) is applied
-   Then DIMSR (Rules A, B and/or C) are applied

The Resources page contains examples of how these rules work together.

Multiple Echocardiogram Services Rule (MESR)

The MESR applies to plain and stress echocardiograms in Category 5,
Group I1, Sub-group 7 of the MBS which includes:

-   Plain echocardiography items 55126-55129, 55132-55134 and 55137
-   Stress echocardiography items 55141, 55143, 55145-55146

If multiple services from this subgroup are provided to the same patient
by the same health professional (same stem) on the same day, a reduction
will be made to the schedule fees for the items claimed.

-   The item with the highest schedule fee will have no reduction
    applied (100% of the schedule fee)
-   Items with the lower schedule fees will be reduced to 60% of the
    schedule fee

This rule applies even if the services are performed at different
attendances on the same day.

MESR and DIMSR both apply

When MESR is applied, the affected echocardiograms items are treated as
1 combined service.

The system will apply MESR and DIMSR in the following order to calculate
Medicare benefits:

-   first, the MESR (100%, 60%, 60%), and then
-   the DIMSR (Rules A, B and/or C)

The Resources page has an example of how to calculate Medicare benefits
when both rules apply.

MESR, MVUSSR and DIMSR all apply

When MESR and MVUSSR is applied, the affected items are treated as:

-   1 combined echocardiography service (total sum of fees for all items
    where MESR has been applied)
-   1 combined vascular ultrasound service (total sum of fees for all
    items where MVUSSR has been applied)

DIMSR is then calculated using these 2 services and the remaining
affected diagnostic imaging, consultation or non-consultation services
(Rules A, B and/or C).

The Resources page has an example of how to calculate Medicare benefits
when the 3 rules apply.

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum effective life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about capital sensitivity and claiming MBS items.

See QITI for effective life age of equipment relevant to specific items.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to external websites,
-   a link to the Services Australia website,
-   examples that include the MESR, MVUSSR and DIMSR, and
-   musculoskeletal ultrasound unilateral and bilateral item numbers

Related links

Medicare online claiming

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
