
Composite items assessing in Medicare 011-42120010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
assessing composite items.

On this Page:

Composite items

A composite item is an item used to pay a Medicare benefit when certain
related services are performed together for the same patient.

A composite item contains elements of independent related services
which, when performed:

-   by the same health professional,
-   for the same patient,
-   generally at the same attendance, combine to form the one service

Composite item': Relates to the computer identification and processing
methods used to pay Medicare benefits when individual items are claimed
instead of the composite item.

The schedule fee for items listed in the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) includes an allowance for preparation time, overheads and other
costs.

When a health professional renders two or more related services for the
same patient, the health professional does not necessarily incur the
same costs. For example, x-rays of various regions of the spine at the
same attendance, multiple tests on pathology specimens, etc.

When payment is made using the composite item, a lower Medicare benefit
is payable compared to the total amount payable for the individual
items.

The following items can be used as an example of the difference between
the use of individual items and benefits and composite item and benefit:

-   individual items 58106 (with a benefit of $67.05) and 58109 (with a
    benefit of $40.95) have a combined benefit of $108.00
-   the composite item 58112 has a benefit of $84.70

There is a difference of $23.30 between the total benefit payable for
the individual items and the amount payable for the composite item.
Note: amounts used are an example only and Service Officers should refer
to QITI for current benefits.

Notes on account documents

Separate attendances

Where account documents indicate that the services were rendered at
different attendances (that is, an AM/PM situation exists), the items
can be paid individually.

Items 56220 to 56238 (CT of the spine) and 56620 to 56630 (CT of the
extremities) apply once only. This is regardless of the number of
patient attendances required.

For example, benefits are payable for only one composite item where a
request relates to 2 or more regions of the spine and:

-   one region is scanned in one attendance, and
-   the remaining regions are scanned at subsequent attendance

Assessing composite items

Where two or more composite services are performed on the one occasion
by the same health professional, benefits are payable under the
composite item rather than the individual item relating to each service.

The composite rule would still apply to services which were requested
and self-determined as a part of the same treatment episode.

The Resources page contains examples when two or more composite services
are performed.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
