
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers relating to
Radiation oncology (radiotherapy) services.

Radiation oncology overview

Radiation oncology is a medical speciality that involves the controlled
use of radiation to treat various forms of cancer.

Radiation therapy (radiotherapy) is the term used to describe the actual
treatment delivered by the radiation oncology team.

The Resources page contains a list of terminology.

Other services associated with radiotherapy

Some radiotherapy treatment services include attendance in the item
descriptions. Therefore separate benefits for consultations may not be
payable.

Radiotherapy under hyperbaric conditions

Benefits are attracted under the appropriate radiotherapy item and the
relevant item for hyperbaric treatment listed in Group T1 of the
Schedule.

Implantation of radioactive substances

Where a surgeon and a radiotherapist are both associated in the theatre
in an operation involving insertion of radioactive material, benefits
are payable in full for both the radiotherapy item and the appropriate
surgical item in Group T8 of the Schedule.

Benefits are not payable for assistance at the implantation of a
radioactive substance covered by Group T2 items. However, when performed
in association with an operation (Group T8), a benefit for assistance at
the operation is payable.

See MBS Online explanatory notes for Category 3.

The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online.

Radiotherapy planning

Computerised planning and simulation items – Subgroup 5 (15500 – 15565
and 15850)

Before starting radiation therapy, a treatment plan is created for each
patient’s individual circumstances.

A plan could consist of any or all of the below:

-   where to direct the treatment (body areas)
-   depth in terms of superficial or deep therapy
-   dosage needed, that is, how much and how often

Radiotherapy planning items have 2 distinct aspects to them:

-   Simulation – determines the field settings used for treatment.
    Requires the use of specialised machinery (e.g. Isocentric X-ray,
    CAT (CT) Scan, megavoltage machine). Simulation or field setting
    items are within the range (15500 – 15515 and 15850) whichever
    method is used
-   Planning or radiation dosimetry – calculates the dose of radiation
    for the patient’s treatment including how much radiation delivered
    to each field. Planning is done on specialised computers which may
    be linked to a tomography machine. Planning items are in the range
    (15518-15539, 15556- 15565)

Only 1 simulation item (15500-15515, 15550- 15555, 15850) can be claimed
per treatment plan (15518-15539, 15556- 15565).

Field setting and dosimetry do not have to be performed together for
benefits to be paid. Providing that the service does not relate to
re-planning, benefits are payable.

One plan per course of treatment /episode of care

Only 1 plan attracts Medicare benefits in a course of treatment.
Treatment may be delivered over weeks or months.

At commencement of treatment, the plan includes all identified tumour
targets necessary. Planning items cannot be paid per tumour site and
text stating ‘separate tumour site’ or ‘separate tumours’ is not valid
reason to override a restriction for 2 planning items.

Benefits are not payable for replanning, as the schedule fees for
planning items include a loading to cover any replans in a course of
treatment.

Multiple planning episodes

There are circumstances where more than 1 treatment plan may be needed
within one course of treatment.

These circumstances include:

-   Where a plan for Brachytherapy (radiation placed inside the body) is
    needed in the same course of treatment as Megavoltage or teletherapy
    (external rays)
-   Where a new tumour site is identified during the original course of
    treatment and a new plan is needed to treat this tumour. This forms
    a separate episode of care or new course of treatment
-   If a claim is received for a second planning item for the same date
    of service as another or within 1 course of treatment, service text
    is required

Stating ‘new tumour’ or ‘separate episode of care’ indicates that a new
plan was needed and the restriction can be overridden.

Note: it is important that health professionals provide sufficient
information on accounts to support the payment of benefit where they
claim more than 1 planning episode relating to separate treatments.

Planning item 15565

Item 15275 is the only appropriate treatment item under an IMRT plan
item 15565.

Where other unrelated or extra treatment is needed within 42 days of
this plan 15565, the health professional needs to include the text ‘not
in association with 15565’ before a benefit is paid.

Breast Boost

Where a more targeted or additional dose of radiation is needed at the
end of a treatment plan relating to breast items 15215-15272,
appropriate text is required:

-   ‘breast boost- not associated with item 15565‘
-   ‘not in association with 15565‘

Breast boost is not always needed and based on how the patient responds
to the dosage schedule of the original plan.

Treatment verification Subgroup 7 (items 15700, 15705, 15710 and 15715)

Treatment verification is a quality assurance procedure designed to
facilitate accurate and reproducible delivery of
radiotherapy/brachytherapy to the prescribed site/s or regions of the
body as defined in the radiotherapy treatment plan.

Treatment verification utilises the capture and assessment of
appropriate images using X-rays, CT or ultrasound.

Note: x-rays taken during simulation do not attract benefit.

Verification items are only payable once per attendance, irrespective of
the number of treatment sites verified at that attendance.

Level of benefits

The level of benefits for radiotherapy treatment items 15000 – 15272 are
affected by:

-   the number of fields irradiated
-   the number of times treatment is given

At each treatment, radiotherapy can be delivered to a tumour site in:

-   a single field (at 1 angle)
-   multiple fields (at more than 1 angle)

Items 15000 – 15272 are classified as base or derived fee items.

-   A base item is used for the irradiation of 1 field. Each base item
    has a corresponding derived fee item
-   When 2 or more fields are irradiated, the corresponding derived fee
    item is also claimed. Medicare benefits are not payable for
    irradiation of more than 5 additional fields. Derived fee items
    require a corresponding base fee item to also appear on the invoice
    for a benefit to be paid

Derived fee items are rejected if submitted without a base item number.

Note: where a claim is received for treatment of more than 1 field,
benefits for both items are paid together under the aggregate/derived
fee item only, not the base item number.

See Processing radiation oncology for more information on base and
derived fees.

Rotational therapy

Treatment by rotational therapy (where the radiation dose is delivered
continuously as the treatment machine rotates) is considered to be the
equivalent to the irradiation of 3 fields.

Related links

Processing radiation oncology

Medicare online claiming

Derived fee items assessing in Medicare

Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) registration
for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
