[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Delivery Point Identifier
(DPID) matching for Medicare enrolments.

Medicare address and DPID

When a new or existing enrolment address is added or modified, it is
matched against an address on the postal address file (PAF) provided by
Australia Post. When a Medicare address is matched with a PAF address, a
Delivery Point Identifier (DPID) is allocated and an individual barcode
(related to that DPID) printed on correspondence.

It is important when adding or modifying an address on enrolment and
patient claims screens that every attempt is made to ensure that a DPID
can be allocated to that address.

The 6-CHK ADDR message displays when an address is keyed in a
non-standard format. An address in a standard format has a greater
chance of finding a matching address on PAF and, therefore, of
allocating a DPID.

DPID matching

When a new or existing enrolment address is added or modified, it is
matched against an address on the postal address file (PAF) provided by
Australia Post. When a Medicare address is matched with a PAF address, a
Delivery Point Identifier (DPID) is allocated and an individual barcode
(related to that DPID) printed on correspondence.

The DPID/PAF has been installed on the Services Australia systems to
create savings in postage to the organisation, increase data integrity
and enhance customer service by using the recognised address from
Australia Post. Whenever a Service Officer fails to accept the address
provided, this undermines the integrity of the DPID/PAF matching
process.

It is important that when adding or modifying an address on enrolment
and patient claims screens, every attempt is made to ensure that a DPID
can be allocated to that address.

Update address to match DPID

The following describes how to update an address to match the DPID in a
new or existing enrolment.

If a new or existing enrolment address is made by mail, select Accept

-   Record is updated with DPID address

If a new or existing enrolment address is made in person by telephone or
at a Medicare Service Centre, or the address given does not match the
DPID and you are able to speak to the applicant in person or by phone

-   Inform the applicant that their Services Australia address must be
    updated to match the address given by Australia Post. Tell them what
    the DPID address is and ask for confirmation that this is their
    address
-   If applicant strongly objects to using the DPID address, see the
    information under 'Applicant objects to DPID address' below
-   If they do not object, select Accept. Record is updated with the
    DPID address

Applicant objects to DPID address

If an applicant strongly objects to their Services Australia address
being updated to match the DPID address:

Select Continue/Change to override the DPID. System continues with the
address keyed.

Update record with applicant's preferred address.

Endorse 'DPID not allocated by the system' on one of the following:

-   CDMS Commentary
-   Note: notate spreadsheet that comments have been added to CDMS
    Operator batch record form
-   Medicare Enrolment form

Error message continues to display

If the message 6-NO DPID? still displays and the address is confirmed as
correct, override the address as follows.

For enrolment processing, use existing override procedures

For claims processing, use:

-   A indicator for permanent address
-   B indicator for temporary address change

The return message 6-CHK ADDR remains unchanged.

The 6-CHK ADDR message continues to display when an address is keyed in
a non-standard format. An address in a standard format has a greater
chance of finding a matching address on PAF and, therefore, of
allocating a DPID.

Related links

Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Child enrolments in Medicare

Medicare claims for deceased persons

Medicare cards

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Change of address for Medicare enrolments

System flags, control lines and abbreviations for Medicare enrolments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
