
Adjust Medicare patient claim on a previously adjusted service 011-43050010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist in adjusting Medicare
patient claims on a previously adjusted service. Note: as at 1 July 2016
Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Processing a subsequent LDA

The patient claims Latter Day Adjustments (LDA) system allows more than
one patient claim LDA to be processed.

These processes do not apply to:

-   bulk bill claims
-   simplified billing claims, or
-   adjustments processed via the NHHI transaction

When performing any adjustment, check the following:

-   electronic funds transfer (EFT) or Credit EFTPOS status is paid.
    Note: Credit EFTPOS ceased 1 July 2016
-   patient cheques (claims processed pre 1 July 2016) has been
    presented
-   Pay Doctor Via Claimant (PDVC) cheque has been presented or paid via
    the 90 Day Pay Doctor Cheque scheme on patient history

If the PDVC cheque is unpresented, an adjustment cannot be actioned.

Return the request to the provider or claimant using the ‘unpresented
cheque letter template’, advising that no action can occur until the
cheque is either banked, paid via the 90 Day Pay Doctor cheque scheme,
returned to Services Australia or becomes a stale cheque.

The Process page contains information on the procedures that staff
undertake regarding patient claim adjustments on a previously adjusted
service.

LDA resulting in underpayments

The Latter Day Adjustments (LDA) claims system pays benefits for amounts
over $2.00 via EFT.

LDA resulting in overpayment

A Latter Day Adjustments (LDA) overpayment applies across a claim that
has been adjusted more than once.

When an adjustment results in an overpayment, any outstanding amount
requires follow-up action as per the agency’s management of debts
policy.

For example, if an initial adjustment results in an overpayment of $60
and a further adjustment results in an overpayment of $50, recovery of
monies must be sought for the total amount of $110.

Recording the overpayment amount

Comments must be added to the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) at group level. The following information is to be displayed:

-   patient's name
-   item numbers
-   dates of services
-   provider name and number
-   individual amounts and the total of the overpayments for recovery
    action
-   recovery of benefits letter and date the letter was sent to the
    claimant

The Process page contains information on the procedures that staff
undertake regarding patient claim adjustments resulting in an
overpayment.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Medicare claims
helpdesk, and links to the Adjustment on an adjustment claim form and
the Patient claim adjustment – unpresented cheque letter template.

Related links

Amend program review details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) for Medicare

Adjustments for Medicare patient claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
