
Management of immunisation evidence 011-10170020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and processes relating to the
management of immunisation evidence by the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) as well as related processes.

Immunisation assessments for family assistance payments

When a customer claims Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) for a child under 20 years of age, links are set up between the
child's Centrelink record and the AIR. The child's immunisation status
is shared between systems using these AIR links.

CCS uses a separate link to that used for FTB. The CCS link must be set
up in Process Direct. The FTB link is set up in Customer First.

See also:

-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit Part A supplement
    for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18
-   Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
    July 2018
-   Immunisation requirements for CCS

Generally, assessments of immunisation status, including exemptions, are
managed by the AIR processing team and are recorded on the AIR using
information from the child’s vaccination provider.

Role of general practitioners, vaccination providers, customers and Service Officers

General practitioners and vaccination providers

General practitioners or recognised vaccination providers send the
details of vaccinations given to individuals to AIR and this is recorded
on the AIR.

AIR approved providers (such as general practitioners, paediatricians
and public health physicians) can notify when an individual has a
vaccine exemption due to medical contraindication or natural immunity by
using the approved AIR Immunisation medical exemption (IM011) form or
the AIR secure site. See Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

Immunisation details can only be updated on the AIR by a current
Australian recognised vaccination provider.

For overseas immunisation to be registered on the AIR, the customer
should provide details of the child's overseas immunisation history to
an Australian vaccination provider who will check if the child is fully
vaccinated according to the Australian vaccination schedule, administer
additional vaccinations if appropriate and complete an Immunisation
history form (IM013) or provide this through the AIR secure site. If the
document needs translating, the customer may be eligible for help from
the Department of Home Affairs Free Translating Service.

Customers with immunisation requirements

Customers do not need to tell Services Australia when a child is
vaccinated, or provide immunisation evidence. If a customer lodges
immunisation evidence, it must be checked and scanned correctly. The
evidence will then be transferred to the AIR for assessment.

Immunisation forms include barcodes to facilitate automatic
classification of the documents when scanning. Do not use a UNSIH
scanning header on a barcoded form as UNSIH work items are handled by
families processing, not AIR.

If a link between Centrelink and the AIR for the relevant payment type
has not been set up, Service Officers should take action to request a
link. See Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between
Centrelink and the AIR and/or Immunisation requirements for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

Individuals, and parents/guardians of an individual under 14 years of
age, can access their or the individual's immunisation history using
their myGov account or the Medicare Express Plus mobile app.

[] If their child is 14 years of age or over, they will need to sign
into or create their own Medicare online account through myGov to view
their Immunisation history statement. The customer will not be able to
view the young person's Immunisation history statement in their own
account. See Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation
Register.

Centrelink Service Officers

When assessing claims for family assistance and child care payments, use
the immunisation status provided by the AIR. The AIR is responsible for
assessment of a child’s immunisation status.

Customers do not need to provide documentary evidence of a child’s
immunisation history to Centrelink. In limited cases, customers may
provide other evidence for an assessment which is not handled by the AIR
(for example, Secretary Determination exemption).

If a customer wants to update the immunisation status held on the AIR
for a child, they need to take evidence to their recognised vaccination
provider. They will update the AIR if appropriate. This includes when a
child has received immunisations overseas.

Service Officers may need to refer to detailed immunisation evidence
when reviewing a decision which affected the customer’s payment. For
example, to cancel or reject child care payments or for non-payment of
FTB Part A supplement (for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18) or rate
reduction of FTB Part A payments (from 1 July 2018).

Service Officers cannot update a child's immunisation status using any
evidence provided by the customer. This includes Baby Books, letters
from health professionals and Immunisation history statements. Only a
vaccination provider can update a child's immunisation details on the
AIR.

If a customer does lodge immunisation evidence with Centrelink, assess
if it is appropriate (see below), and provide relevant advice to the
customer if necessary. Do this before accepting the evidence for
scanning.

Do not discuss specific vaccinations or vaccination schedules with
customers. Refer the customer to their vaccination provider.

See also:

-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
-   Establish an FTB link for a child between Centrelink and the AIR
-   Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Manual immunisation evidence

Generally, manual evidence is not required to manage a child’s
immunisation status.

If a customer lodges manual evidence in an attempt to resolve a
non-payment of child care payments or Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
supplement (for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18), or an FTB Part A
rate reduction (from 1 July 2018), Service Officers must investigate the
issue and resolve as appropriate.

Some examples could be:

Child is not linked with Medicare. See Establish a link for a child
between Centrelink and the AIR

Linking issues including a mismatch between Centrelink and AIR. This may
include when a name or date of birth is incorrect. See Establish FTB
link for a child between Centrelink and the AIR and/or Immunisation
requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Cancellation or rejection of child care payment. See Immunisation
requirements for CCS

Checking an FTB Part A rate reduction due to immunisation. See
Immunisation requirements for FTB Part A from 1 July 2018

Delay in immunisation data transfer between Centrelink and AIR. See the
Incorrect immunisation status table in View and update a child's
immunisation status and assess or update immunisation exemptions for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Multiple Centrelink records

Their child is not fully immunised for the following reasons:

-   the child has commenced a catch up vaccination schedule, or
-   the child has a vaccine exemption due to medical contraindication or
    natural immunity. See the Process page for details

A child is not vaccinated and a customer is seeking an exemption using
other (unapproved) documents

If a customer provides the following immunisation evidence, it must be
scanned and classified:

-   AIR immunisation history form (IM013)
-   letter or general practitioner (GP)/practice printout which is
    signed by a registered vaccination provider that includes the
    provider number, details and dates of immunisations, Medicare card
    number and/or the child's details
-   AIR Immunisation medical exemption form (IM011) completed and signed
    by an AIR approved provider

Immunisation exemption conscientious objection form (IMMU12) signed and
dated by a vaccination provider on or before 31 December 2015 and lodged
before 1 July 2018.

Once scanned correctly, this evidence is automatically transferred to
the AIR processing team to assess and process. The Resources page
contains detailed information about correct scanning and classification
processes.

In limited cases, the policy department may direct that a child is
exempt from the immunisation requirements. These exemptions are managed
using a Centrelink override for the relevant payment.

See also: View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or
update immunisation exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Child has commenced a catch up vaccination schedule

A child who has missed vaccinations on the early childhood immunisation
schedule can commence a catch up program. Catch up schedules are set by
the child's vaccination provider according to the current Australian
Immunisation Handbook. A catch up schedule is recorded on the AIR by a
recognised vaccination provider using an IM013 form or the AIR secure
online site. Only one catch up schedule can be recorded per person.

The customer does not need to tell Services Australia or provide
immunisation evidence that the child is on a catch up vaccination
schedule. The vaccination provider will report catch-up notification
using the AIR immunisation history form (IM013), immunisation encounter
form (IM018) or the AIR secure site.

Other documentation including forms or letters signed by doctors or
vaccination providers and general practitioners' letters written on
practice/ general practitioners' letterhead. Old versions of the AIR
immunisation history form (IMMU13) will not be accepted as notification
of a catch up schedule.

A child will meet the immunisation requirements if their status on the
AIR is that they are up to date with a catch up schedule calculated
according to the current Australian Immunisation Handbook.

Child has a vaccination exemption due to medical contraindication or natural immunity

Notification of medical contraindications and natural immunity must be
provided on the approved AIR Immunisation Medical Exemption (IM011)
form, or reported through the AIR secure site. This form can only be
completed by general practitioners, paediatricians, public health
physicians, infectious diseases physicians and clinical immunologists
(who have the relevant speciality code).

Other documentation including forms or letters signed by other doctors
or vaccination providers, general practitioners' letters written on
practice/ general practitioners' letterhead and old versions of the
Immunisation medical exemption form (IMMU11) will not be accepted as
notification of a medical exemption. These are to be referred to the AIR
who will advise the customer that an AIR approved provider will need to
sign and submit the approved AIR Immunisation medical exemption (IM011)
form.

Once a medical exemption had been assessed and recorded by the AIR the
child will meet the immunisation requirements.

Customer objects to vaccination

From 1 January 2016, vaccination objections (formerly referred to as a
'conscientious objection') due to personal and philosophical or
religious beliefs do not meet the immunisation requirements

The Resources page contains links to immunisation forms, the
reclassification page for scanning immunisation history statements, the
Business Processing Branch homepage, free translating service and
information for immunisation providers about the AIR on Services
Australia website.

Related links

Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink
and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or update
immunisation exemptions for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit Part A supplement for
financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Benefit (CCB) cancelled or rejected due to immunisation
requirements not being met for a child

Immunisation reviews and reminders for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
