
Homeless child enrolments in Medicare 011-44120040

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how homeless children are enrolled in Medicare.

On this Page:

Eligibility

Homeless children are given special consideration and the usual
enrolment considerations are relaxed.

An application to enrol a homeless child in Medicare can be made by:

-   the homeless child, or
-   an organisation (welfare, religious or charitable organisation)

Where there is concern about an application, it must not be refused
without consultation with Eligibility and Enrolments.

Documents required to enrol a homeless child

The following documents are required along with a completed Medicare
enrolment application form:

-   birth certificate, birth extract or birth card in the child's legal
    name
-   Australian passport, or
-   foreign passport and valid permanent resident visa/documentation

Documents not available

Where a child cannot provide the above documents, the following
documentation is acceptable:

Correspondence or documentation (hard copy) from Centrelink verifying
the child's full name and date of birth. Note: it is considered a breach
of privacy to access electronic data from Centrelink to confirm the
details without the child's consent, or

A letter from a trusted member of the community who can confirm the
eligibility (migration) status and/or identity of the child must be
provided. A letter is acceptable from any of the following:

-   medical practitioner
-   teacher
-   social worker
-   minister of religion
-   youth refuge worker
-   police
-   member of the legal profession

Child already enrolled in Medicare

If the child can provide previous enrolment details, a Service Officer
can attempt to identify the child on their previous family enrolment.
Service Officers should assure the child that Medicare maintains
complete confidentiality and that their whereabouts will not be
disclosed.

Where an enrolment is located the child may then be copied or
transferred to a separate card. Service Officers should notate in the
comments field the reason why the copy or transfer has taken place.

Entitlement

Where a child is born in Australia to Australian resident parent/s, the
child is eligible for enrolment in Medicare from their date of birth.

Where a Court Order is provided that states a child has been placed in
care, refer to Eligibility and Enrolments. See also Child Protection
Agency – Medicare card number requests for children and young people in
out-of-home care (OOHC).

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Eligibility
and Enrolments.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
