
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document explains the Medicare eligibility requirements for a
newborn child born in Australia. Also, the processes to follow when
enrolling a newborn child where the maximum number of persons are
already on Medicare enrolment. The applicant has conditional migrant
entitlement, parents and newborn to be on new Medicare card and
applicant (parent) is under 15 years of age

.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia (the agency) plays a critical role in providing
support to people with family and domestic violence concerns. The agency
gives access to the services and support they may need. Family and
domestic violence can pose a serious risk to the safety and wellbeing of
our customers. It is important to discuss all options with the customer.

Eligibility for a newborn child born in Australia

A newborns eligibility for Medicare is based on their parent who has the
highest Medicare entitlement type.

Before enrolling a newborn, Service Officers must check the applicants
(parent) Medicare entitlement type in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) to determine if the newborn can be added to their Medicare
number.

If the applicant (parent) has an entitlement type of Conditional
Migrant, further investigation must be undertaken to determine the
entitlement type of the other parent. The newborn is eligible for
enrolment with the same entitlement type of the parent with the
strongest Medicare entitlement. For example, the newborn must not be
enrolled as a Conditional Migrant if the other parent has an entitlement
type of Australian Citizen. The Process page contains more details.

The Resources page contains more details on determining entitlement type
for newborn.

Note: if the parents visa has been refused before the newborns birth,
the newborn is not eligible for Medicare until the newborn is an
applicant for permanent residency and a holder of a bridging visa with
work rights. See Child born in Australia enrolling in Medicare for more
details.

Maximum number of persons on a Medicare enrolment

Up to 9 people can be listed on the same Medicare card number with a
maximum of 5 people on the first card and 4 people on a second card. All
9 persons do not have to be active on the card but they remain with the
Individual Reference Number (IRN) and no further people can be added to
this card.

When registering a newborn in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) and the error message 00685 Maximum IRN on card appears.
Additional group members cannot be added as the Medicare card limit of 9
IRN’s has been reached.

The Process page contains more details.

Applicant is not the birth parent

In some circumstances, a newborn can be enrolled in Medicare at the
request of someone who is not the birth parent. Evidence that the
newborn is in the care of someone other than the birth parent is
required.

Examples of when a person other than the parent can request to enrol the
newborn is when the newborn is in the care of:

A guardian (for example a grandparent). They must provide evidence that
the newborn is in their care. Acceptable documents are:

-   Court Order
-   Centrelink documents confirming the requestor is receiving benefits
    for the newborn (do not accept documents where only the newborns
    first name is notated, the document must state newborns full name)
-   Confirmation from professional members of the community who have
    regular contact with the family, such as police, ministers of
    religion, doctors or lawyers
-   Social worker reports

A Child Protection Agency (DCP). These applications must be actioned by
the Medicare Eligibility trained Service Officers - Medicare Public. See
Child Protection Agency - Medicare card number requests for children and
young people in out-of-home care (OOHC). The DCP must provide:

-   Medicare enrolment application form (MS004 or MS045) (completed by
    the DCP caseworker)
-   Court Order
-   Proof of birth document
-   Cover letter on DCP letterhead

An adoptive parent (where the adoption is either finalised or in the
pre-adoption phase), see Adopted child enrolments in Medicare

The Process page contains the process to follow when the applicant
enrolling a newborn child is not the birth parent.

Checking Partner details

The group members on a Medicare card must be checked prior to enrolling
a newborn.

If a customer presents a Medicare card number that includes their
ex-partner, the customer must be contacted and transferred to a new
Medicare card before enrolling the newborn child.

See Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare for
more information.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to acceptable proof of birth documents
-   the MS004, MS011 and MS045 forms, and
-   a list of Medicare entitlement types for newborns

Related links

Adopted child enrolments in Medicare

Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Child Protection Agency - Medicare card number requests for children and
young people in out-of-home care (OOHC)

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Customer enquiries about newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Lodgement of newborn child enrolments in Medicare at service centre

Newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Tier 0 technical support - self-sufficiency

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
