
Register a new organ donor in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) 011-11010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to register a new organ donor for yes and no
decisions to donate in the AODR.

New AODR registrations

Note: to avoid duplication before registering a new organ donor complete
the Search for an existing organ donor registration or entitlements.

New registrations via phone are intent registrations. A confirmation
letter, form and card will be sent if a person registers a new
registration over the phone. New intent and consent registrations can be
received via:

-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app
-   Medicare online account through myGov
-   the DonateLife website
-   complete registration section on the Medicare MS014 claim forms
-   the ‘Register to be an organ and tissue donor’ brochure
-   Australian Organ Donor Register New registration, change or removal
    of donation decision details form.

Each paper form has its own specific code that indicates what type of
form it is. The code is located at the bottom left or right corner of
the form. This information is used to update the Donor Medicare Type
option in CDMS. A list of Form codes is available on the Resources page
of Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR).

System generated confirmation letters of yes and no registrations are
sent and can take up to 14 business days to be delivered to the
registrant.

See related links for further details on intent to consent, definitions
and details about inbound and outbound correspondence in AODR.

To process an AODR registration Service Officers need either the Organ
Donor Registrant's (ODR):

-   Medicare number
-   authorisation from the ODR to link their registration to their
    Medicare record, or
-   confirmation they do not have a Medicare number or do not wish to
    link their donor registration to their Medicare record
-   a person can register on the AODR without having a first name

Every opportunity should be taken to obtain the Medicare number when
registering an ODR including when registering over the phone. This
enables a successful link between a donor only entitlement and a
consumer record in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). By
linking the donor only entitlement to the consumer record it assists the
donor register in maintaining current details. View and amend the
registration and/or personal details through Medicare online account via
myGov and/or Express Plus Medicare mobile app account.

When a consumer has 2 Consumer IDs and one has AODR entitlement, the
system will not allow a link to the previously created registration.
Service Officers need to complete a search via the Detailed Search tab
first to search all possible matches. Do not add first name, post code
if not required.

To avoid duplicate registrations and creating duplicate Consumer IDs
when registering a new organ donor search for existing organ donor
registration or .entitlements. This search must be completed before
creating a new organ donor registration in CDMS. Also, see Delete
duplicate organ donor registration.

Objection to donate organs – No Decision

When a person registers their objection to being a donor with the Donor
Register, donation will not proceed unless:

-   the person subsequently changes their mind, and
-   their family confirm this to be the case

Objections to donate are shown as a ‘No’ Decision Type in the Donor
Register and can be known as being a non-donor.

A person can choose to register an objection to donate/no decision by
either:

-   completing a new registration, change or removal of donation
    decision details form and ticking the box register my decision not
    to be a donor

-   [] completing a registration via:

-   Medicare online accounts in myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Medicare mobile app and selecting the option I wish
    to register my decision not to be a donor

-   over the phone and registering their intent for objection to donate

The objection to donate covers:

-   bone tissue
-   eye tissue
-   heart
-   heart valves
-   kidneys
-   liver
-   lungs
-   pancreas and skin tissue

When a customer registers their objection to donate as a no decision
they receive an automated confirmation letter. A card is not included
with the letter.

Note:

-   if the donor has an existing ‘Yes’ consent registration and requests
    to register their objection to donate, they must complete and return
    a new form
-   the processing of an objection is similar to a new ‘Yes’
    registration. However, the Organs and/or Tissues for donation
    section is deselected to prompt a ‘No’ Donor Decision Type in
    Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Processing Rules

To avoid duplicate registrations, Search for existing organ donor
registration or entitlements must be completed:

-   before creating a new organ donor registration in CDMS, and
-   for all processing of forms

Forms not signed - return with the appropriate letter (digital
signatures via electronic document signing programs are accepted)

Forms for persons under the age of 16 –return with the appropriate
letter. No details are updated on Medicare

All organ donor registration enquiries must pass a security check before
confirming or accessing registration and donation decisions

The Process page has information about forms not previously registered
with blank organs and/or tissue for donation, conflicting decisions
change address/personal details.

Processing rules must be actioned prior to registering or amending AODR
Donor and Medicare records. If unable to finalise AODR, scan and send
the registration form to the AODR email box for upload to PaNDA.

Where the registration form has been assigned incorrectly in PaNDA to an
operator, raise proficiency to be actioned by AODR trained staff.

Note: once updated in an AODR registration within CDMS, a date of
contact and/or decision can not be reversed or backdated.

AODR forms with/without a Medicare number or authority to link to Medicare

Process registration form without Medicare number but with authority to
link to Medicare

Where an AODR registration form is received without a Medicare number
but with the authority to link, a search may be conducted to:

-   locate
-   Access, and
-   link to their Medicare record where available

Request received via phone and does not have a Medicare number or
authority to link is not granted

Process the registration by creating an AODR entitlement without
accessing or linking to Medicare. See Table AODR registration without a
Medicare number

Registration form without Medicare number or authority to link to
Medicare

If an AODR registration form is received without:

-   a Medicare number or when the registrant does not have a Medicare
    number, (for example, an overseas student), or
-   an authority to link to the Medicare number,
-   and the consumer does not have an existing registration, operators
    must attempt to contact the individual. Contact to obtain authority
    to link to Medicare prior to processing the registration on the
    system

No authority to link is where:

-   the Medicare number has not been provided
-   an authority to link to Medicare tick a box has not been selected

Where an existing registration is located and already linked to
Medicare, update their existing registration and Medicare record using
the details provided.

If there is an existing Donor Only record, that record is to be updated
as per the registration form. Do not access their Medicare record or
update any Medicare details if no authority to link has been provided.
There is no need to contact the customer in this circumstance. See Amend
organ donor registration

Contact

Phone number provided on the form

One call attempt to contact the individual should be made using the
phone number provided on the form. If a phone number is not provided on
the form, do not attempt to search for a contact number via external
sources.

Where a phone number is not provided on the form or a call attempt is
unsuccessful, check for an email address.

Email address provided

After one unsuccessful attempts to contact the individual by phone or
where no phone number has been provided. The operator to send email via
the AODR email box requesting the individual contact the AODR
Information Line. This is to link their donor registration to their
Medicare record. .

Operators that have not been trained in the AODR email duty, need to
complete the Email Template – ‘No Medicare number provided on
registration’. Forward the template to the AODR email box. This email
template requests individuals to contact the AODR Information Line to
authorise linking their Medicare record by providing their Medicare
number. The operator on the AODR email duty will action the request.

Note: Service Officers not trained in Action public email enquiries for
AODR are to record a comment in ‘PaNDA processing comments. Unassign the
work item by raising proficiency in PaNDA or escalate the form. See
Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA).

Where an email has been sent, the registration form is to be held/pended
for 13 days. If the individual does not contact the AODR Information
Line to provide authority (Medicare number), the registration to be
processed on the 14th day.

No phone number or email address provided on the form

Process the registration by creating an AODR entitlement without
accessing or linking to Medicare. See AODR registration without a
Medicare number table.

Discrepancies in personal details and Donor Registration form

Where Service Officers are unsure/not trained in AODR, proficiency may
be raised in PaNDA. This can include comments for AODR trained staff to
then action. See Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register
(AODR).

Recording second name or initial on an AODR entitlement

Legal identification documentation must be supplied to add or amend a
second name or initial details in CDMS.

If an AODR registration form is received and includes a second name or
initial, but there is no second name or initial on their Medicare
enrolment, the details cannot be added unless the appropriate
identification has been provided.

No change to second name or initial can be made over the phone until
appropriate identification provided. See Change legal name on Medicare
record.

Where an AODR form is received in the mail or appropriate identification
cannot be provided:

-   process the application/phone request excluding the second name or
    initial
-   add second name or initial to the Comments field, for example 'AODR
    Form indicated second initial as J'

Second name or initial details can be entered when creating a new
consumer record with AODR entitlement that does not have a Medicare
number supplied.

The Resources page contains information on processing an AODR
registration using a Medicare Claim form (MS014) the alignment of AODR
business rules with Medicare Public Eligibility and the annotating of an
AODR registration form

Related links

Search for and verify existing organ donor registration in Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Amend organ donor registration

Link Donor Only entitlement to consumer record

Delete duplicate organ donor registration

Amend a person’s Medicare enrolment details

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
