
Pseudonym Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 011-03010060

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on a Pseudonym IHI in the HI Service.

Note: escalate to Tier 3 for processing. Only a certain group of Tier 3
Service Officers with baseline security clearance may create and manage
pseudonym IHIs. For help, contact Tier 3 HI Service support (internal
contact).

For Tier 3 staff with baseline security only.

On this Page:

HI Pseudonym policy and processes

The provision of pseudonymous healthcare is needed as a necessary
feature of the HI Services for vulnerable individuals seeking
healthcare.

This policy applies to the provision of pseudonymous IHI for vulnerable
individuals.

Applications for a pseudonym IHI are mailed to a secure post office box.
See Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

The processes in this document must be performed by Tier 3 Service
Officers with a baseline level security clearance.

The same staff with security clearance sufficient to process pseudonym
IHIs, have access to the post office box keys.

Applying for a pseudonymous IHI

The individual seeking pseudonymous healthcare:

-   must have an existing Verified IHI
-   may only have 1 real and 1 pseudonymous IHI at any one time

A third party may ask for the creation of 1 pseudonymous IHI for an
individual in their care. In these cases, evidence of the authority of
the third party to act on behalf of that individual seeking pseudonymous
healthcare must be provided. This requirement will leverage Medicare's
existing Acting on behalf of a third party policy.

See also: Amend Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

An individual or a third party authorised to act for them (power of
attorney) must consent to the creation of a pseudonymous IHI.

Sufficient evidence of identity (EOI) must be provided for Tier 3
Service Officers to determine the individual's real identity prior to
the creation of a pseudonymous identity for use in the HI Service.

The pseudonymous IHI is created with a status of Verified.

The request for a pseudonymous IHI must not create a duplicate record.
At least 1 of the demographic details provided must be unique. The
complete set of demographic details supplied must not match any existing
record held in CDMS, such as:

-   first name
-   family name
-   date of birth
-   sex
-   address

Pseudonymous IHI management

Note: Tier 3 Service Officers with a baseline level security clearance
are able to access and update these records.

The pseudonymous IHI is not linked to the original Verified IHI within
CDMS.

There are measures in place to ensure security of information for a
pseudonymous IHI. Any security queries can be escalated to a Tier 3
Service Officer who has a baseline level security clearance.

The original Verified IHI is not altered in any way as a result of the
same person's pseudonymous IHI. It remains active and can still be used
for claiming purposes, or HI purposes if needed.

The system log captures all access and access attempts on the
pseudonymous IHI, as per standard audit logging processes and
activities.

The pseudonymous IHI may, on request by the individual, be merged with
an individual's original Verified IHI as per standard duplicate
resolution procedures.

Where an unverified record is created at a healthcare event, this IHI
may be Verified and used as a pseudonymous IHI, if requested by the
individual.

Access to Medicare, PBS and other programs

Medicare or Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) claiming is not
available for people using a pseudonymous IHI when seeking healthcare in
the pseudonym name.

No other Medicare program can be added to a pseudonymous IHI. The
individual is advised that they are not permitted to add other program
or entitlements to the IHI when completing the form.

The pseudonymous IHI form explains the consequences of using a
pseudonymous IHI when seeking healthcare for Medicare and PBS claiming.

Compromised pseudonym IHI

If a pseudonym IHI becomes compromised the IHI must be retired. To
retire an IHI, the date of birth must be changed to make the
individual's age greater than 130 years. The IHI is picked up in the
weekly batch run to automatically retire all IHIs with a date of birth
greater than 130 years.

See also: Retire or expire Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

A new pseudonym IHI may be created in this case. All rules above apply
to the new pseudonym IHI.

Updating pseudonymous IHI details

An individual may update the address and sex of their pseudonym IHI,
which is managed by Tier 3.

The individual needs to:

-   Send in proof of their true identity, their pseudonym IHI and the
    change they are requesting
-   If they ask for a change to their sex, the proof of sex change must
    be supplied with the request
-   A change of name or date of birth is considered a different
    pseudonym, and will need the existing pseudonym IHI to be retired
    and a new pseudonym IHI created. In these cases, the individual must
    complete and send in the Healthcare Identifiers Service Application
    to request a pseudonym Individual Healthcare Identifier form
    (MS005). See the Resources page for a link to the form

See also: Retire or expire Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

The Resources page contains contact details for the HI Service and a
table describing pseudonymous IHI components and a link to the
application form.

Related links

Amend Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service

Retire or expire Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
