
Release of information for Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS) 011-21022531

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about releasing Child Dental Benefit
Schedule (CDBS) information.

On this page:

Release of information

Information can only be released to the parent or guardian listed in the
child’s CDBS record in Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) and
only these people can enquire about:

-   eligibility
-   remaining balance amount, and
-   notification letters sent

If a check of CDBS parent/guardian tab shows no parent or guardian
listed, Service Officers can confirm on the home screen in Customer
First if a Nominee Arrangement or Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) is
recorded.

A security check must be completed prior to releasing information to the
parent or guardian regarding CDBS. Service Officers must also follow
release of information policies.

A Parent or guardian listed in the child’s CDBS record on CDMS can check
and enquire on their child’s CDBS eligibility and remaining balance
until the child turns 18.

Note: Services Australia can only release CDBS eligibility and balance
details to the parent or guardian listed on the child’s CDBS record in
CDMS. Service Officers cannot release information regarding claiming
history without the consent from the child if they are aged 14 or over.
Claiming history can be released if the child is under 14 years of age.

It is important to check the child’s details to ensure they are correct.
Service Officers must also perform a security check on the caller. See
Authenticating a Medicare customer for more information.

The CDBS notification letter

Medicare will mail a notification letter to an eligible child (or the
parent or guardian listed on the child’s CDBS record in CDMS):

-   at the start of each calendar year, and
-   to those that become newly eligible throughout the year

Medicare can reissue CDBS notifications letters when requested by an
eligible child, or the listed parent or guardian. The quickest way for
customers to request a letter is through self-service by logging onto
their myGov account.

The child (or the parent or guardian listed on the child’s CDBS record
in CDMS) can also call the Medicare general enquires line.

Provider Information request

Providers can check a child’s eligibility details, remaining balance and
confirm whether they are eligible to claim a benefit for a particular
CDBS service. This can be done by accessing Health Professionals Online
Services (HPOS) or by calling the provider enquiries line.

Medicare may disclose protected information to a person who has express
or implied authority on the record.

The Resources page contains examples of CDBS enquiries and frequently
asked questions, links to contact details for CDBS, the myGov website
and Medicare for health professionals.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
