
Minors and Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15020020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about who is considered to be a minor
for the purposes of Medicare Compensation Recovery and the circumstances
in which information about a minor can be released.

On this Page:

Minors

For Medicare Compensation Recovery, a person under 14 years of age is
considered a minor.

For all other legal matters, a minor is a person under 18 years of age.

A Medicare Compensation Recovery case is normally made on behalf of a
minor by a claimant or a legal representative, including:

-   A claimant (normally a parent or guardian)
-   A person appointed as Litigation Guardian (normally by the courts)
-   An Executor or Administrator of a deceased minor’s estate (normally
    appointed by the courts), or
-   The Public Trustee (although they are usually the refund recipient
    rather than the claimant)

When Services Australia receives a claim and the injured person is over
14 years of age, all contact must be with the minor to protect their
privacy. The minor can authorise a third party to act on their behalf by
completing a Medicare Compensation Recovery Third party authority
(MO021) form.

Where the agency holds an existing authority signed by a parent,
guardian or legal representative prior to the injured person turning 14
years of age, the authority remains valid under implied consent, until;

-   The injured person turns 18 years of age
-   The agency receives a new authority signed by the injured person, or
-   The agency receives a verbal or written request to revoke the old
    authority

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Compensation Recovery
Third party authority (MO021).

See:

-   Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf for
    Medicare Compensation Recovery
-   Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation
    Recovery

Release of information

The Privacy Act 1988 prevents the agency from releasing information
about a minor to anyone that has not been authorised to receive
information.

See: Authority to release information and acting on a person’s behalf
for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The References page contains a link to the Privacy Act 1988.

Request for a Medicare history statement

Where Services Australia receives a request for a minor's Medicare
history statement, the documents are to be sent to:

-   the claimant (normally a parent or guardian) where the minor is
    listed on their Medicare card
-   the legal representative (normally appointed by the courts), or
-   the minor, when they have their own Medicare card

Declaration/s

Where the injured person is over 14 years of age and under 18 years of
age, declarations (including the Medicare history statement and section
23A statement) can be completed by:

-   The minor if they are capable of understanding and signing the
    declaration
-   The claimant (normally a parent or guardian) provided they are
    listed on the same Medicare card, or
-   A legal representative (normally appointed by the courts)

See: Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Refunds for minors

Refunding an intended advance payment

For refunds, a minor is a person under 18 years of age. Do not pay an
intended advance payment refund or subsequent refund directly to a minor
under 18 years of age.

In these cases, only pay the refund to the claimant (normally a parent
or guardian) or the legal representative (normally appointed by the
courts and includes the Public Trustee or other Trustee).

If the agency has received enough information about a notice of judgment
or settlement form that a Trustee is involved (e.g. the Trustee name,
address and reference details) issue the intended advance payment refund
to the Trustee.

If the information provided is not complete, or if Trustee involvement
is indicated on other documentation, contact the Trustee office in the
State of the minor to verify the Trustee appointed as a financial
administrator. Pay any refund to the appointed Trustee on behalf of the
minor.

If the agency has received no information that a Trustee is involved,
contact the compensation payer to verify if a Trustee has been appointed
as a financial administrator. Where no trustee has been appointed, pay
the refund to the claimant on behalf of the minor.

Note: issue refunds for minors via cheque made payable to the minor.
Distribute to the claimant or the authorised financial administrator
that has the authority to deal with the proceeds of the claim.

Refunding a non-advance payment

Pay any applicable refund from a notice of charge to the party who made
that payment, usually the compensation payer. This may also be a
solicitor or other representative organisation.

See: Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The Resources page contains links to useful contact information, forms,
letters and templates.

Related links

Authority to release information and acting on a person's behalf for
Medicare Compensation Recovery

Declarations for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of judgment or settlement for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
