
Simplified Billing reports in RMDS 011-21121458

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures for actioning Simplified Billing
reports from the Report Management and Distribution System (RMDS).

RMDS reports that require actioning

The following reports must be actioned by Medicare Provider Services
(MPS) on Mondays and Thursdays by each state:

-   MCA EDI105 NPHEDI REPORT (NSW/ACT,QLD,VIC and WA)
-   MCA NSB301 SIMPBILL DLY PEND RPT
-   MCA NSB302 SB LDA AGE ANALYSIS RPT

Access to RMDS reports

The MCA EDI105 report is generated from RMDS and emailed to Provider
Services Support and Provider Services Communication and cc’d to Digital
Channel Management (DCM). Service Officers can view the report directly
from the positional email box, without needing to retrieve from RMDS in
Mainframe.

The MCA NSB301 and MCA NSB302 must be retrieved from the RMDS in
Mainframe.

Access to RMDS is granted when the Service Officer has access to process
claims in the Simplified Billing program. This is usually requested by
Medicare Provider Service branch. The Service Officer will only receive
access to the state they are in.

See also: Accessing the RMDS

MCA EDI105 NPHEDI RPT

The report displays all inbound Electronic Data Interface (EDI)
Simplified Billing claims which a private health insurer has
transmitted, where the vouchers are displayed as accepted or rejected.

The emails that contain an attachment indicate that there are rejected
claims and further action is required by MPS.

Where no rejections/errors exist in the report, a report will not be
attached and the 'Reject/Error Count' will be omitted from the body of
the text of the email and will be replaced with the following:

'No Transmission errors reported. All transmissions have been accepted'

The report will only include claims which contain an error and deemed as
a rejection. Claims which have been accepted or contain a warning
message will not be included in the report.

The report will include the run date, state, and the date the report was
created.

The claims containing errors will be sorted in the following order:

-   Alphabetical order by Minor ID and then by
-   ascending Claim Id and then by
-   ascending Medicare Card Number

The Resources page contains a table explaining the details for each
rejected claim included in the report (attached as a spreadsheet to the
email).

MCA NSB301 SIMPBILL DLY PEND RPT

Simplified Billing manual claims must be processed within 10 calendar
days of the date of lodgement. These claims must be processed by the 7th
calendar day to meet the 10 day payment time.

The 301 report only displays Simplified Billing manual claims. Where
claims are still in PEND the Service Officer must escalate these to
their Team Leader. The Team Leader will escalate to the Service
Officer’s Team Leader who will take necessary steps to ensure these are
actioned within the payment time.

Note: if claims are unprocessed, they must be actioned by the original
operator that keyed the claim. The operator must complete the claim
based on the claim documentation sent to Medicare which they used to
originally key the claim.

MCA NSB 302 SB LDA AGE ANALYSIS RPT

This report shows the Latter Day Adjustments (LDA) that operators have
started processing but not completed. The status of the LDA shows that
the LDA is in pend status. Usually LDA must be actioned the same day
they are being processed to confirm an underpayment, overpayment or
statistical change has occurred.

If LDA claims are left opened and not completed, access to any
adjustments for that claim is blocked and will not allow other operators
to finalise any other LDA claims within that original claim number. The
Service Officer must email their Team Leader who will email the
operator’s Team Leader to request the Latter Day Adjustment be deleted
or finalised.

The Resources page contains the File Fix Template and an EDI105 report
field table.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
