
Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) health assessments for specific target groups (including Indigenous Australians) 011-42040030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

This document outlines how health professionals can use Medicare Benefit
Schedule (MBS) items to provide a health assessment service to eligible
patients.

Health assessments

Health professionals can use MBS health assessment items to claim for
services where a patient’s health and physical, psychological and social
function is assessed. The assessment involves the consideration of
whether preventive health care and education should be offered to the
patient.

Health assessment services are not available to in-patients of a
hospital or care recipients within a residential aged care facility.

Note: the exception is where a comprehensive medical assessment has been
provided to a care recipient in a residential aged care facility using
those specific items.

Health professionals who should be performing a health assessment

Non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners (Non-VR MPs) and
general practitioners (GPs) can perform a health assessment. The
patient’s usual medical practitioner should undertake these services.

A usual medical practitioner for the purpose of a health assessment is a
medical practitioner who:

-   has provided the majority of health care to their patient over the
    previous 12 month, or
-   will be providing the majority of health care to their patient over
    the upcoming 12 months

If a different medical practitioner performs a health assessment, a copy
of the health assessment must be forwarded with the agreement of the
patient and/or their guardian, to their usual medical practitioner.

Note: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practitioners and
Practice nurses may assist health professionals in performing a health
assessment. However, it must be under the supervision of a health
professional and in accordance with accepted medical practice. This may
include activities associated with:

-   collecting patient information for the health professional and
    taking and recording routine measurements
-   providing patients with information about recommended interventions,
    at the direction of the health professional

All other components of the health assessment must include personal
attendance by the medical practitioner.

Patient eligibility

Health assessment items cover specific target groups of patients. Each
target group has different rules regarding how often they are eligible
for Medicare benefits for their health assessment.

Health professionals are responsible for determining if their patient is
part of one or more target groups for health assessment services. These
items have a limit to how often they can be performed (time dependency).

The Resources page has the list of target groups that a health
assessment can be performed on and how often they can be performed.

Patient consent

Prior to the health professional performing the health assessment, the
patient (and/or patient’s parent(s), carer or representative) must be
given an explanation of the health assessment process and its likely
benefits.

The patient must be asked to consent to the health assessment prior to
it being performed.

Where the patient is not capable of giving consent, the patient’s
parents, carer or representative must provide consent.

Consent to the health assessment must be noted in the patient’s records.

Conducting a health assessment

Health professionals should not conduct a separate consultation for
another health-related issue at the same attendance for a health
assessment unless it is clinically required.

Clinical requirements may include the:

-   patient having an acute problem that needs to managed separately to
    the health assessment
-   health assessment being undertaken during the course of a separate
    consultation for another purpose

In the above scenarios, the health professional could claim the health
assessment item and another relevant attendance item. They do not need
to submit text with their claim but should keep a record of why the
other attendance item was claimed (clinical indications).

MBS items for health assessments

There are 4 time-based health assessment services:

-   224 or 701 - Brief health assessment
-   225 or 703 - Standard health assessment
-   226 or 705 - Long health assessment
-   227 or 707 - Prolonged health assessment

Choosing an item depends on the time taken to complete the health
assessment, complexity of the patient’s needs and specific requirements
of each target group eligible for a health assessment.

Note: health professionals need to indicate which target group(s) their
patient is part of in the text notation of their claim, for example,
'over 75' or 'former ADF'.

There are 2 health assessment services which can only be used for the
target group indicated within the item description:

Person of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent:

-   228 or 715 - Patients in the community

Patient with cardiovascular disease or at risk of developing
cardiovascular disease:

-   177 or 699 - Patients in the community

The Resources page has a table with more information on eligible target
groups and how often these services can be performed.

Practices may also be eligible for the Indigenous Health Incentive
(IHI). See Application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) Indigenous
Health Incentive (IHI) for more information.

Follow-up services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health assessment

Patients who have an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health
assessment (item 228,715, 93470 or 93479) can have follow-up services
under items:

-   10987 - follow-up services provided by a practice nurse or
    Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander health practitioner on behalf
    of a health professional. The patient can have up to 10 services
    each calendar year
-   81300-81360, 93546-93558 and 93579-93591 - allied health services.
    The patient can have up to 5 services each calendar year

Residential Aged Care Facilities (RACF) Items that ended 30 June 2022,
will still contribute to the total of 5 services for the calendar year.
These items are:

-   93470
-   93479
-   93546-93558 and
-   93579-93591

For eligibility check, see Process page.

If a patient has a chronic, mental health or eating disorder condition,
they may also be eligible for:

-   Chronic Disease Management services
-   Mental health services under the Better Access Initiative
-   Eating disorder treatment and management plan services

Note: allied health services provided under these initiatives do not
affect patient eligibility for a health assessment related treatment.

The Process page has steps to check a patient’s eligibility for
follow-up allied health services.

The Resources page has links to infographics and education guides for
health professionals, and MBS explanatory notes.

Claiming more than one health assessment in 12 months

Time dependent restrictions apply to services by:

the same health professional under:

-   items 701, 703, 705, 707, 224, 225, 226, and 227 - once per 12
    months

any health professional under items:

-   228, 715, 93470 and 93479 - once per 9 months
-   177 - once per 12 months
-   699 – once per 12 months

Some restrictions can be overridden depending on the circumstances and
text provided with the claim. The Process page has steps to assess a
claim for a second health assessment in 12 months.

The Resources page has a table with more information on eligible target
groups and how often these services can be performed.

Heart health assessments

Heart health assessments performed by:

-   a GP under item 699, are not payable where a patient has had a
    health assessment under items 701-715 within the previous 12 months
-   a non-VR MP under item 177, are not payable where a patient has had
    a health assessment under items 224-228 within the previous 12
    months

However, a patient may be eligible for a general health assessment where
they have had a heart health assessment on a prior date of service
(DOS), if they meet the requirements of one of the target groups.

Record keeping requirements

Health professionals must keep adequate and up to date records.

If a health assessment has been provided, the health professional must:

-   offer the patient a copy of the health assessment, including their
    recommendations
-   retain a copy of the health assessment for 2 years after the date
    the health assessment was performed

The Resources page has a link for more information on record keeping
requirements.

The Resources page contains tables on target groups and expected
frequency of health assessments, and links to Services Australia and
external websites.

Related links

Nurse practitioner and midwife access to Schedule of Pharmaceutical
Benefits (the PBS Schedule)

Chronic Disease Management (CDM) in Medicare

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Treatment and management plans for eating disorders (including anorexia
nervosa)

Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
