
Mental health treatment services for people affected by bushfires 011-20011348

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility and assessing information for mental
health treatment services for people affected by bushfires.

Overview

New Medicare items have been introduced to support people who have
experienced adverse effects to their mental health as a result of the
2019 to 2020 bushfires.

These items are available for services provided from 17 January 2020 to
30 June 2022.

This initiative is similar to the Better Access to mental health
treatment initiative. Patients do not need a referral or mental health
treatment plan to be able to access up to 10 treatment services.

Patient eligibility

Patients must be registered with Medicare to access Medicare benefits.

Health professionals will determine a patient’s clinical eligibility for
mental health treatment services. The items are designed for people who
have experienced an adverse effect on their mental health and wellbeing
as a result of bushfires that occurred in the 2019 to 2020 financial
year (1 July 2019 to 30 June 2020), for example:

-   individuals and families
-   emergency management staff and volunteers

There are no age or location restrictions for patients to access these
benefits.

Patients do not need a mental health treatment plan (MHTP) item on their
Medicare claims history to be eligible for treatment services.

The Process page has information about checking eligibility for
treatment services.

Provider eligibility

Providers must be registered with Medicare at the location they provide
services. There are no provider location restrictions for these items
(they can be practicing anywhere in Australia).

Eligible providers are:

-   general practitioners (GPs)
-   medical practitioners
-   clinical psychologists
-   registered psychologists
-   occupational therapists
-   social workers

MBS item numbers

The Resources page has a list of:

-   item numbers
-   provider types that can claim them

Assessing rules

Patients do not require the following to access Medicare benefits:

-   referral
-   mental health treatment plan
-   shared care plan

The Process page has information about assessing claims for multiple
services for the same patient and same provider on the same date of
service.

Claiming limits

There is a limit of 10 services per calendar year (1 January to 31
December). These services do not count toward any services provided as
part of a mental health treatment plan under the Better Access
Initiative.

Patients can still see their health professional after the 10 services,
but they won’t be able to claim Medicare benefits. Health professionals
may be able to use other mental health treatment items (e.g. 2121) to
support their patients.

See Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative).

Other mental health treatment items for GPs and medical practitioners

The below items are available for patients who have experienced an
adverse effect on their mental health or wellbeing as a result of the
2019 to 2020 bushfires:

-   2121, 2150 and 2196 for GPs
-   894, 896 and 898 for medical practitioners

These are telehealth services that should be delivered by
videoconference. There is:

-   no claiming limit
-   they do not count toward the claiming limit
-   they do not count toward the 10 per calendar year

These items were available for people in drought affected areas for
services provided on or before 30 June 2020. Check assessing rules in
QITI using the date of service to make sure the claim is assessed using
the appropriate rules.

The Resources page provides links to:

-   MBS item numbers
-   FAQs
-   External websites

Related links

Mental health treatment plans (MHTP) under Medicare (Better Access
Initiative)

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
