
Bulk bill incentive items in Medicare 011-43030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19).

This document outlines information about bulk bill incentive items for
Medicare.

On this Page:

Bulk bill incentives

Bulk bill incentive items are available for General Practitioners (GP)
can be claimed where:

-   the service provided is bulk billed, and
-   the person is under 16 years of age or is a Commonwealth concession
    card holder

Bulk bill incentive items can be claimed in accordance with the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS) item descriptions.

Concessional Rule

A patient is considered to be concessional if they are under 16 years of
age or are the holder of, or listed on, a Commonwealth concession card
at the date of service.

Concession cards

The following concession cards entitle General Practitioners (GP) to
claim a bulk bill incentive payment.

Centrelink

-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Health Care Card (HCC)
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Note: Gold or White Cards issued by DVA do not attract the additional
bulk bill incentive payment. However, if a Gold or White Card holder
also holds a recognised Commonwealth concession card and chooses to be
treated under the Medicare arrangements, then that patient is an
eligible concession card holder.

Release of concessional status to Providers for claiming bulk bill incentive payments

A provider can check a patients concession through Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS) using a Medicare Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
Individual Certificate, Concessional Verification checking through
Medicare Online/Easyclaim or by contacting Services Australia on 132
150.

Services Australia can release a patient's concessional entitlement
status to a provider if they have the patient's consent and have
explained to the patient why they need this information.

A patient’s concessional eligibility can be displayed in the patient
history enquiry screen (via Mainframe) or for further details, Service
Officers can query the PBS concessional information.

The Resources page contains contact details for Medicare Programme
Support Officers (PSO) and a link to MBS Online.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
