
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purposes of Medicare Safety Net letters and
how Service Officers and customers can request them.

On this Page:

Letter A

Letter A is sent to individuals who are not in a registered Medicare
Safety Net (MSN) family.

The purpose of this letter is to advise the individual they are nearing
the MSN threshold, and there are services on their patient history
requiring verification that may take them over the threshold and
potentially qualify them for MSN benefits for a specific calendar year.

This letter lists all unverified services recorded for the individual
for that calendar year.

Letter A is a system generated letter and is triggered when a patient
claim is processed and the individuals combined verified and unverified
out of pocket expenses are nearing the MSN threshold.

If the individual has myGov Inbox as their mailing preference, Letter A
is directed to their myGov inbox. Otherwise, the letter will be mailed
to their recorded address.

Letter A can only be produced for the current and previous calendar
year.

Letter B

Letter B is sent to individuals who are not in a registered Medicare
Safety Net (MSN) family.

The purpose of this letter is to advise the individual they have
reached/exceeded the MSN threshold for a specific calendar year.

This letter lists all unverified services recorded for the individual
for that calendar year.

Letter B is a system generated letter and is triggered when a patient
claim is processed and the individuals verified out of pocket expenses
exceed the MSN threshold.

If the individual has myGov Inbox as their mailing preference, Letter B
is directed to their myGov inbox. Otherwise, the letter is posted to
their recorded address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS).

Letter B can only be produced for the current and previous calendar
year.

Letter F

Letter F is sent to the family contact (FC) of the registered Medicare
Safety Net (MSN) family when the family is nearing the MSN threshold for
that calendar year.

The purpose of this letter is to advise the family they are nearing the
MSN threshold for that calendar year and they are required to confirm
the composition of their family before MSN benefits can be paid.

Letter F is a system generated letter triggered when a patient claim is
processed and the families combined total of verified and unverified out
of pocket expenses reaches 70% (or above) of the MSN threshold.

Letter F is posted to the FC recorded address in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS).

Letter F can only be produced for the current and previous calendar
year.

Letter U

Letter U is sent to members of a registered Medicare Safety Net (MSN)
family or individuals not in a MSN family upon request.

The purpose of this letter is to list all unverified services for a
specific calendar year.

Letter U is manually requested by service officers in the Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

If the requestor has myGov Inbox as their mailing preference, letter U
is directed to their myGov inbox. Otherwise, the letter is posted to
their recorded address in the CDMS.

Who can request a Letter U

Where individuals or Medicare Safety Net (MSN) family members have no
unverified payments, a Letter U cannot be issued.

Requesting Letter U for a member 14 years of age or over

Any member of a registered MSN family 14 years of age or over, can
request a letter for themselves and/or any other member/s of the MSN
family who are 14 years of age or over.

Where the letter is for a person 14 years of age or over, it will
contain details of all their unverified payments for claims made on any
Medicare card they are associated with within the requested calendar
year. This is because the letter is Medicare PIN based.

If the letter has been requested for another member, and that member is
14 years of age or over, the letter will be addressed and issued to the
member that the unverified payments relate to.

Requesting Letter U for a member under 14 years of age

Only the family contact (FC) or spouse/partner (SP) of the registered
MSN family can request a letter for a child dependant under 14 years of
age. Service Officers must verify that the requester is the parent or
guardian of the child dependant.

Only unverified payments recorded against the Medicare number of the
requester, i.e. SP or FC, will be listed. This is to ensure the child’s
privacy y not listing any services claimed against another Medicare
card.

The letter will be addressed and issued to the requesting person, i.e.
either the FC or SP.

If the requester and the dependant are not on the same Medicare card,
the Release of information for Medicare process must be followed.

Unverified Payment Statement via Medicare online accounts

[] Customers are able to view and print an Unverified Payment Statement
via Medicare online services. The Unverified Payment Statement lists all
unverified payments for an individual or a Medicare Safety Net (MSN)
family member.

The family contact (FC) or spouse/partner (SP) of a registered MSN
family will be able to access a dependant’s unverified payment
information where the dependant is under 14 years of age and is listed
on the logged in Medicare number.

Unverified Payment Statements cannot be displayed for anyone aged
between 14-17 years old. For these customers, a Letter U will need to be
requested.

Request for Release of Information

Due to privacy requirements, a request must be made to the agency’s
Information Release Section if the request is:

-   for a person 14 years of age or over, and
-   made by someone other than that person, and
-   requested to be sent to the requesting person

or

-   for a person under 14 years of age, and
-   made by a parent or guardian on the same Medicare card who is not
    registered as part of the Medicare Safety Net family with the child,
    or
-   made by someone who is part of the registered Medicare Safety Net
    family but not on the same Medicare card

Deceased persons

A request cannot be made by or for a person who has a Date of Death
recorded against their consumer record.

Letter details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)

The details of Medicare Safety Net letters are recorded in the Inquiry
Medicare Safety Net Details screens in CDMS for customer enquiry and
audit purposes if they are either:

-   requested via CDMS, or
-   automatically generated through patient claiming

Service Officers can view these details under the Letters Details tab
within each consumer’s record.

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Safety Net letter
templates, the Letter U request matrix and a quick reference guide for
issuing U letters in CDMS.

Related links

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare

Verify services for Medicare Safety Net

Release of information for Medicare

Preferences for Medicare letters

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
