
Coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccines 011-21011415

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This process is impacted by the coronavirus (COVID-19) response. Read
the Operational Messages under COVID-19 Vaccines on Coronavirus
(COVID-19) response.

This page is updated regularly with the latest information about the
COVID-19 vaccination rollout. Do not print, save or use copies of this
file.

This document outlines information to help Service Officers answer
coronavirus (COVID-19) vaccine enquiries.

COVID-19 vaccination program

The Australian Government's COVID-19 vaccination program began on 22
February 2021.

Everyone in Australia can be vaccinated against COVID-19 for free,
regardless of their Medicare eligibility.

The Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) records COVID-19, flu and
National Immunisation Program (NIP) vaccinations reported by recognised
vaccination providers.

See:

-   Resources for a link to the Australian Government website for the
    latest COVID-19 news and advice
-   References for a link to the Australian COVID-19 Vaccination Policy

Eligibility and bookings for COVID-19 vaccination

People can use the Vaccine Clinic Finder on the Health Direct website
to:

-   check their eligibility for the COVID-19 vaccines
-   book their vaccination appointments

The Resources page has a link to the Vaccine Clinic Finder.

COVID-19 vaccines

The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) has currently approved or
recognised the following vaccines to be recorded on the AIR if they were
given on or after 1 March 2020:

-   AstraZeneca COVISHIELD (ASTCOV)
-   AstraZeneca Vaxzevria (COVAST)
-   Bharat Biotech Covaxin (BHACOV)
-   Gamaleya Sputnik V (GAMSPU)
-   Jansen-Cilag COVID Vaccine (JANSSEN)
-   Moderna Bivalent Spikevax (MODBIV)
-   Moderna Spikevax (MODERN)
-   Novavax NUVAXOVID (NOVNUV)
-   Pfizer Comirnaty (COMIRN)
-   Sinopharm BBIBP-CorV (SINBBI)
-   Sinovac Coronavac (SINCOR)

See:

-   current information about COVID-19 vaccines on the Department of
    Health and Aged Care website. The Resources page has a link
-   Navigate Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) system for vaccine
    code details and more information
-   vaccine codes for health professionals on the Services Australia
    website. The Resources page has a link

COVID-19 vaccinations given overseas

The Department of Health and Aged Care and the Therapeutic Goods
Administration (TGA) decide which COVID-19 vaccine brands given overseas
are recognised in Australia and recorded on the AIR.

The following COVID-19 vaccines given overseas can be recorded on the
AIR if they were given on or after 1 March 2020:

-   AstraZeneca COVISHIELD
-   AstraZeneca Vaxzevria
-   Bharat Biotech Covaxin
-   Gamaleya Sputnik V
-   Jansen-Cilag COVID Vaccine
-   Moderna Bivalent Spikevax
-   Moderna Spikevax
-   Novavax NUVAXOVID
-   Pfizer Comirnaty
-   Pfizer Bivalent Comirnaty
-   Sinopharm BBIBP-CorV
-   Sinovac Coronavac

Recording vaccines given before this date will result in a Pend 44.
Staff must not process these. See Process pended claims in Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR).

Customers must take evidence of their overseas vaccinations to a
recognised vaccination provider in Australia to record on the AIR.

The Resources page has frequently asked questions about COVID-19
vaccinations given overseas.

Getting ready for vaccination

People can get ready for their COVID-19 vaccinations by:

-   getting a myGov account and linking their services such as Medicare,
    the Individual Healthcare Identifier Service or My Health Record
-   making sure their contact details are up to date
-   accessing their immunisation history statement so they know how to
    once they’ve been vaccinated

The Process page explains how to help individuals get ready for
vaccination.

Department of Defence and Department of Veterans' Affairs

Defence personnel and veterans may not be enrolled in Medicare or know
their Medicare number. They do not need to enrol in Medicare to get:

-   a COVID-19 vaccine
-   proof of vaccinations

Service Officers should encourage Defence personnel and veterans to
reconnect or enrol in Medicare if they are eligible.

See the AIR general enquiries line table on the Resources page to help
Defence personnel and veterans.

Individual Healthcare Identifiers (IHI) enquiries and processing

Individuals can get an IHI so they can get proof of their vaccinations
online.

Individuals request an IHI by using the:

-   online IHI service in myGov, or
-   the Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier form (MS003). See
    the Resources page for a link

If a form is handed in to a service centre, see Allocation of Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Note: service centre staff do not process MS003 forms. A dedicated team
is trained to process the applications.

Frequently asked questions to help staff handle IHI enquiries are on the
Resources page of Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

Proof of vaccination

The AIR provides 3 types of proof of vaccinations:

-   immunisation history statements
-   COVID-19 digital certificates
-   International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

The immunisation history statement:

-   shows all vaccines customers receive when a vaccination provider
    records them on the AIR
-   includes COVID-19 and flu vaccines
-   can be viewed through myGov using Medicare, the Individual
    Healthcare Identifiers Service or My Health Record
-   can be downloaded from the Express Plus Medicare app and saved to
    mobile devices to use offline

The COVID-19 digital certificate:

is available when an individual has had at least one dose of an approved
or recognised COVID-19 vaccine

shows:

-   COVID-19 vaccines approved or recognised by the TGA
-   all of an individual’s COVID-19 vaccines, including any boosters

can be viewed through myGov using Medicare or the Individual Healthcare
Identifiers Service

can be downloaded from:

-   Medicare online, or My Health Record in myGov using a mobile device
    and added to Apple Wallet or Google Wallet for easy access
-   IHI service in myGov using a mobile device
-   the Express Plus Medicare app and saved to mobile devices or digital
    wallets to use offline, see Resources for infographics

can be pushed into participating state and territory check in apps

Note: each time a customer adds their digital certificate to their Apple
wallet or Google Wallet it will save a new version. They can save
multiple versions of their certificate in the wallet to keep a history
of their vaccination proof.

The International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificate (ICVC):

-   provides a secure record of COVID-19 vaccinations that is recognised
    internationally

See International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC) for details.

Customers affected by family and domestic violence

If a customer’s proof of COVID-19 vaccination causes them safety
concerns, there are a few options to help.

See 'Customers affected by family and domestic violence' in Proof of
vaccinations and the Australian Immunisation Register.

Purpose of proof of vaccination

Immunisation history statements and COVID-19 digital certificates:

-   show vaccination information an individual has recorded on the AIR
-   are for use in Australia
-   are to be used for healthcare purposes
-   cannot be used for personal identification

International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC):

-   provide a secure record of COVID-19 vaccinations that is recognised
    internationally

See International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC) for details.

Flyers, posters and vaccine reminder cards

Vaccination hubs

Vaccination hubs have flyers and posters for display, and vaccine
reminder cards to give to individuals.

These resources provide information on how to:

-   link their services to myGov
-   get proof of their vaccinations in myGov or the Express Plus
    Medicare mobile app
-   get an IHI if they are not eligible for Medicare
-   find more information about COVID-19 vaccines
-   get their second dose of a COVID-19 vaccine

The Resources page has examples of the printed products. Flyers and
posters for display in service centres can be ordered from the Product
Ordering Portal (POP).

General practitioners (GP)

GPs can order the ‘Get Proof of your COVID-19 vaccination’ flyer to give
to patients.

Each box has 4,500 flyers but smaller quantities can be requested.

Note: GPs can only order the flyers. See the Resources page for how to
order.

AIR enquiry line

The Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) general enquiries line has
phone options for individuals and vaccination providers with enquiries
about COVID-19 vaccines.

See the Resources page for the options and Interactive Voice Response
(IVR) messaging.

Interpreter and translation services

Individuals with limited English, or who are deaf or hearing impaired,
may need help when contacting Services Australia.

Service Officers can:

-   access on-demand telephone interpreter services on behalf of
    individuals
-   direct individuals to information and resources in their requested
    language
-   refer individuals to translation services

See:

-   Process page to help with COVID-19 vaccine enquiries
-   Resources page for information about available services

Clinical advice about vaccines

Service Officers must not answer questions or provide advice about
COVID-19 vaccines and their safety, effectiveness or clinical
information.

For clinical information and advice, tell:

individuals:

-   to contact a vaccination provider
-   they can go to the COVID-19 Vaccine Side Effect Checker or call the
    National coronavirus and COVID-19 vaccine helpline. See the
    Resources page for links

health professionals to contact their state or territory health
department or specialist immunisation clinics

Medical contraindications for COVID-19 vaccines

Service Officers must not offer clinical advice on medical
contraindications for COVID-19 vaccines to individuals or vaccination
providers. Refer:

-   individuals to their health professional for information
-   health professionals to the Australian Immunisation Handbook. The
    Resources page has a link

Eligible health professionals can record medical contraindications for
COVID-19 vaccines using the:

-   AIR site
-   AIR immunisation medical exemption form (IM011). The Resources page
    has a link

See Immunisation medical exemptions in Australian Immunisation Register
(AIR) for a list of eligible health professionals.

Note: COVID-19 digital certificates are available for individuals who
have a medical contraindication (exemption) recorded on the AIR for
Moderna Spikevax (MODERN), Pfizer Comirnaty (COMIN) and AstraZeneca
Vaxzevria (COVAST). If the provider has recorded a temporary medical
contraindication, the digital certificate will show a ‘valid to’ date.

COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme

On 13 December 2021, the Australian Government released a COVID-19
Vaccine Claims Scheme to:

-   compensate people who suffered serious harm due to an approved
    COVID-19 vaccine or its administration
-   cover losses for $1,000 or above, if the person can prove the
    COVID-19 vaccination or its administration caused them harm

The scheme will have guidance from the Therapeutic Goods Administration
(TGA) about which adverse reactions are recognised by the scheme.
Independent experts will assess claims and people may receive
compensation based on their recommendations.

Customers can visit:

-   Department of Health and Aged Care website for more information, see
    the Resources page for a link
-   Services Australia website to find out how to submit a claim, see
    the Resources page for a link

For information and FAQs see COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme – managing
telephone and face to face enquiries.

MBS items for COVID-19 vaccine

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) has attendance items for a health
professional to assess a patient’s suitability for COVID-19 vaccines.

The Process page has a link to information about the attendance items.

PIP COVID-19 Vaccine General Practice Incentive

General practices approved for the Practice Incentives Program (PIP)
will receive a COVID-19 Vaccine General Practice Incentive payment when
they:

-   provide an initial and follow up vaccine suitability assessment
    service to a patient at the same practice, and
-   use a MBS COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment item

Payments are based on the MBS COVID-19 vaccine suitability assessment
services provided from March 2021.

See Incentive Programs for information about PIP.

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details
-   AIR forms
-   examples of immunisation history statement with COVID-19 status,
    COVID-19 digital certificates, SMS and myGov messages, printed
    materials
-   links to external websites and online tools
-   AIR enquiry line IVR messaging options and transfer points
-   quick reference table to get proof of vaccination
-   frequently asked questions from individuals, health professionals
    and Service Officers

Related links

Proof of vaccination and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

International COVID-19 Vaccination Certificates (ICVC)

COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
