
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to escalate a Medicare enrolment enquiry. It
also details how to escalate a Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS)
enquiry.

An outline

A Service Officer must try to resolve a customer enquiry at first point
of contact by using all resources available before contacting a Medicare
Health Programme Support Officer (PSO).

All vulnerable customer enquiries must be processed at first point of
contact. Service Officers not skilled in this work type, must escalate
to a PSO for assistance.

If a request is received to copy or transfer a child under 15 years of
age to another Medicare card due to family and domestic violence,
Service Officers must escalate these to a PSO who will escalate to
Medicare Consumers Policy for assessment. See Copy or transfer a person
or child to another Medicare card for more information.

See the Process page for the steps a Service Officer must follow before
contacting a Medicare Health Programme Support Officer (PSO).

If Service Officers are not able to resolve the enquiry, escalate to
Medicare Eligibility Programme Support Officer (PSO).

The PSO will give a:

-   verbal answer to verbal enquiries, or
-   request Service Officers to escalate the enquiry through PaNDA,
    include any investigations, notes and documents

Service Officers and HSDD Service Officers are not to escalate any
enquiries to the Medicare Consumers Program Support team directly. Only
a Medicare Eligibility PSO has the delegation to do this.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in the Document
Verification System (DVS) prior to processing enrolment applications.
The Process page contains details on how Face to Face (F2F) Service
Officers verify information.

Role of Medicare Consumer Program Support

The Medicare Consumers Program Support team is in place to help with
exceptional or out of the ordinary enrolment requests and enquiries.
This can include giving an accurate interpretation of eligibility
policies to help work out a customer's eligibility.

The advice we give takes into account all of the relevant legislative
and policy requirements and is used to assess the customer’s individual
circumstances. A final decision is then made that matches the policy
intent.

In most cases the Medicare Consumers Program Support team does not
contact the customer unless it is required.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the Document
Verification System (DVS) request form.

Role of Medicare Consumer Policy

The Medicare Consumer Policy team assess all Copy or transfer requests
for a child under 15 years that involve family and domestic violence.

Due to the complexities involved, the decision on whether the child can
be copied or transferred is made by the Medicare Consumers Policy
section.

Each application received is assessed on its own merits and under no
circumstances are Service Officers to advise the customer that a child
will be copied or transferred.

Related links

Access VEVO (Visa Entitlement Verification Online) program

Australian citizens eligibility for Medicare

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Manage Medicare scanning

Medicare - Eligibility - Your Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
