
X-rays (diagnostic radiology) services assessing in Medicare 011-20021152

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about diagnostic radiology services
in Medicare and assessing claims.

General diagnostic imaging information

For general diagnostic imaging assessing rules see Diagnostic imaging
assessing rules in Medicare.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items

Diagnostic radiology services are in Category 5, Group I3 of the MBS.
The item range is 57506 - 61109.

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online.

Information for health professionals

Health professionals can read MBS explanatory note IN.0.16 for
information about diagnostic radiology services or the Department of
Health and Aged Care website.

The Resources page has a links to these resources.

X-rays

An x-ray uses radiation to create a picture of inside the body. X-ray is
also known as radiography or diagnostic radiology.

Types of x-rays include:

-   Plain radiography/x-ray
-   Computed tomography
-   Fluoroscopy
-   Mammography
-   Angiography

The Resources page has a link to the Health Direct website for more
information about x-rays.

Multiple diagnostic radiology services (DIMSR)

Diagnostic radiology services are subject to the Diagnostic Imaging
Multiple Services Rule (DIMSR).

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about the DIMSR.

Multiple regions in diagnostic radiology

The MBS includes items that cover common combinations of regions. When
this occurs, the item covering the combination of regions should be used
and not the items relating to individual regions.

Where regions are scanned which are not covered by a combination item,
benefits are payable for each examination. Note: the 6-CMP return
message will appear if there is a composite item available for the items
being claimed.

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used in
text fields with claims.

See Composite items assessing in Medicare for information about how to
process claims with return message 6-CMP.

Multiple films for examination of same region

The radiographic examination of a specific area involves taking of a
number of films, for example, radiographic examination of the chest
involves 2 views:

-   posterior-anterior (front/back), and
-   lateral (sideways)

Benefits are paid once only for the radiographic examination regardless
of the number of films taken.

The exception to this is the plain x-ray of the spine items where the
item number differs dependent upon the regions of the spine that are
examined on the same occasion.

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used in
text fields with claims.

X-rays for comparison or not for comparison

A benefit is not payable if 1 or more films are taken for comparison,
for instance opposite:

-   limb
-   shoulder, or
-   hip

A benefit is paid for the examination of the side to be
diagnosed/treated and not for the comparison side, regardless of who
decides that comparison views are needed.

If a claim for diagnostic radiology services is submitted with text such
as ‘not for comparison’ (or to that effect), the claim can be paid for
both items. This is in line with the diagnostic imaging multiple
services rule (DIMSR).

The Process page has instructions to assess claims when ‘not for
comparison’ text has been submitted with a claim.

Medicare online claiming has a list of abbreviations that can be used in
text fields with claims.

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about the DIMSR.

Contiguous or non-contiguous body areas

‘Contiguous’ or ‘non-contiguous’ body areas with different set up
requirements is not appropriate text for x-rays. See Ultrasound services
assessing in Medicare for more information about contiguous body areas.

Services not attracting benefits for diagnostic radiology

Thermography: a benefit is not payable for thermography of any body
area.

Xerogram: a benefit is not payable for xero radiography of the breasts.
Where this is done together with conventional radiography of the
breasts, benefits are payable under items 59300 and 59303 once only
(where the other conditions have been met).

Equipment age (capital sensitivity)

Diagnostic imaging equipment must meet certain requirements to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

Equipment must:

-   be under the effective life age
-   have been upgraded and is under the maximum effective life age, or
-   have an exceptional circumstances exemption for unforeseen delays in
    replacing or upgrading equipment

See Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare for more information
about capital sensitivity and claiming MBS items.

See QITI for effective life age of equipment relevant to specific items.

The Resources page has a link to Equipment, Medicare and diagnostic
imaging on the Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Preparation of radiological procedure

Certain radiological services need substantial preparation. The
preparation items listed in Subgroup 16 apply only where the preparation
is by:

-   injecting opaque or contrast media, or
-   removing fluid and replacing it with air, oxygen or other contrast
    media; or a similar method

In some instances, a Category 3 item may be involved and would attract a
separate benefit for the preparation. A benefit is payable for both the
radiological procedure and the preparation, whether performed by the
same or different doctors. Reports to requesting providers are not
required for preparation items/services.

Note: other radiological services listed in Subgroup I3 include in the
fee for the radiographic examination the:

-   preparation of the patient
-   injection of the opaque media

Intravenous injections during radiography

Additional benefits are not payable for intravenous injections (for
example, Buscopan) during radiography. The injections are considered to
be a part of another service (for example, a procedure or attendance
item).

Radiographic examination of alimentary tract and biliary system

Plain abdominal film items 58900 – 58903 do not attract benefits in
association with barium meal examinations or cholecystograms (items
58909, 58912 and 58915). This applies whether provided on the same day
or the previous day, as preliminary plain films are covered in each
study.

Professional supervision for mammography items (59300 – 59318)

The services described in items 59300 – 59318 must be performed under
the professional supervision of a specialist in diagnostic radiology
who:

-   can monitor and influence the conduct and diagnostic quality of the
    examination
-   personally attend to the patient (if necessary)

Exceptions to the professional supervision requirements are:

-   emergency situations
-   remote areas

Note: providers do not have to apply for a remove area exemption in
these circumstances.

Specimen radiography

A benefit is payable for radiographic examination of excised breast
tissue performed in association with surgical items. The benefit applies
once, regardless of the number of lesions from 1 or both breasts
examined.

Control X rays

Control X-rays are those taken before, during and after an operation.
These allow the surgeon to check the progress of the operation. Benefits
for control X-rays should be paid on the basis of 2 radiographic
examinations:

-   1 before the operation, and
-   1 after the operation

Control X-rays for the insertion of a Smith-Petersen nail attract
benefit under item 57721.

Digital subtraction angiography (DSA)

Items 60000-60078 in Subgroup 13 relate to digital subtraction
angiography (DSA). Each item covers all preparation and contrast
injections other than for selective catheterisation. Benefits are only
payable when these services are rendered in an angiography suite. An
angiography suite means:

-   a room that contains only equipment designed for angiography
-   the equipment is able to perform digital subtraction or rapid
    sequence film angiography

Benefits are not payable under these items when the services are
rendered using mobile DSA equipment, as these services are covered by
item 59970.

DSA benefits are payable as follows:

-   DSA - a maximum of 1 DSA item (60000-60069)
-   Selective - 1 DSA item (60000-60069) and 1 item covering selective
    catheterisation (60072-60078)

The Resources page contains links to external websites

Related links

Medicare online claiming

Composite items assessing in Medicare

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Ultrasound services assessing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
