
Reciprocal Health Care Agreements (RHCA) eligibility for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 011-44060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility under Reciprocal
Health Care Agreements (RHCA) for Medicare and Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

Government intent

An RHCA is an agreement between 2 countries designed to provide
immediately necessary medical treatment to residents/citizens of other
countries who are temporarily visiting another country.

Section 7 of the Health Insurance Act 1973, permits the Australian
Government to enter into a Reciprocal Health Care Agreement (RHCA) with
other countries for the purpose of providing health care to residents of
one country when visiting the other. These RHCAs operate in countries
where the health system is similar.

The agreements cover:

-   eligible visitors who travel to Australia from a country Australia
    has an RHCA agreement with, and
-   eligible Australian residents who travel to a country that has an
    RHCA with Australia

To access Medicare services provided out-of-hospital, visitors need to
enrol in Medicare.

RHCA eligibility criteria, services covered and the period of cover
varies from country to country.

This document provides information on entitlement for visitors to
Australia from each RHCA country. Information for Australians visiting
RHCA countries can be found on the Services Australia website. The
Resources page contains a link.

RHCAs for visitors to Australia

The Australian Government has signed RHCAs with the following countries:

-   Belgium
-   Finland
-   Ireland (Republic of Ireland)
-   Italy
-   Malta
-   The Netherlands
-   New Zealand
-   Norway
-   Sweden
-   Slovenia
-   United Kingdom (including Northern Ireland)

Enrolment in Medicare

To enrol in Medicare under an RHCA, the person must complete a Medicare
enrolment application (MS004) form and provide supporting documents
required from the RHCA country.

The Process page contains further general eligibility information, and
specific information for each RHCA country including document
requirements and processing details.

Document Verification Service (DVS)

All identity documents must be verified in DVS. See Register a customer
for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for the
process.

Services covered

Eligible visitors are generally entitled to the following under an RHCA:

-   Medicare benefits for medically necessary out-of-hospital treatment
    except for visitors from New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland
-   medically necessary care as a public patient in a public hospital
-   some medicines available on prescription which are subsidised under
    the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), at the general rate

Eligible visitors from New Zealand and the Republic of Ireland have
access to the following services for the length of their stay in
Australia:

-   services as a public patient in a public hospital (including
    outpatient services) for medically necessary treatment
-   some medicines available on prescription which are subsidised under
    the PBS, at the general rate

New Zealand and Republic of Ireland visitors are not entitled to
out-of-hospital treatment, they are not enrolled in Medicare.

The RHCAs do not cover medical treatment for a person who has entered a
country for the sole purpose of accessing medical treatment or for care
planned before arriving in Australia.

Note: a New Zealand citizen is not considered a visitor if residing in
Australia for 6 months or more. For more information, see New Zealand
citizen's eligibility for Medicare.

Services not covered

RHCAs do not cover

-   private hospital care
-   public hospital care as a private patient
-   ambulance travel
-   care from a physiotherapist, occupational therapist, speech
    therapist, eye therapist, chiropractor, podiatrist or psychologist
    unless it is in the Chronic Disease Management scheme
-   acupuncture unless from a doctor
-   glasses and contact lenses
-   hearing aids and other devices
-   prostheses
-   costs someone else is responsible for, for example an insurer,
    employer or government agency
-   care that is not clinically essential
-   cosmetic surgery
-   checks for life insurance or superannuation or to join a friendly
    society
-   home nursing
-   Medicare benefits are not payable for Assisted Reproductive
    Technology (ART ) services (Items 13200-13292)
-   PBS subsidised In Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) medicines under the
    Section 100 IVF program. For further information the Resources page
    contains a link to Guaranteeing Medicare – aligning reciprocal
    health care – Budget 2017

Defence force personnel and medical visa holders

There are specific RHCA eligibility rules for defence force personnel
and medical visa holders (subclass 602).

The Process page contains further information on RHCA eligibility for
these cohorts.

Australian citizens travelling to RHCA countries

Australian citizens travelling to RHCA countries may get some publicly
funded medically necessary care depending on the individual agreement.
The Resources page contains links to information about Australians
travelling to RHCA countries on the Services Australia website.

Australian citizens living in a RHCA country who are visiting Australia

Australian citizens visiting Australia (meaning they have not returned
to reside) but are living in a RHCA country, may be eligible under a
RHCA, if they:

-   have been residing outside of Australia for more than 5 years and
    have not returned to Australia to reside, and
-   meet the eligibility criteria as outlined under their relevant
    country’s RHCA

The Process page contains further general eligibility information, and
specific information for each RHCA country including document
requirements and processing details.

Pathway to Permanent Residence for Retirees

The Pathway provides eligible Retirement (405/410) visa holders with the
ability to obtain permanent residence in Australia.

Customers can access the Pathway by applying for a Parent (subclass 103)
or Contributory Parent (subclass 143) visa in Australia. If a retiree
has lodged an application for a Parent visa subclass 103 or Contributory
visa subclass 143 they are eligible to enrol in Medicare if they were
residing in a RHCA country prior to arriving in Australia.

The customer’s visa subclass 405/410 may still be current or they may
have a bridging visa. This will display on VEVO.

The Resources page contains further information.

Temporary extension of RHCA entitlement for eligible citizens of Italy and Malta

Due to coronavirus (COVID-19), previously or currently enrolled citizens
of Italy and Malta had their entitlement automatically extended until 17
March 2022. They must be currently living in Australia.

The system will update their:

-   entitlement period, and
-   send a new Medicare card to the address recorded in the Consumer
    Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)

The Process page has details of what to do when a customer contacts
Services Australia.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   forms
-   contact details
-   RHCA effective dates
-   eligibility and entitlements
-   the Services Australia website
-   external websites
-   user guide

Related links

Permanent residents eligibility for Medicare

Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
