
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on the ways in which a vaccination
providers can access the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site.

AIR site

The Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site is accessed via the
Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal, which is owned by
Services Australia. It allows vaccination providers (and their
delegates/staff) to submit immunisation data electronically.

AIR site access

To access HPOS and the AIR site, individuals need a Provider Digital
Access (PRODA) individual account.

This includes when they are:

-   accessing the AIR site as themselves, or
-   on behalf of another individual or organisation.

Once an individual has a PRODA account, the account remains with the
individual and follows them regardless of where they work. Access to the
various programmes (service providers) linked to PRODA is controlled
within the PRODA account set up.

AIR site access recommendations

Service Officers should provide information on the AIR site access
options available to enquirers (PRODA Individual, PRODA Organisation
member, HPOS Delegate). The individual/organisation chooses which access
suits them.

The Resources page provides a table of PRODA access options available to
AIR users dependent on their provider category and role type.

Using PRODA to access the AIR

All individuals need their own PRODA individual account to access the
AIR site:

-   as themselves (health professional)
-   on behalf of another individual (HPOS delegate), or
-   on behalf of an organisation (director or member)

Health professional

A health professional with their own Medicare provider number (for
example, medical practitioner, nurse practitioner or midwife) is granted
automatic access to the AIR site once they link and log into HPOS using
their individual PRODA account.

Any health professionals still accessing AIR through the Authentication
File method should be assisted to move to PRODA.

The Resources page has a link to the following Health professional
education resources:

-   Accessing the AIR (AIRM03) - eLearning
-   Accessing the AIR site (AIRM03INFO1) - infographic
-   Registering an organisation in PRODA to access the AIR (AIRM08) -
    eLearning
-   Log into the AIR using HPOS (AIRM07) - eLearning
-   Add and link HPOS in PRODA to access the AIR (AIRM08INFO1) –
    infographic
-   Add members to an Organisation in PRODA and delegate access to the
    AIR site (AIRM08INFO2) - infographic

HPOS delegate

Health professionals nominate a HPOS delegate by using the HPOS
delegations function to grant other individuals (a HPOS delegate) the
ability to access and action HPOS functions on their behalf.

An individual can be nominated as a HPOS delegate by multiple health
professionals at different locations. Health professionals can also
nominate as many individuals as they like to become HPOS delegates. HPOS
delegates need to have their own PRODA individual account linked to the
health professional's Medicare provider number.

HPOS delegations are recommended where staff members (for example,
practice manager, immunisation nurse etc) need full access to AIR and
the health professional is happy to nominate them.

The Resource page provides information to help users decide which access
option is suitable for them.

PRODA Organisation Director

An individual with a PRODA account can set up a PRODA account for their
organisation (ancillary provider number) if they are listed as an
Associate or Authorised contact for the organisation on the Australian
Business Register (ABR). This person is known as the organisation
‘Director’ and they can link HPOS to their organisation (using the Add
Service Provider function) so they can access AIR as an organisation. An
individual can be a Director of multiple organisations and
sub-organisations.

An organisation Director can also add other individuals to the PRODA
organisation account using that individuals PRODA Registration Authority
(RA) number. These people are known as organisation members.

PRODA Organisation member

A person working on behalf of an organisation, such as a medical
practice or commercial vaccination provider (for example, practice
manager, immunisation nurse, finance officer) needs to have their
individual PRODA account RA number linked to their employer's PRODA
organisation account. They are then considered an organisation ‘member’.

An individual can be a member of multiple organisations.

Note: when the AIR is accessed either by a HPOS delegate or organisation
member, they are given the same access to AIR site functions as the
health professional or organisation Director. There is no ability for
certain functions within the AIR site to be singled out for access only.

PRODA individual account (AIR)

Individual PRODA accounts are required by all users of the AIR. Even if
they access the AIR via HPOS delegations or a PRODA organisation
account. They still need their own RA in order to be issued with their
own username and password.

A PRODA individual account does not expire and moves with a person
across roles or organisations. For example, it stays the same when an
individual changes employer or works for the same employer but in 2
different locations. It is recommended that individuals use their
personal email address and phone number when they set up their PRODA
account to maintain access.

Evidence of Identity (EOI)

The EOI documents used in verification must be an exact name match as
the name being registered on the individual's PRODA account.. Encourage
individuals to ensure they have the correct identity documents ready
before starting a PRODA registration. See Resources page for a link to
the Services Australia website for more information on identity
documents.

Registration authority (RA) number

Once a PRODA individual account is registered and verified, a unique RA
number is issued. The RA number:

-   identifies the individual, and
-   allows users to access HPOS

This number must should not be shared with other people.

To assist users, see Helping users to set up a PRODA individual account
on the Process page.

The eBusiness team is able to assist individuals experiencing issues
when registering for PRODA.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the AIR PRODA Individual User Guide – for internal use only
-   the Services Australia website for Identity documents needed before
    they start

PRODA organisation account (AIR)

PRODA organisation accounts are used by organisations with an AIR
ancillary provider number to access the AIR site.

-   Register parent organisation (pass proof of record ownership (PORO)
    registration questions, verify registration - emailed activation
    code)
-   Create sub-organisations (optional)
-   Add HPOS as a service provider by linking AIR to the organisation
    and any sub-orgs (pass PORO verify relationship questions)
-   Add members to the organisation and any sub-orgs using attributes

Note: The most common access added for organisations in AIR is the HPOS
access. Only a Director/Member with Owner-Access may grant this access
using the Delegable Attributes function.

Pre-registration checklist

Before organisations start the PRODA organisation registration process
they need:

An Associate or Authorised contact on the ABR with an individual PRODA
account

The organisation’s:

-   AIR provider number/s
-   AIR linking code/s (a one-time access code issued when the AIR
    organisation’s provider number was approved. This is sent to the AIR
    authorised contact person within the organisation. If the provider
    number was issued before 17 January 2020, organisations use their
    AIR site authentication filename as the AIR linking code)
-   details that are currently registered with AIR
-   full name and ABN and access to the non-publicly available
    information about the organisation held by the ABR (to answer proof
    of record ownership questions). The ABN registration must be active
    (not closed) and details up to date
-   email address for the verification email to be sent to (not an
    individual email address)

To assist users, see Helping users to set up a PRODA organisation
account on the Process page and Health professional education resources
on the Resources page.

The eBusiness and/or PRODA helpdesk team is able to assist individuals
experiencing issues when registering for PRODA.

Proof of record ownership (PORO) questions (AIR)

During PRODA organisation registration, proof of record ownership (PORO)
questions are drawn from non-publicly available information about the
organisation held on the ABR. The responses entered by the user must
exactly match the information recorded on the ABR record in order to
proceed. Users are allowed 3 attempts at answering the PORO questions
presented.

If the user:

-   changes the question presented to another question, or just views
    the questions, this counts as an attempt
-   is unsuccessful, the PRODA organisation registration is cancelled,
    and the process needs to be re-started from the beginning

The user will get an error message and option to lodge an Assistance
Required request if the individual registering the PRODA account:

-   is not listed as an Associate or Authorised contact on the ABR
-   their PRODA name does not match their name listed on the ABR, or
    they fail PORO registration questions

Organisations can Request Assistance from Services Australia at this
part of the process – these requests are not managed by AIR but are
managed by the eBusiness team.

Verify organisations email address (AIR)

Once the PORO answers are successfully answered, an activation code is
sent to the organisation’s email address.

To finalise registration:

-   users enter this code in the Email code field, and
-   receive an email confirming they have successfully registered the
    organisation in PRODA

The email contains the organisation's unique RA number which is needed
for other processes.

Add subsidiary organisation(s) (sub-org) (AIR)

Once a PRODA organisation is created, a person with an Owner Access or
Sub-Org Management attribute can create a ‘subsidiary organisation/s’
(known as sub-org/s). This is optional and is used to break up the
organisation into sections/departments etc. to independently manage
individual's or group's access to the AIR. Each sub-org must have the
same ABN as the parent organisation but needs to have its own AIR
provider number.

Example

A public hospital with an AIR provider number can be the parent
organisation, and each department of the hospital (that has its own AIR
provider number) can be set up as a subsidiary. Hospital staff are added
as members to the specific sub-org based on where they work, what their
role is and what information they see for each department.

There is no limit to the number of sub-orgs a parent organisation can
create. However, there is only 1 level of sub-org available. Users can’t
register a sub-org to another sub-org.

To assist users, see Step 5 on Helping users to set up a PRODA
organisation account table on the Process page.

See Provider Digital Access (PRODA) organisations for additional
details.

The Resources page contains a link to the AIR PRODA Organisations User
Guide – for internal use only.

Add and link to HPOS for AIR

Add HPOS

Organisations need to add HPOS as a service provider to access the AIR.
Once added, the user is taken to the Provider Linking System (PLS) to
link their organisation to AIR. Users who experience issues with linking
their PRODA organisation to HPOS can request assistance from AIR.

Users request assistance by answering the proof of record ownership
questions and selecting the Assistance Required check box. They will be
prompted to enter a comment. To submit the request the user selects Next
and Finish.

This is undertaken by a person with either the Owner Access or
Service-Link Management attribute assigned to them. Service Officers
cannot undertake this process.

The Resources page contains a link to information about this.

Link AIR using linking code

Ancillary vaccination providers are issued with a one-off PRODA Linking
Code when they register for their AIR vaccination provider number.

This code is:

-   generated automatically
-   sent via letter at the same time as their provider number letter
-   sent in a separate envelope to that of the provider number
    confirmation

The Linking Code is used to link an organisation to the AIR and verify
the organisation/AIR relationship. The user must answer questions that
verifies the relationship. As these questions are drawn from program
registration info it is vital that organisations keep their details up
to date with AIR.

Vaccination providers registered before 9 September 2018 use their AIR
Authentication Filename as the PRODA Linking Code.

Linking Codes/Authentication Filenames can be:

-   viewed by Service Officers on the Client Details page of the AIR
    site
-   released to a provider over the telephone upon successful completion
    of a security check

The Process page contains the steps to follow to find and release a
PRODA Linking Code for an AIR vaccination provider and how to assist an
organisation link to the AIR.

Manage blocked accounts (AIR)

When linking an organisation to the AIR and the user fails the verify
relationship questions 3 times:

-   the account will be blocked for security purpose and they will need
    to contact AIR using the Assistance Required function
-   Service Officers with appropriate access can unblock the account
    once they have established the relationship manually. If they don't
    have access, the Service officer will need to escalate to an AIR PSO

The Process page provides details on how Service Officers manage account
blocking during the linking process.

Resolve orphan links (AIR)

PRODA users who remove their organisations or sub-organisations that are
currently linked to HPOS may cause the system to create an orphan link.
To prevent this, Services Officers need to first unlink the organisation
or sub-organisation from HPOS to enable the user to remove the
organisation or sub-organisation from PRODA.

When the orphan link is created and the user attempts to relink the
service provider, they will receive a message that they are unable to
link as the identifier is already linked. This will prompt the user to
contact Services Australia for assistance, or select the request
assistance option in PRODA. A file fix will be required to resolve this
issue. An AIR Officer will escalate this issue to National Office for
attention (requiring an ICT file fix).

Service Officers with Tier 3 access can unlink or close the AIR provider
number link to HPOS. The Process page provides details on how to
close/unlink a provider number link to HPOS.

PRODA organisation members (AIR)

PRODA attributes are used within PRODA organisations to control what
management functions a user can perform on behalf of the organisation.
The person who sets up the PRODA organisation account initially is given
Owner-Access attribute and can then delegate attributes to other members
of the organisation.

An attribute is valid for 12 months and users are alerted by email when
it requires renewal.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website for more
information about understanding management attributes and managing
members and delegations within an organisation on the PRODA webpage and
a table explaining PRODA attributes and associated permissions. Note:
the ‘Indent’ attribute is not available to AIR.

Add members to a PRODA organisation/sub-org and delegate AIR access

Once a (parent) organisation’s PRODA registration is complete, a member
with the Employee Management attribute can add other users (for example,
staff) to the PRODA organisation or sub-org account. These are known as
Members. To be added to the account, each individual needs their own RA
number.

Members level of access is controlled by the attribute (role) assigned
to them. Members added to a sub-org with the Sub-Org Management
attribute can only perform functions related to that sub-org, not other
sub-orgs or the parent organisation.

To assist users, see Step 7 on Helping users to set up a PRODA
organisation account table on the Process page.

Remove members from a PRODA organisation/sub-org (AIR)

It is important that organisations remove members who no longer require
access to HPOS/AIR.

This is done using the PRODA Manage My Organisation function by
selecting them from the list of Members (this opens the members profile)
and choosing the Remove this member option. It can be undertaken by
members with Owner Access and Employee Management attributes.

Promote the use of this function to users to ensure AIR data is
available only to those people who need it.

To assist users, see Step 8 on Helping users to set up a PRODA
organisation account table on the Process page.

PRODA recommended browsers

Using the latest internet browser helps improve security. Providers will
need 1 of the following versions at a minimum to use PRODA/HPOS:

-   Microsoft Edge
-   Internet Explorer 9
-   Mozilla Firefox 30
-   Google Chrome 39

PRODA Assistance Required requests (AIR staff)

PRODA has the option for users to request assistance with account set up
using an Assistance Required function. The stage of the process the
assistance is requested determines who the request is actioned by:

-   PRODA Individual account set up: eBusiness Helpdesk
-   PRODA Organisation registration: PRODA Helpdesk
-   PRODA Organisation linking to AIR: AIR Helpdesk

The Process page provides the steps Service Officers should take to
access and action PRODA Organisation linking assistance requests from
AIR ancillary providers.

PRODA staff portal (AIR)

The PRODA staff portal is used to search for and access a PRODA
individual or organisation account details and enables AIR Service
Officers to:

-   View the RA number and username of the PRODA individual account
-   View the RA number and ABN details of the PRODA organisation account
-   View the individual’s personal details (for example, full name, date
    of birth and contact information)
-   View the service providers linked to an individual or organisation
    account and account status
-   View the organisations members
-   Make changes (update) to or assist users manage their account (for
    example, unblocking locked accounts, assist to overcome other
    difficulties)

Access to PRODA staff portal

Service Officer’s access to the PRODA portal and PRODA Organisation
Linking portal are controlled by Tivoli Access Manager (TAM) Group roles
and access requested in the ISP and approved by the PRODA business
owner.

-   Tier 1 - AIR Service Officers require ‘View’ access
-   Tier 2 - AIR Programme Support Officers (PSOs) require ‘View’ access
-   Tier 3 - AIR Business Programme Officers (National Office staff) and
    Business Development Officers require ‘Amend’ access

PRODA assistance for software developers

The Online Technical Support (OTS) Liaison team is the first point of
contact for software developers for assistance with PRODA. Direct
callers to the Services Australia Health Professionals contact
information webpage, see Resources for a link.

PRODA assistance for AIR Service Officers

Service Officers should seek assistance from AIR Program Support
Officers in the first instances. There are several additional sources of
assistance with AIR site access issues. The Resources page provides more
information.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to Health professional education resources
-   information on AIR site access by provider type
-   PRODA frequently asked questions
-   PRODA organisation attributes and permissions
-   links to Services Australia website
-   contact details
-   letter templates
-   user guides
-   IM005 form

Related links

Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) site functions

Escalating Provider Digital Access (PRODA) incidents, complaints and
feedback

Evidence of Identity documents for Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Provider Digital Access (PRODA) organisations

Helping users create a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Helping users self-manage their provider Digital Access (PRODA) account

Authentication and release of information for Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
