-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details for Service Officers about how a notice
to process of past benefits request. It also outlines the purpose of a
notice to claimant and how to issue a new one. For a copy of an existing
one see Medicare Compensation Recovery.

Notice of past benefits request

A notice of past benefits request is made to get the total amount of
recoverable Medicare benefits and care costs in relation to a notifiable
compensation claim. The request results in the issue of a notice to
claimant, and then a notice of past benefits or notice of charge.

When and how to make a request

A notice of past benefits can be requested before or after
judgment/settlement, or entering into a reimbursement arrangement.

If a Notice of judgment or settlement form (MO022) or Notice of
reimbursement arrangement form (MO027) is received by the agency and a
notice of past benefits does not exist or a Section 23A statement
(MO023) is not accepted with an MO022, a notice to claimant is
automatically sent. A notice of past benefits request is not required.

If a notice of past benefits is requested before judgment/settlement the
request must be made on a current Notice of past benefits request form
(MO026).

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Who can make a request

The request can be made by:

-   an injured person
-   claimant, authorised third party or legal representative (for
    example, power of attorney, legal guardian, executor or
    administrator of a deceased estate)
-   a notifiable person, compensation payer or insurer, or their
    delegate or agent

Note: an agent or delegate is another business, such as another insurer
or solicitor, who has been contracted to handle the claim. For example,
a state Worker's Compensation authority may contract work to an insurer.

See the MO026 Notice of past benefits request form - information
requirements table for the contents of a valid MO026.

Processing the request

When the notice of past benefits request is processed in MCRS, a notice
to claimant is issued.

Notice to claimant

A notice to claimant (NTC) is sent to the injured person or claimant:

in reply to a notice of past benefits request, or

if a notice of judgment or settlement form is received without a valid
Section 23A statement, and

-   there is not a valid NOPB at DOS,
-   an NTC has not already been issued, or
-   a statement by claimant (SBC) is not awaiting processing

if a reimbursement arrangement was entered into before a notice of past
benefits was issued

A notice to claimant has 2 parts:

-   Identify related Medicare history and care services letter (Z2800)
-   Medicare history and care services statement/s (Z2801)

A notice to claimant:

will not include a Medicare history statement if:

-   no Medicare services were received between date of injury and date
    of statement issue
-   the claim is for an injured person not entitled to Medicare however
    the Agency has been advised that care services were received in
    relation to the compensable injury/illness

will become an SBC when returned (Z2801)

will result in the issue of a notice of past benefits or notice of
charge

may be issued more than once for the same compensation claim. Each
subsequent notice will include services (ticked items) that were
identified on last the statement

may be re-sent (for MCRS or CCMS generated NTC, if a copy was
requested). See Medicare Compensation Recovery

Return statement by the due date on the notice

The completed SBC must be returned by the due date printed on the
statement/s. The due date is 37 days from the date the statement is
printed. This is the legislated 28 days plus up to 9 days allowance for
receipt by regular mail (post).

See the Z2801 Medicare history and care services statements/Care
services statement table for the contents of a valid SBC.

If the completed SBC is not returned, all items on the Medicare history
statement:

will be taken as related to the compensated injury/illness,

will be included in the total recoverable amount, and

must be paid to the Australian Government if the NOPB is valid when the
claim is finalised by:

-   judgment
-   settlement, or
-   reimbursement arrangement

Note: previously identified care costs on an expired notice of past
benefits will be carried forward and added to the statement with all
services included.

Before the due date, an extension of time to return the completed
Medicare history and care services statement/s and declaration (Z2801)
may be requested. The HOSC Act refers to the returned Z2801 as the
‘statement by claimant’. For more details, see Extensions, not
substantially correct, decisions and reviews.

When Services Australia will not issue a notice to claimant

If the time in which a notice of past benefits or charge must be issued
has passed, for example if it is 3 months or more after the agency
received a notice of judgment or settlement or advance payment
(whichever is later):

-   MCRS will not give the option to send a notice to claimant, and
-   the agency will not recover benefits and subsidies for the claim

See Notice of Judgment or Settlement.

The Resources page contains:

-   Forms
-   Letters
-   a Services Australia website link
-   case notes template attachment

Related Links

Process correspondence – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge – Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Notice of Judgment or Settlement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of reimbursement arrangement – Medicare Compensation Recovery

Extensions, not substantially correct, decisions and reviews – Medicare
Compensation Recovery

Search for or update an existing claim or register a new claim –
Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
