
Repatriation Benefits card (RPBC) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 011-60010030

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Repatriation Benefits card (RPBC) introduced
by the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA). The card is known as an
orange card.

On this Page:

Features of the RPBC card

The RPBC orange card has the following features:

-   The words 'Pharmaceuticals only' are printed on the face in order to
    highlight the entitlement under the card issue.
-   It provides eligible British, Commonwealth and Allied veterans
    access to the extended range of pharmaceuticals available under the
    Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) at the
    concessional rate.
-   It does not entitle the veteran to any other medical or allied
    health services, only medicines.
-   The veteran's file number is in the same format as the existing DVA
    file number on the gold and white cards.

RPBC card eligibility

DVA determines eligibility for the RPBC card. Some veterans only qualify
for the orange card.

White card holders

DVA White card Specified Treatment Entitlement Card (STEC) holders who
also qualify for the orange card:

-   have the same DVA file number for both cards
-   have two records stored on the PBS system (one for STEC, the other
    for RPBC)

Gold card holders

DVA Gold card Personal Treatment Entitlement Card (PTEC) holders who
also qualify for the orange card:

-   have the same DVA file number for both cards
-   do not have an orange card issued (because they are already eligible
    to claim all PBS/Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS)
    items listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits)
-   do not have any RPBC information sent to Services Australia

See the Resources page for information about how the card type and
entitlement are displayed in the DVA authority system.

Prescription processing

All orange card DVA entitlement numbers are passed through existing
validity checking programs, which validate number construction and check
digits for prescription processing.

As the number is the same for White card (STEC) and orange card
eligibility, Service Officers cannot determine which card is used at the
pharmacy for the supply of their Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
and Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) medicines. In all
instances, it is assumed that the orange card entitlement is used for
the supply of PBS and RPBS medicines.

Entitlement checking and allocation of Improved Monitoring Entitlement
(IME) warnings or rejections will be exactly the same as for other DVA
cards such as Gold card (PTEC) and STEC.

As with the existing PTEC and STEC entitlement numbers, the orange card
can only be used in the RPBS payment category. If it is supplied in a
payment category other than RPBS, the appropriate IME error will be
returned to notify the Service Officer and pharmacy.

Safety Net entitlement processing

The system recognises the additional DVA entitlement of RPBC when
processing Safety Net entitlement.

RNFC screen

The RNFC (Safety Net Data Entry Program) screen displays the DVA Link,
displays DVA number RPBC and is linked to a Safety Net (SN) number.
Service Officers should not notice any changes to this screen, however
RPBC numbers will display in the DVA LINK field.

RNFH screen

The RNFH (Safety Net - Patient Selection) screen displays the DVA Link,
displays DVA number RPBC and is linked to a Safety Net (SN) number.
Service Officers should not notice any changes to this screen, however
RPBC numbers will display in the DVA LINK field.

The Resources page contains information about how the card type and
entitlement are displayed in the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
authority system and a link to contact details for Veterans' Affairs
Pharmaceutical Advisory Centre (VAPAC).

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
