
Surgical operations assessing rules in Medicare 011-42060050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessing rules for surgical operations in
Medicare.

On this Page:

Surgical operations

Surgical operations are in Category 3, Group T8 of the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS).

Surgery means a procedure performed for structurally altering the human
body by incision or destruction of tissues. It is part of the practice
of medicine for the diagnostic or therapeutic treatment of conditions or
disease.

Benefits for surgical operations

Unless otherwise stated, the benefit payable for an operation includes:

-   performance of the procedure
-   repair or suturing of the wound
-   aftercare provided to the patient

Surgical procedures determine the benefits for both the:

-   associated anaesthesia
-   assistant surgeon services

Medicare benefits not payable

Medicare benefits are not payable for fees allocated to equipment costs
or the cost of materials associated with operations, for example:

-   staples
-   orthopaedic plates or wires
-   other consumables or tools

Multiple operations on same occasion

When more than 1 operative procedure is performed on the same patient on
the same occasion by the same health professional, it is regarded as a
'multiple operation' and is treated as one service for payment purposes.

Multiple operations are also known as 'multiple procedures'.

Multiple surgeons

Where 2 or more surgeons operate, and:

each performs 1 or more operations, but

-   1 assists the other, or
-   they assist each other, the surgeons are not considered to be
    operating independently

The multiple operation rule is applied to all the operations combined.
The assessment of the assistant's fee is based on the fee for the
combined operations.

The Resources page has examples of the Multiple Operation rule when 2 or
more surgeons operate. This includes:

-   Example of 1 surgeon assists the other
-   Example of 2 surgeons assist the other

Multiple operation rule

Payment of Medicare benefits for multiple operations is based on a total
fee for the operations involved.

Where two or more operations (other than amputations), are performed on
a patient on the one occasion, the fees are calculated according to the
multiple operation rule (MOR), as follows:

-   100% of the fee for the item with the highest schedule fee
-   50% of the fee for the item with the next highest schedule fee, plus
-   25% of the schedule fee for all other surgical items

When the results of these calculations are added together, the total
becomes the schedule fee for the multiple operation. This fee is used to
calculate the Medicare benefit payable (75% or 85% depending on where
the services are performed).

See Medicare benefits for professional services for more information
about rates of benefits.

For processes for different claiming channels, see also:

-   Medicare online claiming
-   ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare
-   Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
    Medicare
-   Claims processing in Medicare
-   Bulk bill claims in Medicare

Spinal surgery

Spinal surgery items are in Category 3 Therapeutic Procedures, Group T8
Surgical Operations, Subgroup 17 Spinal Surgery, Part 10 Operations.

Restrictions for spinal surgery:

-   Spinal surgery items 51011 to 51171 cannot be performed in
    conjunction with any other item in the surgical operations table
    items 30001 to 50952, when that surgical item is related to spinal
    surgery
-   Spinal surgery items 51011 to 51171 can be performed in conjunction
    with other items in Subgroup 17
-   Spinal surgery for scoliosis and kyphosis in paediatric patients
    (Items 50600 to 50644) can be claimed in conjunction with items
    51113 and 51114
-   Combined anterior/ posterior spinal surgery items 51061, 51062,
    51063, 51064, 51065 and 51066 cannot be claimed with any item
    between 51020 and 51045
-   Lumbar spinal fusion cannot be claimed for chronic low back pain
    before a diagnosis has been made
-   Other restrictions apply and these restriction can be located in the
    table on the Resources page

The Resources page has a link to MBS Online for more information about
the procedures and billing of spinal surgery services (TN.8.141 and
TN.8.142), and a table of the spinal items and restrictions.

Breast surgery

Items 31536 and 31548 are two distinct medical procedures and restricted
on the system:

-   These items cannot be claimed for the same breast lesion/site
-   Items 31536 and 31548 can be claimed together if performed on
    different sites

Where a claim is received for both or multiples of these items, the
claim must state that the procedures are for different sites or
different times.

Health professionals use the times on a clock face to indicate the sites
of breast lesions. If the claim includes text with the wording like '9
o’clock' or '3 o’clock', this refers to the site of the lesion.

The Process page contains processing steps for claiming breast items
31536 and 31548.

The Resources page has examples of text notations for items 31536 and
31548.

Surgeons operating independently

Where different health professionals perform 2 or more operations under
the one anaesthetic, the surgeons are considered to be operating
independently when neither:

-   assists the other at the operation, or
-   administers the anaesthetic

Where 2 health professionals operate independently and either performs
more than 1 operation, the method of assessment outlined above would
apply in respect of the services performed by each.

The Resources page has examples of this rule and how to calculate
benefits.

Conjoint surgery

This type of surgery involves two surgeons working concurrently
(sometimes from different specialities) to perform certain types of
procedures:

-   a principal surgeon leading the procedure, and
-   a co-surgeon working in their speciality

There are specific MBS items for conjoint surgery. The Resources page
contains a table with examples.

Two surgeons - One assists the other

Where 2 or more health professionals operate and each performs 1 or more
operations plus 1 assists the other:

-   the multiple operation rule applies to all operations
-   the assistant fee is based on all procedures at which the assistance
    was rendered and that have the word 'assist' in the item descriptor

The Resources page has examples of this rule and how to calculate
benefits.

Two surgeons - Assist each other

Where 2 or more health professionals operate and each performs 1 or more
operations plus each assists the other:

-   the multiple operation rule applies to all the operations (as though
    they had been performed by 1 surgeon)
-   the assistant fee is based on all the procedures (as long as they
    attract an assistant fee) after being reduced by the multiple
    operation rule

The division of the assistant fee is a matter for the health
professionals involved.

The Resources page has examples of this rule and how to calculate
benefits.

Operations performed in stages

A staged procedure is any operation undertaken in 2 or more separate
parts, with a break between the stages to facilitate tissue healing or
clearance of infection.

The Resources page contains tables with examples of different stage
operations.

Re-operations of vascular procedures

When a re-operation is required for vascular surgery, Item 35202 would
be used in combination with vascular items and the multiple operation
rule would apply.

This item is payable more than once on the same day if a number of
incisions were performed in different parts of the body as per the item
description.

Amputations

Amputation items are located in Subgroup 12 of Group T8 Surgical
Operations in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

The multiple operation rules does not apply to amputations. Where more
than one amputation is performed each service attracts 100% of the
schedule fee.

Where an amputation is performed in association with 1 or more operative
procedures, the amputation will be paid at 100% schedule fee and all
other services will be subject to the multiple operation rule.

The assessment would be based on:

100% for the amputation, and

multiple operation rule applied to the other procedures as follows:

-   100%
-   50%
-   25%

The Resources page contains a table with an example showing the
calculation for an amputation performed with other procedures subject to
the multiple operation rule.

Bone grafting

Benefits payable under the items covering bone grafts also include the
necessary obtaining of the bone graft from the donor site.

Where it is necessary to obtain a bone graft through a separate
incision, benefits are payable under items 47726 and 47729 in
conjunction with any other surgical operations. The multiple operation
rule applies.

Item 47732 applies in the case of a vascularised pedicle bone graft and
is only payable when associated with another item in Group T8.

Cosmetic and plastic surgery

Services performed for cosmetic reasons, such as face lifts, eyelid
reductions, hair transplants (except in certain circumstances), do not
attract Medicare benefits.

Where a claim for surgery does not attract a benefit, then benefit is
not payable for the following:

-   assistance rendered at the operation
-   administration of the anaesthetic (including pre-operative
    examination)

See Cosmetic and plastic surgery assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Fractures treatment

Orthopaedic items for fracture treatment are in Category 3, Group T8
Surgical Operations, Subgroup 15 Orthopaedic, of the Medicare Benefits
Scheme (MBS).

Where the treatment of a fracture:

-   is not specifically covered by an item, health professionals can
    claim an appropriate attendance item from Category 1. For example,
    the treatment of a fractured metacarpal that requires no reduction,
    could be billed as an attendance item
-   requires reduction on multiple occasions to achieve adequate
    alignment, benefits are payable for each separate occasion at which
    reduction is performed under the relevant item covering the fracture
    treatment

Closed reduction means treatment of a dislocation or fracture by
non-operative reduction, and includes the use of percutaneous fixation
or external splintage by cast or splints.

Open reduction means treatment of a dislocation or fracture by either
operative exposure including the use of any internal or external
fixation; or non-operative (closed reduction) where intra-medullary or
external fixation is used.

Obstetric services associated with operations

The multiple operation rule does not apply to obstetric items (Group T4)
or any associated operations performed on the same occasion as obstetric
items.

Assistant fees

Assistant surgeon fees are calculated based on the total fees for the
surgery performed by the principal surgeon.

Items 51300 and 51303 should be used by assistant surgeons to claim
Medicare benefits.

The fee for item 51303 is 20% of the fees for the surgery being
performed after the multiple operation rule has been applied. The
benefit rate is calculated using the fee.

Benefits for assistant surgeons will only be paid if the procedural
items have the word 'assist' in the descriptor.

See Assistance at operations assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

Sterilisation of minors

The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commissioner has provided the
following guidelines on sterilisation procedure conducted on minors.
Sterilisation of Minors - Legal Requirements - (Items 35657, 35688,
35691, 37622 and 37623):

-   It is unlawful throughout Australia to conduct a sterilisation
    procedure on a minor which is not a by-product of surgery
    appropriately carried out to treat malfunction or disease (e.g.
    malignancies of the reproductive tract) unless legal authorisation
    has been obtained
-   Health professionals are liable to be subject to criminal and civil
    action if the Family Court of Australia or another court or tribunal
    with jurisdiction to give such authorisation performs such a
    sterilisation procedure on a minor (a person under 18 years of age)
    which is not authorised
-   Parents/guardians have no legal authority to consent on behalf of
    minors to such sterilisation procedures. Medicare Benefits are only
    payable for sterilisation procedures that are clinically relevant
    professional services as defined in Section 3 (1) of the Health
    Insurance Act 1973

Gender reassignment surgery

Benefits are payable for gender reassignment surgery, both male to
female and female to male, if the service rendered is covered by an
existing item in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) and the service is
clinically relevant.

See General assessing information for Medicare for more information
about clinically relevant services

Neonate surgical definition

There are a number of items within the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
that relate specifically to neonates (newborn infants), for example
items 43801-43882.

These items are located in Category 3, Group T8, Surgical Operations
Subgroup 11, Paediatric Subheading 1, Surgery in Neonate or Young Child.

The Resources page contains links to MBS Online and Department of Health
websites, spinal surgery items grouped according to the item
descriptors, and examples of various item benefits for surgical
operations in Medicare.

Related links

Discontinued and abandoned surgery assessing rules in Medicare

Assistance at operations assessing rules in Medicare

General assessing information for Medicare

Cosmetic and plastic surgery assessing rules in Medicare

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Assessing MBS item restrictions

Medicare online claiming

ECLIPSE claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in
Medicare

Claims processing in Medicare

Bulk bill claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
