
Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for Medicare 011-40060030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about amending customer details in
CDMS for Medicare.

Incorrect details recorded

Personal details requiring amendment, such as an incorrectly recorded
name or date of birth, can be updated once the correct details have been
confirmed.

Incorrect details must be deleted completely from the consumer’s record.
If they are not deleted, they will remain on the consumer’s Medicare
record history.

Some examples of how incorrect details may be accidentally recorded
include:

-   when a consumer has been enrolled on an incorrect Medicare record
-   when a consumer has been enrolled twice on the same Medicare card
-   when a consumer has separated and updated their address before
    transferring off the Medicare card. See Separating safely -
    protecting personal details

Refer the enquiry to Medicare Consumers Program Support - Medicare
Consumers Section - Medicare Branch to delete the incorrect details.

End date reason code for Linked to Another Consumer

The Medicare Customer Data Integrity Unit merge consumer records as
required, as part of remediating duplicate Medicare enrolment records.
Non-surviving (or secondary) records were removed from the list of
Medicare records for My Health Record creation.

The Consumer End Reason for a non-surviving record in these situations
is ‘L’ (linked to another consumer).

Removing an end date from a record will result in the automatic creation
of a second My Health Record for the same person.

End dates with this reason must not be deleted. Staff must check the
individual’s Comments tab, which references the primary record. Staff
are to amend the primary record as required.

If there are issues with using the primary record, staff are to contact
the Medicare Customer Data Integrity Unit. The Resources page contains
contact details.

Manage personal information

For Medicare Public Eligibility helpdesk only

On 12 March 2014 the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) came into
effect and replaced the Information Privacy Principles (IPPs). The APPs
require Services Australia to change the way personal information is
managed.

The Resources page contains an external link to the Australian Privacy
Principles (APPs).

This function allows a new Tivoli Access Manager (TAM) group, including
staff from Medicare Public Eligibility and other program areas, to
delete incorrect information from record history details within CDMS. It
also allows a different staff member to log they have verified that the
correction has been handled appropriately. As part of the quality
assurance process 2, staff members are required to process the
correction.

Information available for deletion or amendment includes (but is not
limited to):

-   customer/s
-   addresses
-   bank account details
-   customer association with incorrect Medicare card
-   customer in incorrect Medicare card program group association
    history
-   program group history when customer was added to the group
-   customer comments (if applicable) when customer was transferred to
    incorrect Medicare card
-   customer Sensitive Information Indicators
-   incorrect Medicare card address in customer address history

Note:

-   group comments (if applicable) when customer was transferred to
    incorrect Medicare card
-   all programs affected by the audit deletion will be notified and
    asked to approve the amendment
-   comments are included for each request to explain the reason for the
    amendment

The Resources page contains a link to Medicare Public Eligibility
Helpdesk and the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) on the Office of
the Australian Information Commissioner Website.

Related links

Unauthorised Medicare activity

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Amend address in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) for
Medicare

Sensitive Information Indicators in the CDMS

Customer password for Medicare enquiries

Separating safely - protecting personal details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
