
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to action claims in pend for
bulk bill latter day adjustments (LDA) in Medicare.

On this Page:

Recalling a claim from pend

After background assessing is complete the adjustment claim has a status
of ADJUST. Any claim lines not adjusted are removed. The claim now
comprises only of those lines (original, new, delete and restated)
involved in the second stage of DHSC.

Each adjustment for a patient must be assessed on a separate DHAC screen
to examine the results of background assessing even when there are no
errors.

The format of the DHAC screen is similar to the DLAC screen.

The order (card number or alphabetical) of the claim at the time it was
closed is the order in which the claim is returned after background
assessing.

When the total of all 'original' lines is compared to the total of all
'restated' lines for a patient it may result in an underpayment or an
overpayment of benefit/s previously paid, the system generates a result
line.

This result line displays the system-calculated benefit adjustment
amount for the patient. If there is no change to benefit, no result line
is displayed.

Assessing

All assessing rules are applied and are consistent with claims
processing in DAPC and DOPC transactions.

Reason codes allocation

The system allocates an appropriate reason code to each line. The reason
codes are allocated depending on the adjustment action taken and the
overall result.

An adjustment to a line results in one of the following transactions:

-   over key
-   transfer
-   suppress

The Resources page contains lists of over key, transfer and suppress
transaction reason codes, and DCEI enquiry claim status examples for
adjustment claims.

Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island is covered under Medicare
provisions.

Return messages

If the sum of all benefit adjustments for the claims:

-   Zero or is less than $1.00, the message HISTORY ADJ $0.00 is
    displayed. Patient history is updated and the claim status of ADJ
    HIST is displayed on DCEI.
-   Results in an underpayment and the amount is $1.00 or more, the
    message UNDERPAYMENT $xxx.xx is displayed. This message indicates
    that during the next overnight run an EFT payment and benefit
    statement for the adjustment claim will be produced and sent.
-   Results in an overpayment the message OVERPAYMENT $xxx.xx. At the
    end of each month, a report listing all overpayments is produced.

Suppressed overpayments are excluded from the calculation of a claim
result. These services are not relevant to a provider and are not
printed on statements.

Final claim status

When a claim results in an overpayment ADJ OPAY or a historical change
ADJ HIST the status is treated as final.

These claims can no longer be reversed on date of processing (DOP) other
than the same DOP that the update occurred.

Subsequent adjustments can be performed on the original claim even if
one of these results was applied.

Payment of an adjusted claim

Claims with a status of ADJ PAID are paid in the next overnight run. A
bulk bill benefit statement and EFT payment for the amount of the
underpayment is generated for the provider.

The Resources page contains information about over key, transfer and
supress transaction reason codes for bulk bill LDA and examples of claim
status depending on the sum of the adjustment.

Related links

Online statement and features for bulk bill LDA claims in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
