
Oral and maxillofacial assessing rules in Medicare 011-42070000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the oral and maxillofacial
assessing rules in Medicare.

On this Page:

Oral and maxillofacial services

Oral and maxillofacial surgery is defined as the surgical specialty
which deals with the diagnosis, surgical and adjunctive treatment of
diseases, injuries and defects of the oral and maxillofacial region.
These services involve treatment of the mouth, jaw and face and are
located in Category 4 of the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

When performed by approved dental practitioners, these services are
often referred to as ‘dental’ services.

When searching for information regarding oral and maxillofacial services
in the MBS first refer to the item number. This provides a full
description of the item, the item’s schedule fee and advises if there is
any explanatory note containing additional information regarding the
item. Alternately, search the MBS using key words.

All relevant explanatory notes including QITI need to be reviewed prior
to Service Officers providing advice.

If additional clarification of the item description or explanatory notes
is required, refer to your Office Manager, supervisor or program
advisor.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS Online page.

Oral and Maxillofacial Schedule

Access to Category 4 is restricted to those dental practitioners who
were approved by the Minister prior to 1 November 2004. No new approvals
are granted.

The oral and maxillofacial services attracting Medicare benefits are
listed in Category 4 of the Medicare Benefits Schedule.

The services listed in the Schedule are concerned with oral and
maxillofacial surgery and are considered to be medical services.

Surgical/fracture items listed in the Schedule are subject to the
multiple operation rule and items are available for assistance.

Details of the services which attract benefit are set out in Category 4
of the Schedule Oral and Maxillofacial Services by Approved Dental
Practitioners.

Eligibility for benefits and processing oral and maxillofacial services

Benefit eligibility for these services is subject to:

-   services performed on Medicare eligible patients
-   services rendered by an approved dental practitioner

As services in Category 4 are classified as medical services, claims for
oral and maxillofacial services are processed as normal medical
services, that is:

-   referrals are necessary for consultations
-   associated anaesthetic services apply
-   the multiple operation rule applies
-   normal aftercare arrangements apply
-   principles relating to treatment of fractures applies
-   payment of assistance items apply

Approved dental practitioners for oral and maxillofacial services

Dental practitioners holding Fellowship of The Royal Australasian
College of Dental Surgeons (Oral and Maxillofacial Services) (FRACDS
(OMS)) accreditation or equivalent with Ministerial approval prior to 1
November 2004, may perform prescribed oral and maxillofacial services
listed in this category.

All dental practitioners approved for the purposes of subsection 3(1) of
the Health Insurance Act 1973 are recognised to perform oral and
maxillofacial surgery services listed in Group C2 of the booklet
'Medicare Benefits for Treatment of Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate
Conditions'. Approved dental practitioners can also request a specific
range of diagnostic imaging services.

Medical practitioners who specialise in oral surgery

Confusion can arise between approved dental practitioners providing oral
and maxillofacial services and medical practitioners who specialise in
oral surgery. Category 4 of the Schedule is exclusive to approved dental
practitioners, while medical practitioners who specialise in oral and
maxillofacial services itemise their services, as appropriate, from
those Categories relevant to medical practitioners, for example,
Categories 1 and 3.

There are also a handful of practitioners who hold dual qualifications,
that is, they are registered medical practitioners with specialist
qualifications and also approved dental practitioners. The payments
system identifies the appropriate item categories relevant to the
provider qualifications.

Oral and maxillofacial consultations, treatments and aftercare

This section provides information on benefits applicable for the
treatment associated with oral and maxillofacial services.

Access to these services is restricted to dental practitioners who were
approved by the Minister prior to 1 November 2004. No new approvals were
granted after that date.

Although Category 4 is often called the 'Dental Schedule' all services
listed in this category are concerned with oral and maxillofacial
surgery and are considered to be medical services.

All items listed in Category 4, except consultations (group 01) and
assistant items (group 02) are subject to the multiple operation rule.

Consultations

Consultation item numbers (51700 and 51703) must be used by approved
dental practitioners in the practice of oral and maxillofacial surgery.
The referral must be from a registered dental practitioner or a medical
practitioner.

Assistance at operations

Provision has been made in Category 4 of the MBS for payment of
assistance items. Benefits are payable for the assistance at an
operation performed from the surgical operations listed in Groups O3-O9.

The assistance can be rendered by a medical practitioner (under the
appropriate Group T9 item) or an approved dental practitioner (under the
appropriate Group O2 item).

Only operations that have the notation 'Assist' shown against the item
descriptor are used when determining which level of benefit is payable.

Aftercare

The normal aftercare arrangements apply to the oral and maxillofacial
surgical operations listed in Groups O3 -O9.

Multiple operations rule

The Multiple operations rule applies to the oral and maxillofacial
surgical items listed in Groups O3-O9.

Fractures

The principles relating to treatment of fractures by medical
practitioners, apply to the treatment of oral and maxillofacial
fractures by approved dental practitioners, Group O9.

Related links

Diagnostic imaging assessing rules in Medicare

Multiple operations assessing rules in Medicare

Surgical operations assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
