
Assessing complex Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) claims with clinical details 011-18120406

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing complex MBS claims.

Complex MBS claims and clinical details

Each medical service listed in the MBS is a complete individual medical
service in itself.

There are times when a separate Medicare benefit is not payable:

-   for a particular service, or
-   when it is rendered in conjunction with another medical service

The requirements for payment of Medicare benefits for these services is
usually included in the item’s descriptor. Other information on medical
services may also be available in MBS explanatory notes.

Assessing claims with restrictive items involves:

-   determining the basis for the restriction to exist, and
-   assessing if the restriction should apply in that instance

Health professionals may provide other information often referred to as
‘clinical details’. This is usually received as:

-   service text
-   note/s on the account, or
-   operation notes

Restrictive terms within MBS items

Some terms in item descriptors indicate a restriction exists between
services. If there is a term listed in one or more of the restrictive
items claimed, assess each restrictive item on its own merit.

Understanding terms within an item descriptor is important when
assessing the restrictions between some items within the MBS.

See Assessing MBS item restrictions for information about common terms
within MBS items. This includes examples of assessment outcomes for
claims with independent procedures:

-   ‘not being a service associated’, and
-   ‘not being a service to which another item applies’

Assessing clinical details

If clinical details accompany a claim, they are to support the payment
of restrictive services.

When assessing the whole claim, Service Officers use the clinical
details to:

-   assess the restrictive items only, and
-   decide if the restriction can be overridden for that claim

If there is no restriction between one or more item numbers, the system
has already been checked and that combination of item numbers can be
paid together.

Service Officers:

do not need a high level of understanding of the medical terminology
used in operation or clinical detailed notes

assess the claims using:

-   information in the item descriptor
-   MBS notes, and
-   any other information given by the health professional

Note: if the information is not clear to support payment of the
restrictive services, benefits would not be payable.

Health professionals must ensure that any services billed to Medicare:

-   meet the item descriptor
-   meet the eligibility requirements in full, and
-   are clinically relevant and accepted by the profession as medically
    proper in the circumstances

Other information to support the payment of restrictive services

Additional information may support the payment and can prevent claim
rejections.

Health professionals are encouraged to:

-   submit their digital claims with service text
-   notate the invoice or assignment of benefit form for manual claims

Health professionals can include text or notes against each item
claimed, listing the surgical body site or other relevant information
about the procedure. This reduces the need to include detailed operation
or clinical notes for assessment.

Use QITI to check assessing rules for particular items and instructions
on how to assess claims.

See the Resources page for examples of supporting text.

Restrictive items - why an item is restricting

Reasons that items restrict include:

separate procedures

bilateral and unilateral items

same areas of the body

complete medical service

procedures restrictive with an attendance or consultation service

legislative limitations in item descriptions, including these terms:

-   as an independent procedure
-   where no other procedure is performed
-   not being a service associated with
-   not being a service to which another

If a claim has one or more items where a restriction exists, the Service
Officer may not be able to determine if they can override the
restriction.

If the text or account describes 2 separate procedures that support the
payment of both services on the same occasion, then Medicare benefits
are payable.

Use QITI to check assessing rules for particular items and instructions
on how to assess claims.

For more information including acceptable text examples, see:

-   Assessing MBS item restrictions
-   Education guide - Billing multiple MBS items. The Resources page has
    a link

Escalations

If a Service Officer cannot make a decision based on the supporting
information, they should escalate the claim to their Programme Support
Officer (PSO). Use the Clinical Details Escalation Form and include the
reason/s why a decision could not be made. The Resources page has a link
to the escalation form.

If a PSO needs further clarity, they can escalate the claim to the
Medicare Assessing Helpdesk. Include the reason/s why a decision could
not be made. This may be due to the item descriptor being complex or the
volume of restrictions between a series of item numbers.

If a decision has been made and needs review/clarification, escalate to
the Medicare Assessing Helpdesk.

Enquiries about item rejections

Service Officers must ensure that the information they give to customers
is accurate when responding to determination enquiries.

When a customer asks about an item that is deemed not payable based on
clinical details, Service Officers can:

respond with script such as:

-   ‘Based on the supporting information that has been given, ‘XXXX’
    item does not satisfy the requirements to pay a Medicare benefit’

refer the caller to MBS item descriptors, explanatory notes and
legislation for information to support the determination

If a health professional seeks clarification on an MBS item descriptor,
suggest they contact:

-   their professional association/peak body
-   the AskMBS email advice service, see the Resources page in Assessing
    MBS item restrictions for details

Note: patients should contact their health professional for further
advice if needed.

Letters

Information given on letters sent to health funds/billing agents/health
professionals should clearly state the item numbers:

-   that are deemed to be payable, and
-   those that are not payable

Use the free form text section of the letter where an item number does
not pay a benefit to include wording such as:

-   ‘The supplied supporting information was reviewed and item ‘XXXXX'
    does not satisfy the requirements to pay a Medicare benefit’

Service Officers do not need to provide extensive explanations outlining
how a determination was made.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details
-   letter templates
-   Clinical Details Escalation Form
-   external website links

Related links

Assessing MBS item restrictions

General assessing information for Medicare

QITI assessing information system

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
