
Notice of reimbursement arrangement for Medicare Compensation Recovery 011-15030040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about a notice of reimbursement
arrangement relating to Medicare Compensation Recovery.

On this Page:

Reimbursement arrangements

Under section 3 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995
(the Act), a reimbursement arrangement is:

-   an agreement in writing
-   an order by a court or compensation authority, or
-   a decision of a person or body that the person against whom a claim
    for compensation is made is liable to pay compensation to reimburse
    the claimant for medical expenses and care costs as they are
    incurred

A reimbursement arrangement does not include payments where there has
been a fixed amount awarded for damages exceeding $5,000.

The References page contains a link to the legislation.

When a reimbursement arrangement is notifiable

Under section 13 of the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act
1995 (the Act), if 6 months has elapsed from the date the claim for
compensation was made by the injured person to the date a reimbursement
arrangement is made, the compensation payer must notify Services
Australia (the agency) in writing within 28 days of the arrangement.

The agency is entitled to recover any eligible benefits paid for past
medical expenses or care costs incurred by the injured person as a
result of the arrangement.

Notifiable reimbursement arrangements and appeal decisions

Claims initially accepted within 6 months can later become notifiable if
there are subsequent periods of disputed liability. Regardless of
whether liability was originally accepted and the timeframes, any later
periods of denied liability can become notifiable where the denied
liability is successfully appealed. A reimbursement arrangement made
because of a successful appeal decision is notifiable if:

-   the appeal decision that reinstates liability is 6 months or more
    after the date the claim for compensation was made

Such cases have recoverable costs for the period of previously disputed
liability now ruled as accepted period of liability on an appeal
decision.

When a reimbursement arrangement is not notifiable

If a reimbursement arrangement is made within 6 months from the date the
claim for compensation is lodged by the injured person, the claim is not
notifiable to the agency.

A z2654 ‘Compensation claim not notifiable’ letter should be issued
after approval from a Programme Support Officer or Team Leader. The
letter advises that any payment received will be returned and provides
further information on how a Medicare claims history can be obtained
including a Services Australia webpage.

If a payment has been received for a not notifiable case, also prepare
an email for finance to return to the payer using the email template
‘Referring a case to Compensation Finance’. The email template must be
sent to the Team Leader for approval, prior to sending to Finance.

If a Service Officer is unsure whether a compensation case is
notifiable, advice should be obtained from a Programme Support Officer
and the case escalated to Programme Management to determine if the case
is notifiable.

See: Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation
Recovery.

The Resources page contains a link to email and letter templates.

The References page contains links to legislation and the Services
Australia website.

Notice of reimbursement arrangement

A notice of reimbursement arrangement is a form or letter that the
compensation payer (usually the insurer) provides to Services Australia,
advising that a reimbursement arrangement has been made.

Contents of a valid notice of reimbursement arrangement

The compensation payer is encouraged to use the agency’s current 'Notice
of reimbursement arrangement’ form (MO027). Alternatively, notice may be
given to the agency in any other form or letter provided all required
information is supplied.

The Resources page contains a link to the 'Notice of reimbursement
arrangement' form.

The notice of reimbursement arrangement must include the below
information:

-   Injured person's name, address and date of birth
-   Date of injury
-   Nature of the injury
-   Names of all the parties to the agreement
-   Date the claim was lodged
-   Date the reimbursement arrangement was made
-   Signature of the compensation payer or compensation payer’s
    solicitor or agent

Where the date of lodgement of the claim and/or date the reimbursement
arrangement is missing from the notice, these can be obtained by
telephone (or an email or letter) from the compensation payer, agent or
their solicitor. All other information must be supplied in writing for
the notice to be considered valid.

The document will be considered valid and complete when some of the
information listed above has not been provided on the notice or form but
can be obtained from supporting documentation such as:

-   Appeal decision documents e.g. Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
    determination
-   Complying agreement
-   Tribunal document e.g. Certificate of determination

During mail validation, where there is missing or incomplete
information:

-   send a z2463 'More information is needed to process the notice of
    judgment or settlement/ reimbursement arrangement’ letter to request
    the missing information

Note: the agency will accept hand written amendments to documents as
long as they are initialled and signed by all relevant parties.

Where the notice or supporting documents are missing some required
information but include the injured person’s details (name, address and
date of birth), the date of injury, the nature of injury and the
compensation payer’s name and address, the case must be registered in
the Compensation Case Management System (CCMS).

See: Legal and requests for information for Medicare Compensation
Recovery.

Issue notice to claimant

Where there is no valid notice of charge when the agency receives a
notice of a reimbursement arrangement, a Medicare history statement and
declaration is sent to the injured person or claimant to complete and
return within 28 days.

See: Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery.

The References page provides links to legislation.

Amount to be recovered

The agency is required to recover the total amount of Medicare benefits,
nursing home benefits, residential care subsidies and home care
subsidies (Care Costs) paid in relation to the compensable injury or
illness.

The agency only recovers those benefits and subsidies paid:

-   between the date of injury or illness to the date the reimbursement
    arrangement was made, or
-   specified liability period for medical expenses or in accordance
    with decisions in relation to the compensable injury or illness
    determined by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) or other
    tribunal

Note: care is needed when assessing any tribunal or AAT decisions in
relation to the specified liability period for medical expenses and any
determination in relation to the compensable injury or illness.

A tribunal or AAT decision may determine that the claimant is only
entitled to compensation for a specified liability period or a specific
injury or illness and a review of an existing notice of past benefits
may be required. Consult a Programme Support Officer or Team Leader to
determine if a new notice should be issued or whether the case requires
escalation to Programme Management.

Note: the agency does not need to have regard for any ongoing medical
costs once the arrangement is made as the compensation payer is
responsible for paying these costs.

The Resources page contains a link to contact information.

The References page provides links to legislation

See:

Care costs for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of charge

A notice of charge must be issued within 3 months of receiving a notice
of reimbursement arrangement.

If a notice of past benefits has not been issued within 6 months of a
reimbursement arrangement being made, under sections 25(4) and 25(5) of
the Health and Other Services (Compensation) Act 1995 (the Act) the
agency must give a notice of charge to the compensation payer:

within 3 months after receiving a complete and valid notice of
reimbursement arrangement, or

where an extension of time has been granted for the claimant to complete
a Medicare history statement and declaration:

-   within 60 days of receiving a complete and valid statement, or
-   within 60 days of the due date for the statement, where it was not
    returned, whichever is later

A notice of charge is payable within 28 days.

If the agency fails to issue the notice of charge within the required
timeframe:

-   a notice of charge is to be issued to the compensation payer
    discharging their liability to pay any amounts owing

The References page contains a link to legislation.

See:

Medicare history statement request for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Notice of past benefits becomes the notice of charge

Provided the case is notifiable, when the agency receives notice of a
reimbursement arrangement if a valid notice of past benefits exists,
under s21(8) this becomes the notice of charge payable by the
compensation payer within 28 days.

See: Amount to be recovered

The Resources page has contact details, links to the Services Australia
website, email and letter templates.

Related links

Notifiable and not notifiable claims for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare history statement request for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Statement by claimant for Medicare Compensation Recovery

Notice of past benefits and notice of charge for Medicare Compensation
Recovery

Payments, refunds and debts for Medicare Compensation Recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
