
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims for Simplified Billing in Medicare 011-17033000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) claims being
transmitted via the Services Australia gateway system for Simplified
Billing claims in Medicare.

About EDI

EDI is simply the transfer of data between 2 parties, the private health
insurer and Services Australia, where services are transmitted
electronically as opposed to other means of communication.

EDI allows for the transfer of a file from a private health insurer's
database/software to the agency's systems using secure file transfer
protocol (SFTP). Services Australia will accept EDI transmissions 24
hours per day, 7 days per week via ‘Managed File Transfer’. Services
Australia manage both inbound and outbound files.

Once processing has been completed, the agency will transmit 2 reports
to assist the private health insurers in reconciling their claims - a
Statement of Benefit (Exception report) and an Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT) payment report (Payment report), for all successful claims.

Note: with the implementation of the new Sterling system from April 2019
exception reports will have ‘MEDRUC’ in the file name and the payment
report will have ‘REMADV’ in the file name.

The Process page contains information on Simplified Billing EDI claims.

Statement of Benefit

Information regarding both paid and unpaid benefits will be included in
the Statement of Benefit. The report is generated overnight, after
Medicare processing has been completed, and is then transmitted via
Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) to the private health insurer the
morning of the following day.

These statements will be transmitted daily, Monday through to Saturday.

The following information is contained in the transmitted file from the
agency:

-   minor ID
-   claim number
-   date of lodgement
-   number of patients
-   number of exceptions
-   total amount charged
-   total benefit paid
-   patient details
-   fund/agent reference number
-   Medicare number
-   card flag if applicable, space if not applicable
-   surname
-   first name
-   number of items paid
-   number of items rejected
-   number of exceptions
-   total benefit paid
-   item number
-   date of service
-   servicing provider number
-   amount charged
-   schedule fee
-   benefit paid, and
-   explanation code

EFT payment report

Information regarding Medicare benefits paid into a private health
insurers' bank account will be included in the EFT payment report.

The following information is contained in the transmitted file from the
agency:

-   number of claim payments
-   minor ID
-   function ID = M (Medicare)
-   total deposit amount
-   payment run number
-   payment date
-   claim number
-   date of transmission
-   BSB number (as registered with the agency)
-   account number (as registered with the agency)
-   account name (as registered with the agency)
-   deposit amount

Accuracy of data

It is the agency's policy that any data transmitted cannot be altered.
This is to ensure that all data held by the agency is accurate. Even if
there is an obvious change needed, Service Officers are not allowed to
amend the information.

Date of birth

Where there is more than 1 person with the same name enrolled on a
Medicare card number, background assessing automatically selects the
patient where an exact match is made with data held on the Consumer
Directory.

This removes the need for Service Officers to select the correct patient
where the first names are identical.

Referral or request details

Where a referral or request line is transmitted by a private health
insurer for items that are not subject to these requirements, background
assessing ignores the data and does not pass it to the FAPI screen.

This removes the need for Service Officers to enter reason codes on all
unnecessary referral or request lines during pend processing.

Patient demographics

Where a private health insurer does not have a valid Medicare card
number, they have the option to transmit the patient demographics which
include:

-   surname
-   first name
-   second initial
-   date of birth
-   sex
-   locality
-   postcode

Where there is an exact match with a record on the Consumer Directory,
the Medicare card number is automatically inserted during background
assessing and included on the statement of benefit returned to the
private health insurer.

Note: if no match is made the claim must be rejected.

Source office codes

Service Officers must logon to the EDI processing source office code for
the site.

The Resources page contains more information on EDI processing source
office codes for the site.

Access claims history data

Service Officers can access claims history data by referring to:

-   patient history (NHSI)
-   claim history (FCEI) and request duplicate statement (FPSI)

1-PREV CON message

Co-claiming 1-PREV CON will return when certain consultation items are
on a patient’s history and restrict with a Group T8 item, with:

-   a schedule fee over the threshold amount
-   claimed on the same date of service, and
-   performed by the same provider

The Resources page contains a matrix with the process for 1-PREV CON
message returns and templates

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
information on notional charges, Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
source office codes and default system operator numbers, Simplified
Billing control line modifiers and claims, Private Health Insurers list
and Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) Operator
Manual and links to the WDAM access request form.

Related links

Payments for Simplified Billing in Medicare

Pend processing of Simplified Billing manual claims for Medicare

Work Distribution, Allocation and Management System (WDAM) for Medicare
claims

Perform telephone security check for private health insurers in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
