
Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) 011-40060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to search and register a customer for
Medicare as well as how to search and perform various enquiries in the
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Search before creating a new Medicare enrolment

Before registering, amending or inquiring on a Medicare enrolment, a
detailed search must be conducted to locate any possible customer
records that may exist.

Begin by doing an Inquiry Search in CDMS using:

-   Family Name
-   Gender select All
-   Age or Age Range

Where CDMS returns too many or there are no search results refine the
search:

-   add the first initial of the customer's first name or any of the
    other fields

If unable to identify a consumer, search by the address provided on the
form to eliminate any possible customer records

An Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) may have been allocated to a
customer prior to enrolment in the Medicare program. For example, an
individual may have requested an IHI by using:

-   the ‘Request an Individual Healthcare Identifier (MS003) form’, or
-   the IHI Service in myGov

In these cases a customer record will already exist in CDMS. Ensure the
existing consumer record is used to associate the Medicare enrolment. Do
not create a new record.

See the Detailed search in CDMS table on the Process page for more
information.

Document verification

Identification documents need to be verified in Document Verification
System (DVS) prior to processing the application. The Process page
contains details on how to verify and record this information.

Where the customer is an applicant for permanent residency, or has been
granted permanent residency, Service Officers must attempt to identify
them via:

-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) or
-   Immigration data link

If Service Officers:

-   can identify the applicant via VEVO or the Immigration data link,
    Service Officers do not need to use DVS
-   cannot identify them via VEVO or the Immigration data link, Service
    Officers must verify the documents in DVS prior to processing the
    application

See Applicants for permanent residency eligibility for Medicare and
Permanent residents eligibility for Medicare.

My Health Record questions for a customer

My Health Record preferences are processed in the Medicare entitlement
screens in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

Applicants can answer My Health Record questions for themselves and
children under 14 years of age.

Forms can be used to enrol additional persons 14 years and over. These
additional persons must complete and sign their own My Health Record
questions on the form.

The Resources page contains a list of eligibility document requirements
to register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS), information on group and personal history
categories, contact details for the Eligibility and Enrolments team and
the Medicare Intertwined and Duplicate Resolution team.

Related links

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
