
Newborn child enrolments in Medicare 011-19042328

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about the enrolments of an eligible
newborn child in Medicare.

Medicare newborn enrolments

A newborn child is aged up to and including 52 weeks of age (the child’s
1st birthday).

A customer can enrol a newborn child by completing and lodging:

-   a Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) form (if also claiming family
    assistance)
-   the Medicare enrolment application (MS004) form, or
-   the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medicare enrolment and
    amendment (MS018) form

A customer can also enrol a newborn child via:

-   [] Medicare digital self service if not claiming any Centrelink
    family payments)
-   [] Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or Centrelink online accounts
    (if also claiming family assistance)
-   Participation in the Newborn Enrolment Trial at participating
    hospitals

For newborn enrolments enquiries, see Customer enquiries about newborn
child enrolments in Medicare.

To process FA081, MS004 and MS018 forms, see Lodgement of newborn child
enrolments in Medicare at service centre.

Note: if the applicant (parent) is still enrolled on their original
family Medicare card (with their parents), Service Officers must not
enrol the newborn onto this card unless there are exceptional
circumstances, See Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments
in Medicare for more information.

Medicare digital self service

[] If a customer is not claiming any Centrelink family payments, the
newborn child can be enrolled using either:

-   Medicare online account through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare Mobile app

Customers who do not have a Medicare online account will need to create
a myGov online account and link Medicare service to it, see How
customers create a myGov account and link services.

Customers can enrol their newborn in Medicare by selecting Enrol a
newborn, located in the left Services menu.

Customers must upload the Child Declaration (FA081) form or any
acceptable proof of birth document for newborn and if required, an
acceptable document confirming proof of relationship or parentage to
newborn.

Below is a list of some of the documents that the customer will see
online. For a more detailed list, see Resources for Acceptable proof of
birth documents.

Acceptable documents: One of the following:

-   a copy of the birth certificate
-   if applicant is the birth mother, the back page of the Newborn Child
    Declaration (FA081) form
-   if applicant is not the birth mother, all pages of the Newborn Child
    Declaration signed by birth mother and or partner
-   doctor/midwife’s declaration of birth
-   other proof of birth documentation

and the document:

-   proof of parental relationship or court order (depending on
    applicant’s parental circumstance)

Note: See Types of documents for Medicare enrolment for full list of
acceptable documents.

To process newborn child enrolments in Medicare received via Medicare
digital self services, see Processing newborn child enrolments in
Medicare.

Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) form

The FA081 is issued to parents after the birth of their child. The back
page of the form contains a birth declaration that must be signed by the
doctor or midwife and be stamped with an official hospital stamp or
hospital sticker that includes the birth mother’s name and date of
birth.

The FA081 is Services Australia's proof of birth document that can be
used for:

-   supporting claims for Family Tax Benefit, Parental Leave Pay and Dad
    and Partner Pay
-   enrolling the newborn with Medicare and the Medicare Safety Net
-   registering the newborn for the Australian Immunisation Register
    (AIR) and the My Health Record preference

[] If the customer has a Centrelink Reference Number (CRN), the parent
can go online via their Centrelink online account (accessed via myGov)
or the mobile app and complete an online claim. As part of this claim,
the customer needs to upload the Doctor/Midwife - Proof of Birth
declaration on the back page of the FA081. If a customer completes an
online claim, they are not required to complete the full FA081.

To process newborn child enrolments in Medicare, see Processing newborn
child enrolments in Medicare.

Note: if customer chooses this option, the agency will process both the
Centrelink claim and the Medicare enrolment will be processed as part of
their single application.

Medicare enrolment application (MS004) form

The MS004 is Services Australia's general form for all Medicare
enrolment applications. Parents can enrol a newborn child who was born
in Australia, by completing Part C of the MS004 form and submitting with
proof of birth documentation via email, mail or at a service centre.

Applicants can request to have the newborn added to their partner's
Medicare card. Where this occurs, both signatures (applicant and
partner) are required on the declaration of the form.

If the newborn child was born overseas, the applicant must complete Part
A of the enrolment form and submit with supporting documents.

To process newborn child enrolments in Medicare, see Processing newborn
child enrolments in Medicare.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander enrolment application (MS018) form

The MS018 form can be used by Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
Australians who are adding a newborn child to their Medicare card and
cannot provide standard identification for the newborn. For enrolling a
newborn child in Medicare who was born in Australia, Aboriginal or
Torres Strait Islander people complete the MS018 form and submit with
documentation.

One of the following documents is required to enrol an Indigenous
newborn:

-   Birth certificate or birth card
-   Centrelink document listing mother's name, place of birth and date
    of birth
-   Certification (on letterhead) provided by a medical practitioner
-   Passport
-   Hospital baby book
-   Section 7 (Referee statement and declaration) of the Aboriginal and
    Torres Strait Islander Enrolment and amendment form signed by an
    authorised referee

To process newborn child enrolments in Medicare, see Processing newborn
child enrolments in Medicare.

Indeterminate sex

A newborn child can only be enrolled in Medicare as Male or Female. The
Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) does not allow for
indeterminate sex to be recorded.

If a parent wishes to enrol their child as an indeterminate (X) gender,
they need to provide evidence which reflects the indeterminate status.

Services Australia's ICT systems cannot accommodate customer records to
reflect a non-binary or indeterminate (X) gender classification.
Therefore, once acceptable evidence has been provided, the parent needs
to choose either male or female option for their child's gender to be
recorded in CDMS in order to complete the creation or change of a
customer record with the current system limitation.

The Comments field at Personal level needs to be updated to record that
the newborn is indeterminate (X) by recording the text 'customer
identifies as gender X'.

Due to the sensitivity around these requests, Service Officers need to
advise the parent about this process using the script for request to
enrol a newborn with indeterminate sex prior to enrolling.

See Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments.

Deceased newborn

A deceased newborn is a baby who is alive at birth but passes away
shortly afterwards.

Enquiries relating to a deceased newborn must be handled with the utmost
sensitivity.

When medical claims are raised for the deceased newborn, the newborn
will need to be enrolled in Medicare in order to pay the medical claims.

The deceased newborn must not be enrolled on the parents Medicare card
unless specifically requested by the parents.

Service Officers:

-   must create an enrolment for the newborn only, including the date of
    death and process any claims
-   must not issue a Medicare card

The Resources page lists acceptable proof of birth documents.

Note: a Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008) form is not to be used for
Medicare enrolment.

If a parent is unable to provide a proof of birth document, the Service
Officer must confirm the details of the deceased newborn by calling a
medical practitioner who either delivered or treated the deceased
newborn. This may be evident by the medical claims submitted by the
parent for payment.

See Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS).

Stillborn baby

A stillborn baby is a baby who is not alive at the time of birth.

Enquiries relating to a stillborn baby must be handled with the utmost
sensitivity.

There are no services listed in the Medical Benefits Schedule (MBS) that
are payable for the treatment of a stillborn baby. Therefore, a
stillborn baby must not be enrolled on either the parent's Medicare card
or on an individual Medicare card.

The Resources page contains:

-   a list of acceptable proof of birth documents
-   script for request to enrol a newborn with indeterminate sex
-   Medicare digital self service frequently asked questions
-   links to the FA081 and MS004 forms
-   Services Australia website for submitting Centrelink documents
    online
-   Digital Newborn Enrolment (DNBE) escalation template, and
-   myGov website

Contents

Customer enquiries about newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Complex eligibility and entitlement type of newborn child enrolments in
Medicare

Lodgement of newborn child enrolments in Medicare at service centre

Processing newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Related links

Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments

Document types for Medicare eligibility and enrolment

How customers create a myGov account and link services

National Programme Support Officers (PSO) line for Medicare and PBS

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Child born overseas enrolling in Medicare

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Helping customers provide proof of a child’s birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Errors and exceptions with newborn child enrolments in Medicare

Medicare Enrolment Trial – Birth of a Child Pilot

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
