-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Service Officers to escalate work
items to staff with the appropriate Medicare Compensation Recovery
System (MCRS) skill tags or delegations and how to review hardship
claims for priority processing. It also includes information about the
purpose of and how to record case notes when staff view, access or
process a compensation claim.

Escalations

If an MCRS Enquiry case needs a decision by another staff member with
the appropriate MCRS skill tag, it will be transferred to them:

Automatically by MCRS if there are:

-   identified care costs
-   NOJS refunds or debts over $50,000
-   NORA refunds or debts over $50,000
-   Decisions that are required to be made at a certain delegation

Manually by a Service Officer reassigning it in Work Optimiser –
Medicare when:

-   they are unsure if a compensation claim is notifiable or not
    notifiable
-   help or advice from Programme Management is required
-   help or advice from an Service Officer (SO5) is required
-   a review of decision is required
-   a not substantially correct decision is required
-   a care cost calculation, amendment or breakdown is required

Escalation of work will occur either automatically by the system or as
directed by operational procedures.

Staff must add a detailed case note explaining the reason why the
Enquiry case has been escalated.

An escalated Enquiry case (automatic or manual) will be picked up by a
staff member with the appropriate MCRS skill tag via Work Optimiser –
Medicare.

Note: staff must not use the transfer assignment function in MCRS.

Help with decision making

Ask for help from a Service Officer (SO5) with decisions such as:

-   removing services for uncompensated injuries where medical evidence
    has been submitted for the decision. For example, brain scan,
    Medicare benefit service for a head injury
-   Bulk Payment Agreements and if a claim needs registration
-   exceptional or out of scope requests and enquiries. This includes
    giving an accurate interpretation of policies to help work out the
    correct course of action

SO5s will escalate matters to Programme Management if they are unable to
resolve themselves.

SO5s and Programme Management advice will take into account all of the
relevant legislation and policy requirements and apply them to the
enquiry and the customer’s individual circumstances. A final decision is
then made that matches the policy intent.

In most cases SO5s and Programme Management do not contact the customer
unless required, and will give instructions to the Service Officer. This
instruction is provided through case notes in the claim. The response
from a SO5 or Programme Management is also provided through case notes
in the claim.

Priority processing requests

For details about priority processing requests, see Enquiries and
authenticating a customer.

Case notes

Purpose of case notes

Medicare Compensation Recovery use case notes to document all activity
that occurs for every claim processed in MCRS. Case notes inform the
reader of the status of a claim, and may be required as evidence in
court to provide a true and accurate account of decisions made.

They:

are a public record of information received about a claim, including:

-   all actions, and
-   decisions made

are used to make informed decisions for the next course of action, and

are important if the following are involved:

-   Programme advice & Privacy Branch (Legal Services Division)
-   Administrative Appeals Tribunal
-   Ombudsman, or
-   Ministerial enquiries

The below Services Australia staff use the case notes:

-   Medicare Compensation Recovery, Service Delivery and Programme
    Management
-   Compensation Finance
-   Payment Assurance Operations
-   Treasury, and
-   Accounting

Case notes are used throughout the agency to record information, and are
a free form text field in the:

-   Medicare Compensation Recovery System (MCRS)
-   Medicare mainframe screens and systems

When a case note is required

Staff must enter case notes every time they view, access or process a
claim. This includes:

-   when viewing a claim, and no action is taken. The MCRS audit trail
    captures details each time a claim is viewed/accessed
-   following any communication with a person involving a claim
-   when advice is provided to another staff member about a claim
-   when making a decision in relation to a claim
-   when a payment or refund is processed, or recovery action starts

Examples of when staff must record a case note:

Service Officer records a case note about a claim, after talking to:

-   an injured person
-   a claimant, or their solicitor
-   a compensation payer, or their solicitor

Team Leaders must record a case note after viewing a claim to provide
feedback to a staff member

A Local Peer Support (LPS) must record a case note after reviewing a
claim to provide assistance to a staff member

A Service Officer and SSO each record a case note when an Enquiry Case
is to be escalated to Programme Management

Programme Management staff record a case note when explaining a decision
about a claim

Accounting Operations staff record a case note about:

-   payments received and allocated, or
-   when debt recovery action starts

Case notes cannot be added to a closed or terminated claim through an
enquiry case. To add a case note to a closed or terminated claim, use
the Restricted Claim Actions function. See Process for steps on how to
access this function.

Structure of case notes

Case notes must include:

a full and accurate record of work-related decisions and activities

details allowing others to easily understand when, how, where and why
actions occurred and the decisions made

why the claim was viewed, accessed or processed

actions and decisions made

reason/s why the action/decision was made, for example:

-   why a change of address was recorded, or
-   who authorised an action

requests for actions to be performed

instructions for future actions or decisions that are required

when, what and why information was requested or provided, and by who and
to whom

full name and details of the person spoken to during a telephone
conversation, for example:

-   solicitor’s name and solicitor’s firm name
-   family member’s name and relationship
-   compensation payer

Note: staff are only authorised to access personal information on
customer records where they have a business need to do so.

Do not include in case notes:

-   personal comments and opinions or information not related to a
    claim, as case notes may be requested for viewing by members of the
    public under certain provisions in the Freedom of Information Act
    1982
-   acronyms and abbreviations unless they are approved
-   information that is not relevant to the case
-   actual names of any staff member. Use logon IDs instead

See:

Resources for links to the:

-   standard case notes template
-   general processing abbreviations and acronyms, and
-   Privacy and Secrecy intranet page

References for a link to the Privacy Act 1988 and Freedom of Information
Act 1982

The Resources page contains:

-   links to contact details, forms and the privacy and secrecy intranet
    page
-   general processing abbreviations and acronyms, and
-   a link to the case notes template

Related Links

Medicare Compensation Recovery

Medicare Compensation Recovery quality checking

Medicare Compensation Recovery System (MCRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
