
Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net 011-43080060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information on the registration of families in
the Medicare Safety Net scheme.

Family Safety Net registration

Families must register with Medicare to participate in the Safety Net
scheme.

To register for the Medicare Safety Net scheme, persons must be enrolled
and eligible for Medicare.

Families can register for Safety Net by:

-   phone
-   in person at a service centre
-   completing a Medicare Safety Net Registration and amendment for
    couples and families form and returning it by post for processing

It cannot be assumed that all members on the same Medicare enrolment are
considered to be part of a Safety Net family unless they are registered
as a family for Medicare Safety Net purposes.

-   A person cannot be a member of more than 1 registered family, except
    where the person is a dependant child and more than 1 family shares
    the right to make decisions concerning the daily care and control of
    the child
-   If a child is enrolled on 3 Medicare cards, any enquiries must be
    referred to MPS Assessing as dependant children can only be
    registered on 2 family Safety Net registrations

Families who reach and exceed the Safety Net threshold during a calendar
year are entitled, once confirmed, to increased Medicare benefits for
any out-of-hospital services rendered during the remainder of that
calendar year.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Safety Net
registration form.

Family registration

A family's eligibility commences from the date of the family's
registration. This means that a family will not be paid any additional
benefits under the Safety Nets, even if the threshold has been reached
prior to the date of registration. For example, if the Safety Net family
reach a threshold in May but did not register as a family until July
they will not be paid additional benefits until July.

Note: for families who have a newborn and have not previously registered
as an MSN family, the registration date will be the newborn’s date of
birth.

As with the Medicare Safety Net, when a family reaches or is reaching
the appropriate threshold they will be notified by letter and asked to
confirm their family composition.

If a person submits a Family Safety Net Confirmation form and the form
has a 'received date' marked by a Service Centre, this date must be used
as the confirmation date. If the form does not have a received date
Service Officers must use the date of lodgement in PaNDA.

Note: family registration cannot be backdated.

Register a family for the previous year

Service Officers can only register a family for a previous year in
circumstances where the registration form was received by Medicare in
that previous year, but not processed until the next year.

In this situation, Service Officers can register a family for the
previous year by selecting the relevant Safety Net year from the drop
down list in Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). See Process
page table Register a new Safety Net family.

Note: registrations processed for previous years are automatically
carried over to the current year. A family only has to register once,
however, confirmation of the Medicare Safety Net family is required each
calendar year when the family is nearing the Medicare Safety Net
threshold.

Family eligibility for Medicare Safety Net

Members active on a Medicare card for the year of Safety Net
registration can be selected for inclusion in the family registration.

Card members who have been end-dated or deceased during the calendar
year of Safety Net registration, should remain in the Safety Net family
for the remainder of that calendar year.

Active card members suppressed on the Medicare enrolment will not be
able to be registered on a Safety Net family, unless they were
registered for Safety Net prior to being suppressed.

Family eligibility criteria

Eligibility for a family under the Medicare Safety Net is defined as any
active card member:

-   not already registered for Medicare Safety Net as a family contact
    (FC) or spouse/de facto partner (SP)
-   not already registered for Medicare Safety Net as a child
    dependant (CD) or student dependant (SD)
-   registered for Medicare Safety Net as child dependant (CD) or
    student dependant (SD) in ONE OTHER family (that is, dependants can
    be registered in a maximum of 2 families)

Therefore, members of a family will not be displayed for selection
during registration, if any member on the Medicare number keyed:

-   is already registered for Medicare Safety Net as a family contact
    (FC) or spouse/de facto partner (SP)
-   is a child dependant (CD) or student dependant (SD) who is already
    registered in 2 families
-   has an inactive Medicare enrolment status
-   has an end date on the Medicare enrolment file that is prior to the
    calendar year the registration applies to
-   has been suppressed for the purposes of Medicare enrolment
    entitlement

Family definition for Medicare Safety Net

For Medicare Safety Net purposes, a family can consist of a:

-   couple legally married and not separated or a couple in a de facto
    partnership with or without dependent children or students
-   single person with dependent children or students
-   couple legally married, or a couple in a de facto partnership,
    separated by illness (for example, where 1 person resides in a
    nursing home or residential care facility)

Note:

-   a dependent child is a child under the age of 16 years, or a full
    time student under the age of 25 years, who is receiving full-time
    education at a school, college or university
-   families covered by the Medicare Safety Net include same-sex couples
    and their dependants

Service Officers should refer to individuals as 'partner' when dealing
with enquiries regarding Medicare Safety Net. The words 'de facto
partner' carries the same meaning as 'spouse' which is still used within
the mainframe.

Family composition for Medicare Safety Net

The Medicare Safety Net is designed to provide assistance to individuals
and families with high out-of-hospital medical expenses.

Families need to register as a Medicare Safety Net family, even if they
are all on the same Medicare card.

Medicare Safety Net family members are allocated a member type at the
time of registration to identify their relationship within the family.

A valid family must be comprised of at least 2 members as follows,
either:

-   family contact (FC) and spouse/de facto partner (SP)
-   family contact (FC) and spouse/de facto partner (SP), student
    dependant (SD) and/or child dependant (CD)
-   family contact (FC) and student dependant (SD) and/or child
    dependant (CD)

Note: families covered by the Medicare Safety Net include same-sex
couples and their dependants.

Changes to family composition

The remaining family members will be treated as individuals for Safety
Net purposes where a family contact (FC) has been removed from a family
registration and the Medicare Safety Net registration does not contain
a:

-   spouse/de facto partner (SP) or a student dependant (SD), and
-   the eldest child dependant (CD) is under 14 years of age

Service Officers can only remove an individual (FC or SP) from a family
Safety Net registration when that individual has requested or provided
authority to change the family composition and the family composition
has not been confirmed.

Where there are changes to the family composition, for example through
separation, children must be copied from the original family
registration to the new family registration.

Where a child or student dependant is:

-   copied to a second family Safety Net registration, their Safety Net
    totals are not transferred over
-   already on a maximum of 2 family Safety Net registrations, the
    enquiry must be referred to MPS Assessing including documentation
    demonstrating care arrangements

Service Officers must not remove a child from the original family Safety
Net registration unless instructed by the remaining adult on the
original family registration.

Note: where an individual has transferred from 1 Medicare card to
another, and is part of a registered MSN family, the Service Officer
must check the Medicare Safety Net and record comments in CDMS. See Copy
or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card for more
information. For example, where a child transfers to their own card at
15 years of age, the Service Officer must confirm whether or not they
wish to remain on the family Safety Net registration.

When amending a family Safety Net registration Service Officers should
ask if the family member would like to check that their EFT and contact
details are up to date in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS).

Note: there is no automatic system review of student dependants, other
than the removal of persons 25 years of age or older as at 1 January
each year. The system determines a dependant's age from the date the
family registration is processed. Copy or transfer a person or child to
another Medicare card contains further information.

Inquiring on a safety net record

Service Officers use the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)
and select the Inquire on Consumer Details screen to check an existing
Medicare Safety Net registration. This screen displays all details of
members registered in the selected Safety Net family number, including
members who are on different Medicare enrolments for the current and
previous 7 calendar years. For more information see the Inquiry on
Medicare Safety Net record table on the Process page.

Service Officers can view the following information within CDMS for
Safety Net families.

-   Threshold Details
-   Consumer Details
-   Registration Details
-   Confirmation Details
-   Letter Details
-   Comments

Amend a Safety Net family registration

The Amend consumer details screen in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS) is used to amend the details of an existing Medicare
Safety Net family registration.

Service Officers can amend a family registration as follows:

-   Amend family member types
-   Remove family member
-   Add family member
-   End date family
-   Request a letter
-   Add comments
-   Confirm details

Note: a person can leave a family Safety Net after the threshold has
been reached providing the family Safety Net composition has not been
confirmed.

For more information see the Amend a Medicare Safety Net family
registration table on the Process page.

A member of the public cannot remove their spouse from the family Safety
Net registration. The requestor (FC or SP) can only remove themselves.

Note: once a Medicare Safety Net Family has been confirmed, Service
Officers cannot remove any members from the registration until the
following calendar year. New family members (including newborns) can be
added to a Medicare Safety Net Family after the family has been
confirmed, it is recommended that all changes (adding or removing
members) are processed before a safety net is confirmed.

Deceased or end-dated persons registered on a Safety Net registration

Where Services Australia has received notification that a person is
deceased or end-dated do not remove them from the family Safety Net
registration as they are automatically removed at the end of the
calendar year.

If required the Service Officers must amend the Safety Net composition.

Person is deceased or end-dated and there is a partner registered

Where a Service Officer has determined that the:

deceased or end-dated person is the family contact (FC)

Safety Net registration contains a spouse/de facto partner (SP)

the Service Officer must change the:

-   FC to the SP
-   SP to the FC

This will ensure that where a confirmation letter is generated it is
sent to the appropriate family member, as the confirmation letter will
be suppressed if the FC is deceased or end-dated.

Person is deceased or end-dated where there is no partner, no student dependant or child 14 years of age or older registered

The Service Officer must not change the Safety Net registration where
they have determined the:

-   deceased or end-dated person is the family contact (FC)
-   Safety Net registration does not contain a spouse/de facto partner
    (SP) or student dependant (SD), and
-   eldest child dependant (CD) is under 14 years of age

Medicare Safety Net end-of-year roll over

The end-of-year roll over will automatically delete any end-dated and
deceased persons from an existing family Safety Net registration. Where
there is no valid family contact (FC) the Safety Net registration will
be deleted.

Medicare Safety Net confirmation

When a family reaches 70% of the Safety Net threshold, the family
contact is automatically sent a Letter F and a Family Safety Net
Confirmation form requesting them to confirm the composition of the
family.

Confirming a registered Safety Net family can be undertaken online (in
certain circumstances), over the phone, in writing or at a service
centre.

Confirming Medicare Safety Net online

[]The registered family contact (FC) or spouse/partner (SP) can confirm
their Medicare Safety Net family for the previous and/or current
calendar year online by either using their:

-   Medicare online account through myGov, or
-   Express Plus Medicare mobile app

Customers who do not have a Medicare online account will need to create
a myGov online account and link Medicare service to it. See How
customers create a myGov account and link services.

The ‘Confirm your family’ service is available on the ‘Medicare Safety
Net’ screen for the previous and/or current calendar year for customers
who:

-   have a Medicare online account
-   whose family has reached 70% of the Medicare Safety Net threshold
-   are registered as the family contact (FC) or spouse/partner (SP)
-   haven’t confirmed their family for the relevant calendar year

Customers who do not meet the above criteria will not be able to use the
service. They can confirm their family by using existing channels.

The ‘Confirm your family’ service advises customers to contact us if:

-   the customer needs to make changes to their family registration
-   a member of the family is deceased
-   an unexpected system error occurs
-   the family registration is invalid, see Family definition for
    Medicare Safety Net

See also: Using Medicare self service and the Resources page for a user
guide to help customers confirm their Medicare Safety Net family online.

Medicare Safety Net confirmation over the phone, at a service centre or
in writing

On receipt of the completed confirmation form, or confirmation request
from an eligible family member, Service Officers must update the family
registration on the Confirmation Details tab of the Consumer Directory
Maintenance System (CDMS) Amend Medicare Safety Net Details screen to
indicate the family has been confirmed. Service Officers must also
update the contact details as part of confirming the Medicare Safety
Net.

If a person submits a Family Safety Net Confirmation form and the form
has a 'received date' marked by a Service Centre, this date must be used
as the confirmation date. If the form does not have a received date
Service Officers must use the date of lodgement in PaNDA.

If a family has been confirmed for the calendar year the Confirmation
details tab of the CDMS Inquire/Amend Medicare Safety Net Details page
will show:

-   a status of ‘Confirmed’
-   the Confirmation channel and confirmation date
-   the name of the family member that requested the confirmation

See the Confirm registered Medicare Safety Net family table on the
Process page.

Section 10AE(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 states that a person
confirming the family composition must be a member of the registered
Medicare Safety Net family.

Departmental policy states that any individual who is part of the
registered Safety Net family and aged 14 years of age or older can
confirm the family composition.

Note: once a Medicare Safety Net Family has been confirmed, Service
Officers cannot remove any members from the registration until the
following calendar year. New family members (including newborns) can be
added to a Medicare Safety Net Family after the family has been
confirmed, it is recommended that all changes (adding or removing
members) are processed before a safety net is confirmed.

The Resources page contains a link to the family Safety Net Confirmation
form.

Standards for Medicare Safety Net forms

A person can complete Medicare Safety Net forms on their computer using
Adobe Acrobat Reader on some browsers, or they can print it. They must
consent:

-   electronically, or
-   manually

When filling in the form, the person must:

-   declare the information is true and correct
-   key or write their full name (middle name/s not mandatory)
-   tick they have read, understood and agree
-   key or write the date (not mandatory)

Services Officers must accept Medicare enrolment forms where people
have:

-   previously signed in all required fields
-   electronically signed in all required fields
-   declared in all required fields

If the person has not completed all required fields correctly, return
the form with the appropriate letter.

Medicare Safety Net registration amendments and confirmation

Medicare Safety Net registrations, amendments and confirmation can be
undertaken at a service centre, in writing or over the phone.

Note: once a Medicare Safety Net Family has been confirmed, Service
Officers cannot remove any members from the registration until the
following calendar year. New family members (including newborns) can be
added to a Medicare Safety Net Family after the family has been
confirmed, it is recommended that all changes (adding or removing
members) are processed before a safety net is confirmed.

Registration at a service centre

Service Officers are able to register, amend and confirm Medicare Safety
Net compositions when a member of the registered family is present in a
service centre without the need to complete a Medicare Safety Net
registration, amendment or confirmation form.

Note: any family member who is 14 years of age or over can verify the
family composition.

The printed receipt must be used when the family member is present in a
service centre. If the person is not present a Safety Net registration
and amendments form can be completed and posted to the department.
Alternatively, Safety Net registration and amendments can be made by
phoning Medicare.

Registration over the phone

Medicare Safety Net registrations, amendments and confirmation can be
undertaken over the phone. See Phone registrations for Medicare Safety
Net.

The Resources page has:

-   contact details for the Assessing and Benefits team
-   information and a link to Public Letters and the Family Safety Net
    Confirmation form
-   a link to the Tier 3 Safety Net escalation form
-   information on the family member types for Medicare Safety Net, and
-   user help guides

Related links

Register children (including children in care) for Medicare Safety Net

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Medicare Safety Net

Medicare Safety Net thresholds

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Phone registrations for Medicare Safety Net

Process Medicare Safety Net claims

Register a customer for Medicare in the Consumer Directory Maintenance
System (CDMS)

Medicare Safety Net letters

Escalation process for Medicare Eligibility 011-44015000

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
