
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an individual’s consent to include Services
Australia administered programme information (Medicare information) in a
My Health Record.

On this Page:

Setting consents

An individual or authorised representative can set consents when they
apply for a My Health Record.

Consents can be updated by the individual at any time. If an individual
updates consent due to separating from a relationship, there are key
tasks they should consider to protect their personal information. See
Separating safely - protecting personal details 102-22060707.

The My Health Record System Operator handles consent enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

Medicare history included in a record

From the date of consent, the individual can choose to include:

-   the previous 2 years' data (where available), and/or
-   future information

The My Health Record System Operator handles these enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

Ending consents

Consent ends when:

-   an individual or authorised representative withdraws consent
-   an individual or authorised representative cancels their or their
    dependant’s record
-   an individual dies

If an individual ends consent due to separating from a relationship,
there are key tasks they should consider to protect their personal
information. See Separating safely - protecting personal details
102-22060707.

Medicare information already available in the record remains in the My
Health Record system.

The My Health Record System Operator handles consent enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

Re-instating consent

Consent can be re-instated when an individual or authorised
representative:

-   updates previously withdrawn consents
-   re-registers for a My Health Record

The individual will again have the option to include the previous 2
years of Medicare data (where available) to their or their dependant’s
record. Depending on the time between withdrawal of consent and
re-consenting, there may be a gap in Medicare data:

-   If less than two years has passed since the individual cancelled
    consent/record, there will be no gap in their Medicare information
    if they include previous 2 years of data
-   If more than two years has passed since the individual cancelled
    consent/record, there will be a gap in their Medicare information if
    they include previous 2 years of data

The My Health Record System Operator handles consent enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

Medicare information in a child’s record

Setting consents will trigger information from all the Medicare cards
the child is on to be included in the record, regardless of which
authorised representative gives consent.

All authorised representatives can update consents for a child at any
time until the child turns 14. This could mean a non-custodial parent
who has court appointed visitation rights can view and amend consents.

The My Health Record System Operator handles consent enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

When consents can’t be set for a child

An authorised representative can’t set consents if the child:

-   has taken control of their My Health Record and set their own
    consents (if either over 14 or an independent minor)
-   is over 14 years of age at the time the authorised representative
    registers them for a My Health Record

The My Health Record System Operator handles consent enquiries. See the
‘My Health Record enquiry’ table on the Process page of The My Health
Record system – Your Health.

The Resources page contains a link to the My Health Record Website.

Related links

Medicare information in the My Health Record system

Document details in a My Health Record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
