
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on processing claims when a new
Safety Net threshold has been met and in particular Services Australia's
acceptance of partially paid claims. Note: as at 1 July 2016 Norfolk
Island is covered under Medicare provisions.

On this Page:

Fully paid accounts when Medicare Safety Net met

Where a fully paid account is claimed, the claim is processed as paid
and the claimant is reimbursed the appropriate Medicare benefit plus 80%
of the remaining out-of-pocket (OOP) expenses or the Extended Medicare
Safety Net (EMSN) benefit cap, when the claimant has reached their
relevant Medicare Safety Net threshold.

Service Officers must check to ensure that there are no outstanding
balances on the account. The system then calculates the benefit
automatically without any Service Officers intervention.

The Resources page contains an example of how the system calculates the
benefit on fully paid accounts when the Medicare Safety Net has been
met.

Partially paid accounts when Medicare Safety Net met

Legislation states that where an individual has met their Safety Net
threshold, they need only pay a maximum of 20% of the out-of-pocket
(OOP) expenses.

This means that Services Australia (the agency) accepts partially paid
accounts (where at least 20% of the OOP has been paid) as well as fully
paid and unpaid accounts.

This also means that some health professionals may only charge claimants
20% of the OOP who they believe or know have reached the Safety Net
threshold. In this case, claimants only incur 20% of the OOP expense and
health professionals are reimbursed the Medicare benefit plus 80% of the
OOP or the Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN) benefit cap via a pay
doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque.

Note: where the item is subject to an Extended Medicare Safety Net
(EMSN) benefit cap the 20% of the OOP expense paid by the claimant may
not be sufficient to pay the account in full and the account is treated
as an unpaid account.

Exactly 20 per cent of OOP paid

The agency automatically processes partially paid accounts where the
claimant has paid exactly 20% of the out-of-pocket (OOP).

When processing a claim where 20% of the OOP has been paid, the system
prompts Service Officers to enter the amount paid by the claimant and it
then calculates the benefit payable automatically.

The Resources page contains an example of when 20% of the OOP has been
paid.

Less than 20 per cent of OOP paid

Where a claimant has paid less than 20% of the out-of-pocket (OOP), the
system asks for the partial payment to be keyed because it does not know
the calculation until all figures are entered.

When the system recognises that the partial payment is less than 20% of
the OOP, the message '8-PPMT<20%' displays.

Where the claimant is:

Present or contacted via telephone:

-   Service Officers should advise that this claim will be processed as
    unpaid, only paying the standard Medicare benefit. Alternatively,
    when the claimant pays the account, an additional benefit would be
    payable

Not present, for example, claims lodged by post or digitally:

-   The claim is to be processed as unpaid

Note:

-   Where the claim is processed as unpaid, the system disregards the
    partial payment entered and the claim is processed as unpaid. The
    pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheque is for the Medicare benefit
    only
-   Verification is required for a further benefit to be paid. The
    message 'Extra benefits may be paid with proof of payment to
    Medicare' on the PDVC cheque statement advises this

The Resources page contains an examples of when less than 20% of the OOP
has been paid and verification is required for a further benefit.

More than 20 per cent of OOP paid

Claimants may sometimes pay more than 20% of the out-of-pocket (OOP) due
to health professionals not knowing what is exactly 20% of the OOP.

In this situation, the benefit payable from the claim must be split
between the health professionals and the claimant.

When the claimant has paid more than the 20% OOP, but less than the
health professionals charge on the account, process the claim recording
the amount of partial payment where prompted.

A message displays advising that the claim cannot be finalised at this
stage because payment must be split between the health professional and
the claimant. The claim must be pended and forwarded to MPS Assessing
for full assessment and payment of benefit.

The Resources page contains an example of when more than 20% of the OOP
has been paid.

More than 100 per cent of OOP paid

When the claimant has paid more than 100% of the out-of-pocket (OOP),
Service Officers are prompted to enter the partial payment amount and
should process the claim as more than 20% of OOP paid.

The Resources page contains an example of when more than 20% of the OOP
has been paid.

Identification of a partially paid account

Health professionals must provide the following details on an account:

-   date
-   amount charged
-   total amount paid
-   amount outstanding

This assists Service Officers in identifying where an account is unpaid,
fully paid or partially paid.

The amount a claimant has paid towards the account, as well as the
amount still outstanding, is recorded on all accounts.

When this information is not included on the account the claim is to be
treated as unpaid and processed as a pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) for
the standard benefit only, and the claimant advised to pay the balance
as per current procedure.

When the amount paid is less than 20% of the out-of-pocket (OOP).

The Resources page contains an example of when less than 20% of the OOP
has been paid.

Unpaid accounts when Medicare Safety Net met

Where an unpaid account is claimed, the system generates a pay doctor
via claimant (PDVC) cheque for the appropriate Medicare benefit.

Service Officers are prompted to key a partial payment when a threshold
has been reached which will be 0 (zero).

The message 'Extra benefits may be paid with proof of payment to
Medicare' is inserted on the statement of benefit to advise the claimant
that additional benefits may be payable when the account is paid and
verified by Medicare.

To claim the additional Safety Net benefit, the claimant must provide
proof of payment to the agency so that verification (substantiation) can
be processed. When this is done the system calculates and pays the 80%
out-of-pocket (OOP) benefit or the Extended Medicare Safety Net (EMSN)
benefit cap, whichever is less, to the claimant.

The Resources page contains an example of when an unpaid account is
claimed.

Select the correct Safety Net family

It is possible for a dependant to be enrolled on more than one Medicare
card. These dependants can also be registered with more than one Safety
Net family.

When processing a claim Service Officers must ensure they allocate the
Safety Net benefit to the family who incurred the cost of the service.
The Process page contains processes for selecting the correct Safety Net
family when processing claims and adjustments.

Note: dependants can be registered on a maximum of two Safety Net family
registrations.

See also:

Medicare Safety Net

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claims forms

8-confirm

This document outlines the procedures to follow when the 8-CONFIRM
message is displayed when processing a claim. It applies to out of
hospital claims where the account is either paid in full or where the
gap has been paid. Claims for unpaid or in-patient service accounts are
to be processed as normal.

Claimant in a service centre

Where the 8-CONFIRM message is displayed and the person is in the
service centre, they must confirm their current family Safety Net
composition by either:

-   signing the CDMS printed family confirmation, see the Print a
    confirmation form table in Family registration and confirmation for
    Medicare Safety Net, or
-   completing a Family Safety Net confirmation form

Once the family composition has been confirmed the claim can be
processed.

Note: for quality control purposes, it is considered an error when a
Service Officer has confirmed a family composition and has not included
the signed confirmation in their work.

Claimant not in a service centre

When a claim for a fully paid or partially paid account returns an
8-CONFIRM message and the person is not in the service centre, only
continue to process the claim when it can be determined that the Safety
Net threshold will not be exceeded. See Family registration and
confirmation for Medicare Safety Net.

When processing a claim that will take the family over the Safety Net
threshold, confirming a registered safety net family can be done over
the phone.

Service Officers are to attempt to call the family contact or the
claimant (who is over 14 years of age). Service Officers are required to
make 2 attempts by telephone before returning the claim to the claimant.
Where the claimant is unable to be contacted by phone, the claim must be
returned to them with a family Safety Net confirmation form and letter.

Any individual who is part of the registered Safety Net family and aged
14 years of age or older can confirm the family composition.

See also: Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net.

Ensuring privacy

When it is necessary to return the claim to an individual with a letter
informing them that they may be entitled to higher benefits once they
verify their family composition, the following must occur, the:

-   Standard letter template is used for each letter. This decreases the
    chances of incorrect information being sent. Note: do not under any
    circumstances, overtype information saved from a previous letter
    sent to a different person
-   Correct claim is attached to the letter that is to be sent

Note: when this policy is not adhered to, it is considered a breach of
the privacy and secrecy provisions.

See also: Quality assurance and quality checking for external mail in
Medicare.

Adjusting a claim after family confirmation

A claim can be adjusted after receiving verification of the family
composition in the following circumstances:

-   all online claims
-   an individual or family identifies that they were entitled to a
    higher benefit
-   a Service Officer identifies that the individual or family was
    entitled to a higher benefit
-   a Service Officer has made an error

When processing an adjustment where a dependant is registered with more
than one Safety Net family, Service Officers must ensure they select the
correct Safety Net family who incurred the cost of the initial service.

See the Select correct Safety Net family for Medicare patient claim
adjustment table on the Process page.

Note: take extreme care when performing adjustments. Once an adjustment
has been performed, the affected service lines cannot be altered.

The Resources page contains examples of how the system calculates the
benefit for varying account paid amounts when the Medicare safety net
has been met, calculations when verification is required and examples
when an unpaid account is claimed. It contains a description of
transaction codes, examples of when a person is unable to confirm their
family composition at a service centre and links to Medicare Safety Net
templates and standard letter templates. There are links to Medicare
Safety Net user help guides.

Related links

Medicare Safety Net thresholds

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Medicare Safety Net

Incomplete or incorrect Medicare claims forms

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Medicare Safety Net letters

Medicare Safety Net (MSN) Adjustments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
