
Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using the eHealth Program (EHP) 012-03040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about searching for eHealth Program
(EHP) individuals (including Healthcare Provider Identifier - Individual
(HPI-I), Responsible Officer (RO) and Organisation Maintenance Officer
(OMO) and Healthcare Organisation records.

On this Page:

Service Officer search

Service Officers can search for EHP individual and organisation records.
All records with matching details are returned, regardless of the
record's activity status.

For every transaction request in the EHP application via a Service
Officer, details of the person making the request in addition to the
Service Officer ID details are recorded. Details of the requestor
include the identifier of the individual and the identifier of the
organisation where they work.

The search for a Health Identifier (HI) record can be performed using an
identifier if known, or by using personal demographic information for
the individual or organisation.

Note: if the HI Service is unable to find a matching record to the
search criteria entered, a message is returned advising that the search
criteria need to be revised.

Additional search options

Search using a wildcard (asterisk symbol *) can be performed. An
asterisk wildcard substitutes characters in the string for matching
purposes. If an asterisk is used:

-   after a group of characters, it substitutes characters that come
    after it in the string
-   before and after a group of characters, it substitutes characters
    that come before and after it in the string

Any previous addresses recorded with the HI Service, including those
that have been end-dated, are returned in a historical search.

Search for Healthcare provider or organisation using HPOS

A search maybe conducted for either an organisation or an individual
using Health Professional Online Services (HPOS). Details used in this
search may be either a:

-   (Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation) HPI-O number
-   HPI-I number
-   combination of demographic details

Search for Healthcare provider or organisation using B2B

A search may be conducted for either an organisation of an individual
using Business to Business (B2B). B2B can be used to retrieve a:

HPI-I number when a web service request is received from a:

-   Healthcare provider
-   HI user

HPI-O number when a web service request is received from either a:

-   RO
-   OMO
-   HI user

Only records with an active status are returned in a search response.

A search maybe conducted using a HPI-I number or demographic details.

A Healthcare provider may retrieve their own record details in the
search results.

Recording the type of enquiry and reason for searching records

A new record must not be created where an existing record already
exists. It is important to perform a thorough search before creating a
new record.

When searching for an existing record before creating a new record, the
following will automatically default to:

-   Inquiry Type - No Inquirer
-   Reason - Internal Processing

The Inquirer Details and Reason must always be entered prior to any
transaction in the EHP. If your search for a record is at the request of
an individual, inform the requestor that their personal details are
recorded on the system log and add their name to the search.

Search techniques prior to creation of a new record

An asterisk wildcard substitutes characters in the string for matching
purposes. If an asterisk is used:

-   after a group of characters, it substitutes characters that come
    after it in the string
-   before and after a group of characters, it substitutes characters
    that come before and after it in the string

Search for an individual

Never create a new record for an individual who indicates that their
profession is 1 of the professions covered by Australian Health
Practitioners Regulatory Agency (Ahpra). Escalate to Tier 3 if the
record cannot be located using the search techniques outlined on the
Resources page.

Search for an organisation

The Resources page contains tips and details of how to search for an
organisation.

HI HPD

All healthcare provider and provider organisation records that appear in
the Healthcare Provider Directory (HI HPD) have an 'active' status.
Healthcare providers can maintain their own HPI-I entries and the OMO
can maintain the organisation's HPI-O entries online using HPOS or via
Services Australia service channels.

The HI HPD is not available for public view. Entries in the HI HPD are
published with the consent of the healthcare provider or OMO responsible
for the seed or network organisation.

The healthcare provider or OMO may request details of records. In this
case, when the search is conducted, ensure only details:

-   of 'active' records are disclosed
-   that have been agreed to be published are disclosed

The Resources page contains minimum search requirements, tips and
details of how to search for an individual or organisation and contact
details for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) service.

Related links

Search for Individual Healthcare Identifier (IHI) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
