
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Schedule, Summary of changes and the Highly Specialised Drugs
Program.

About the PBS Schedule

Under the Federal Government's Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), a
comprehensive range of drugs and medicinal preparations may be
prescribed by medical practitioners for persons receiving medical
treatment.

The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (commonly referred to as the PBS
Schedule) contains information regarding a list of items that are
available under the PBS, and the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (RPBS). It also contains restrictions and legal requirements
regarding the prescribing and dispensing of those items.

Pharmaceutical benefit items may be added or deleted, the level of
availability of some items changed or prices adjusted. The maximum
quantity and repeats may also be altered.

The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits is updated each month and
published online. Pharmaceutical benefit items may be added or deleted,
the level of availability of some items changed or prices adjusted. The
maximum quantity and repeats may also be altered. The Resources page
contains a link to the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (online and
offline versions).

Responsible parties

Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC)

The Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) is responsible for
advising the Minister for Health which drugs, together with any
restriction, should be listed on the Schedule of Pharmaceutical
Benefits.

A drug cannot be listed (or deleted) unless it has been recommended by
the PBAC. The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits provides information
for doctors (prescribers), pharmacists and Services Australia staff
regarding the operation of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.

PBAC is an independent statutory body comprising 11 members. They
include consumers, health economists, practising community pharmacists,
general practitioners, clinical pharmacologists and specialists with at
least 1 member from each group. There are 3 additional members chosen by
the Minister.

Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Authority (PBPA)

The prices of drugs on the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits are
agreed by the Minister, on advice from the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Pricing Authority (PBPA).

Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal (PBRT)

Pharmacists are paid a dispensing fee for each item they dispense. These
fees are agreed between the Department of Health and Aged Care (Health)
and the Pharmacy Guild. The Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration
Tribunal (PBRT) ratifies the new fees and issues the determination to
make them legal.

Department of Health and Aged Care

Health is responsible for compiling, issuing and maintaining the
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Section 1

Section 1 of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits contains a
reference to the workings of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

The section is divided into:

The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits - Where to find what - Provides
an overview of the contents of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits

Prescribing Medicines - Information for Doctors and Dentists - Explains
who can prescribe PBS prescriptions. It also includes:

-   prescription forms available
-   how to write a prescription under PBS, both General and Authority
    prescriptions
-   maximum quantities and repeats
-   National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Regulations 2017, section
    49 (previously regulation 24)
-   urgent cases
-   drugs of addiction
-   prescriber bag supplies

Supplying Medicines - What Pharmacists need to know - Explains what a
pharmacist needs to know in order to make supply of an item under the
PBS. This includes:

-   eligible suppliers
-   supply procedures
-   suspected forgeries
-   National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Regulations 2017, section
    49 (previously regulations 24)
-   repeat authorisations
-   Authority prescriptions
-   urgent cases
-   receipts
-   prescriber bag supplies

Patient Charges

-   the type of patient
-   establishing Concessional entitlement
-   patient contribution

The Safety Net Scheme - Explains the Safety Net Scheme and covers:

-   Safety Net thresholds
-   recording prescriptions
-   patient record forms
-   retrospective entitlement and patient refunds
-   applying for Safety Net cards
-   issuing Safety Net cards

Services Australia - Entitlement Checks - Explains the administrative
procedures for entitlement checking

How pharmacists claim reimbursement: Information Required - Introduces
the Medicare payment system and outlines the information required from
approved pharmacists when claims are being submitted

How pharmacists claim reimbursement: Documents to be Submitted - What
documents are required from a pharmacy to support their claim for
payment

Pricing prescriptions - Includes pricing principles used to price ready
prepared and extemporaneously prepared items

Miscellaneous - Refers to references, standards and legislation relating
to the PBS

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Therapeutic index

The Therapeutic index is located after Section 1 of the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits. This index lists drugs in therapeutic groups
using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system.

In the ATC classification system, the drugs are divided into different
groups according to their site of action and therapeutic and chemical
characteristics. There are 5 levels to this code:

-   Level 1 - anatomical main group
-   Level 2 - therapeutic main group
-   Level 3 - therapeutic sub-group
-   Level 4 - chemical/therapeutic sub-group
-   Level 5 - chemical substance (generic name of the drug)

Level 1 of the ATC code divides drugs into the following 14 anatomical
main groups:

-   alimentary tract and metabolism
-   blood and blood forming organs
-   cardiovascular system
-   dermatologicals
-   genito urinary system and sex hormones
-   systemic hormonal preparations, excluding sex hormones and insulins
-   anti-infectives for systemic use
-   antineoplastic and immunomodulating agents
-   musculo-skeletal system
-   nervous system
-   antiparasitic products, Insecticides and Repellents
-   respiratory system
-   sensory organs
-   various

Within each classification, there are Therapeutic Main Groups (Level 2)
and the Therapeutic Sub-Groups (Level 3).

The page numbers referring to the generic items in Section 2 of the
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits are indicated next to these 2 levels
in the index.

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Section 2

Section 2 of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits lists ready
prepared items available under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

A ready prepared item is one that is bought by the pharmacist ready-made
from the manufacturer. These can be ordered by brand or generic name and
can also be ordered as individual units that merely require counting or
relabelling, for example, tablets or packed lines that are 1 box.

The Resources page contains a table detailing the ready prepared items.

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Section 3

Container prices, fees, standard packs and prices for ready prepared
pharmaceutical benefits

Most items are packed by the manufacturer in the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) maximum quantity so that the pharmacist only needs to label
the item with the doctor's directions for use. Section 3 of the Schedule
of Pharmaceutical Benefits lists items that are not packed in the PBS
maximum quantity.

The Resources page contains a table detailing these.

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Section 4

Section 4 of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits lists information
relating to extemporaneously prepared pharmaceutical benefit items.

'Extemporaneous' means 'made for the moment' and these items are
actually manufactured by the pharmacist, by mixing a number of
ingredients in a specified manner to form 1 final product, for example
mixture. They can be Standard Formula preparations for which a recipe is
found in approved reference books, or Non-standard Formula, for which
the doctor devises his/her own recipe.

Some items may be extemporaneous because of their short shelf life while
others are not manufactured as 'ready prepared' items because there is
insufficient demand for them.

For extemporaneous items the pharmacist receives a dispensing fee and an
allowance for the cost of the bottle or container in which the item is
supplied.

The dispensing fee for an 'extemporaneously prepared' item is greater
than that for a 'ready prepared' item due to the increased work required
by the pharmacist to make the item.

Extemporaneously prepared items are usually comprised of:

-   average price items, where payment is usually made on the basis of
    an average 10g/mL rate applied to the category of preparation
    concerned
-   standard formula preparations, which are commonly used
    extemporaneously prepared items

The pricing principles of ingredients, miscellaneous pricing rules,
pricing prescriptions where additional ingredients have been added to a
specified formula and container rates are detailed in Explanatory Notes,
Section 1 of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

The Resources page contains a table detailing the description of these
items, and a link to the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Repatriation Schedule

The Australian Repatriation system is based primarily on the principle
of compensation to veterans and eligible dependants for injury or death
related to war service. In certain cases treatment is also provided for
accepted injuries or conditions that are not service-related or have
occurred as a result of other than war service.

The Repatriation Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits contains items that
are available to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) beneficiaries
under the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS). Items
available under the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme include
those listed in both the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits and the
Repatriation Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

DVA determines which items will be listed in the Repatriation Schedule
of Pharmaceutical Benefits. A number of items are included that are not
medicines but which can normally be purchased from a pharmacy, for
example, cotton wool, bandages, etc. as these items may be needed to
treat conditions which may relate to war service.

Payments for items supplied under the RPBS are processed by Services
Australia on behalf of DVA.

Non-listed items can be supplied to veterans providing prior approval is
obtained by the prescriber from the Veterans' Affairs Pharmaceutical
Approvals Centre (VAPAC).

Eligibility for entitlements under the Repatriation Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme are not handled by agency staff but should be referred
to DVA.

Repatriation schedule structure

The Repatriation Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits is set out in the
following manner:

-   Outline of Repatriation beneficiaries' entitlement cards and
    eligibility for the RPBS
-   RPBS explanatory notes
-   Address and telephone number of DVA Pharmaceutical Approvals Centre
-   Summary of changes that have occurred since the previous edition of
    the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits and advance notices of
    future changes
-   Therapeutic Index for RPBS Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits
-   Section 1 - drugs, medicines and dressings. The layout of items is
    very similar to that of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.
    Items listed in the Repatriation Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits
    are not subject to brand price, therapeutic or special
    pharmaceutical benefit premiums. See also: Pricing and fees in
    Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Section 2 - Standard packs and prices

Structure of the Hardcopy PBS Schedule - Generic or proprietary index

The Generic or Proprietary index lists items by both generic and
proprietary names in alphabetical order.

Where applicable, the manufacturer's code is indicated next to the
proprietary name.

The page numbers referring to the generic items in Sections 2 of the
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits are also indicated in this index.

Brand price premium

The premium column contains the 'price difference' between a higher
priced brand and the lowest priced brand when multiple brands of the
same item have different prices.

Under the Minimum Pricing Policy, the patients must pay the 'price
difference' plus their normal patient contribution.

When a prescription for an item with a brand price premium is written
for increased quantities (authority or section 49 (previously regulation
24)) the brand price premium is multiplied by the number of maximum
quantities supplied.

Brand substitution by pharmacists without reference to the prescriber is
legal for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) prescriptions where:

-   the brands are identified in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits
    as being interchangeable
-   the doctor has not indicated on the prescription form that
    substitution is not to occur

The means by which the doctor endorses the prescription to prevent
substitution has not been specified in the legislation. Prescription
forms that are printed by the agency contain a box to be ticked where
brand substitution is not permitted.

The prescriber can write an endorsement or use a stamp on prescription
forms to prevent brand substitution. When a stamp is used it cannot
obliterate other information on the prescription form and it needs to be
initialled by the prescriber to demonstrate that is was in fact the
prescriber who endorsed the prescription.

When a pharmacist substitutes a brand with the agreement of the patient,
the pharmacist is required to state the brand supplied on the repeat
prescription form.

Any 'price difference' paid for a dearer priced brand cannot be recorded
for Safety Net purposes.

The letter 'B' and a dollar value in the premium column indicate items
in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits for which a brand price
premium applies.

Brand price premiums do not apply to prescriber bag supplies or
Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) benefits.

Therapeutic group premium

Under the therapeutic group premium arrangements, Commonwealth subsidy
on medicines is based on the lowest priced benefit items within
identified therapeutic groups. Patients pay the difference for higher
priced items. Exemptions on medical grounds are available.

When a prescription for an item with a therapeutic group premium is
written for increased quantities (authority section 49 (previously
regulation 24)) the therapeutic group premium is multiplied by the
number of maximum quantities supplied.

The therapeutic group premium is included under the same column as the
brand price premium, and is indicated by a 'T' after the dollar amount.
Under the minimum pricing policy, the patient must pay the 'Price
Difference' plus their normal patient contribution. The only exception
to this is when the prescriber has obtained a special authority
exemption from the agency.

There is currently 1 drug group that Therapeutic Premiums apply to but
this may vary over time. Current groupings is:

-   EPROSARTAN Tevetan brand 400mg and 600mg

Doctors can ask for an exemption from the premiums for their patients by
applying for an authority prescription through Services Australia or the
Department of Veterans' Affairs.

To receive an exemption the patient must meet 1 of the following
criteria:

-   transfer to a base-priced drug would cause patient confusion
    resulting in problems with compliance
-   adverse effects occurring with all of the base-priced drugs
-   drug interactions occurring with all of the base-priced drugs
-   drug interactions expected to occur with all of the base-priced
    drugs

In these cases:

-   the patient does not pay a therapeutic group premium
-   the agency reimburses the dispensed price listed in the Schedule of
    Pharmaceutical Benefits, less any brand price premium, less the
    patient contribution

Abbreviations

Abbreviations are necessary due to the length of some Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) Schedule item/brand names, and or form and
strength descriptions as well as space limitations on the system.

The tables list common abbreviations for the descriptions of PBS
Schedule items in the PBS System for example at Authority applications,
claims processing, National drug reference database (NDRD).

Note: some abbreviations appear duplicated but are applied to the
appropriate information, for example ‘PR’ for prolonged release will be
in the items form/strength and ‘PR’ for prior date will be followed with
a date.

The Resources page contains information on the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits including tables detailing abbreviations.

Related links

Pricing and fees in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Quality Assurance Intervention (QAI) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) Claims Processing System

Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

The Efficient Funding of Chemotherapy - Section 100 Arrangements
Supplement (EFC Schedule)

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
