
Mohs Micrographic Surgery (Mohs Surgery) - Provider Eligibility 012-18111538

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Mohs Micrographic Surgery
(Mohs Surgery) Provider Eligibility.

Medicare benefits for Mohs Surgery

Medicare benefits for Mohs Surgery was introduced 1 November 2018 and a
non-location specific speciality code was implemented. Mohs Surgery
eligibility is restricted to specialists or consultant physician
dermatologists recognised by the Australasian College of Dermatologists
(ACD).

Mohs Register

Only medical practitioners recognised by the ACD as approved Mohs
surgeons are eligible to bill Mohs MBS item numbers. The ACD maintains a
register of recognised Mohs surgeons and must ensure the register is
communicated and updated with Services Australia.

Eligibility

The ACD has the responsibility to advise the agency when medical
practitioners become recognised and approved to access the new Mohs
surgery Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items.

Removal and recertification of eligibility

Where a medical practitioner is no longer recognised or approved to
perform Mohs surgery, ACD will notify the agency and their access to MBS
item numbers will be removed. If a medical practitioner is requires
reinstatement, the ACD must to provide written advice to the agency with
details of the medical practitioner who has been reinstated and approved
to access these MBS items.

Correspondence to the medical practitioner

The agency writes to the practitioner when the ACD secretariat advice is
received and their provider number record has been updated to reflect
eligibility or the cessation of eligibility for Mohs MBS items.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has the responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. Information is provided to the agency
with the understanding that the agency will protect data from
unauthorised access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to
remain confident that the agency will protect their information and
comply with the privacy provisions of the various legislation it
administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the agency's Privacy and Secrecy
page.

The Resources page contains links to contacts, websites, letters and
examples.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
