
Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of the OMO and how to create an OMO
record in the HI Service.

Nomination of OMO

[] The Responsible Officer (RO) of an organisation nominates the initial
OMO. The RO creates and/or links an existing OMO to an organisation
during the Online Seed Registration process, or later in the Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) portal. Seed organisations must have
at least 1 person as an OMO. The RO can also register and function as an
OMO if they don’t have another person to act in the position.

Seed organisations must have at least 1 OMO, but there can be more if
needed. Additional OMOs can be added/linked by the RO and other OMOs.

Network organisations can have their own OMOs. If not, OMOs higher in
the network hierarchy can perform the functions for the network.

Note: the OMO is also referred to as the Organisation Maintenance Role
(OMR) in some systems.

Role of an OMO

See Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

[] Note: many functions OMOs can perform are available via the Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) portal and Business to Business
(B2B). A Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account is needed to access
HPOS.

Creating an OMO

[] If a phone call is received about creating and/or linking an OMO to
an organisation, Service Officers must first advise the caller that this
function can be performed online via HPOS.

Evidence of identity (EOI) is not needed for an OMO as this role is
nominated by an individual who is already registered in the HI Service
with the same organisational hierarchy as the new OMO being registered.

If EOI is supplied, it must be entered into the eHealth Program (EHP)
system.

Service Officers must perform a search for an OMO in the HI Service
before creating a new one.

Where an EHP individual record:

-   exists, a new record is not created for the same individual. The
    existing record must be amended to include the role of the OMO
-   does not exist, a new OMO record can be created

For every transaction request in the EHP system via a Service Officer,
details of the person making the request must be entered.

Mandatory requirements to create an OMO

When a Service Officer creates an OMO, the below must be provided:

-   completed form Application to replace a Responsible Officer or
    add/remove an Organisation Maintenance Officer for an organisation
    form (HW040), see Resources for a link
-   evidence that the requester is an RO or OMO for the organisation
-   enough personal details to find the requestor’s existing EHP record
-   enough personal details to be able to search for the new OMO in EHP
    in case they have a record

See also:

-   Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
-   Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
    Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer on behalf
    of an organisation

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia’s website for
information about PRODA and the HW040 form.

Related links

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer on behalf of
an organisation

Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
