
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to action failed payments for Incentive
Programs.

Failed payments

The Program Management team is notified when a program payment fails or
returns for:

-   General Practitioner (GP) Aged Care Access Incentive (ACAI)
-   Practice Incentives Program (PIP)
-   Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream

Payment channels include:

-   Reserve Bank statements
-   CPS Payment Summary reports
-   Government Direct Entry Services (GDES) reports (GP and ACAI)

Failed GP ACAI payments

The Program Management team:

-   update the relevant spreadsheets with failed GP Aged Care Access
    Incentive (ACAI) payment data, and
-   email the Incentives Team Leader using the Incentives Delivery
    Leaders mailbox

A Team Leader will assign the failed payment to a Service Officer to
investigate or follow-up.

Failed PIP and WIP - Practice Stream payments

Program management updates the relevant spreadsheet when newly failed
payments appear on the CPS Payment Summary Report. Spreadsheets are
saved in the Incentive Program Delivery (IPD) shared drive.

The report is generated weekly and in most cases, new data will appear
after a quarterly payment run.

IPD monitor the spreadsheet for newly failed payments and investigate or
follow-up. The investigating Service Officer will update the spreadsheet
with their findings.

Program Management will monitor the spreadsheet for IPD updates. They
will then arrange for the refresh of system data and redirection of the
failed payment(s).

The Resources page contains links to contacts and forms.

Related links

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA

Practice closure or withdrawal in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) for Practice
Incentives Program (PIP)

Update practice bank details in PIP or WIP - Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Link WIP - Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
