
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for PBS subsidies for donepezil,
galantamine, memantine and rivastigmine for patients with Alzheimer’s
disease. This page is for reference only.

Alzheimer’s disease and listing dates

Alzheimer's disease is a neurodegenerative condition characterised by
loss of memory and cognitive function.

Listing dates:

-   donepezil hydrochloride – 1 February 2001
-   rivastigmine – 1 February 2001
-   galantamine – 1 December 2004
-   memantine hydrochloride – 1 July 2008

Treatment phases

Initial

Up to a maximum of 6 month’s initial supply can be approved over the
phone or electronically (using Online PBS Authorities system) for the
requested drug and strength under the Initial restriction.

The restriction does not limit a prescriber from requesting another 6
months approval over the phone or electronically under initial for
different strengths or drugs.

Continuing

Continuing treatments are Authority Required (Streamlined). Authority
approval is not required for listed quantities and repeats. Advise the
prescriber to visit the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme website or their
prescribing software for the restriction information and the streamlined
code. The Resources page has a link to the website.

Cognitive tests

Cognitive tests are used to determine the extent of the patient’ disease
and there are different cognitive tests used at specialist clinics.
However, there are only 3 assessments used in PBS restrictions for
Alzheimer medications.

MMSE

The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) assists in measuring cognitive
impairment. The Resources page contains a table outlining the MMSE
scale. The baseline MMSE is required for all initial applications.

A Standardised Mini-Mental State Examination (SMMSE) scale may also be
used.

Note: an MMSE date is not required.

CIBIS

MMSE score 9 or less

The Clinicians Interview Based Impression of Severity (CIBIS) scale is
used for assessment in a patient with Alzheimer’s disease:

-   with a baseline SMMSE score of 9 or less, and
-   who is unable to register a score of 10 or more for reasons other
    than their Alzheimer’s disease

The reason that the patient cannot register a SMMSE test score of 10 or
more must be selected from 6 groups. The patient may qualify under more
than one group. The Resources page contains a table with more
information.

ADAS-Cog

The Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive sub-scale (ADAS-Cog)
is another examination used to assist in determining a patient's
cognitive state. The ADAS-Cog is a 70 point scale with scores towards 70
indicating more severe mental impairment.

Prescribers may provide this when the patient’s baseline MMSE or SMMSE
is between 25-30 points. Services Australia do not have to record this,
however if the prescriber wishes, it can be added in the authority
comments field of OPA.

Enquiries

For escalations and support for processing Alzheimer’s disease
applications refer to Escalate calls in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

The Resources page contains Alzheimer’s disease item and restriction
codes, table for MMSE scores 9 or less and the PBS Schedule.

Related links

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Process telephone Authority approval application

Process the Authority required (STREAMLINED) item

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
