
Other Medical Practitioners programs for Medicare 012-42040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Other Medical Practitioner
(OMP) Programs.

Important changes to OMPs program

Changes made to OMPs programs were made under the 2018-19 Budget measure
‘Stronger Rural Health Strategy – Improving access to Australian trained
general practitioners and quality care’.

The following OMPs programs were closed to new applicants from 1 January
2019:

-   After Hours Other Medical Practitioner program (AHOMPs) (spec code
    199)
-   Medicare Plus for Other Medical Practitioners program <5 years
    (MOMPs) (spec code 188)
-   Outer Metropolitan Other Medical Practitioner program (OMOMPs) (spec
    code 615)
-   Rural Other Medical Practitioner program (ROMPs) (spec code 186)

Medical practitioners enrolled on an OMPs program on 31 December 2018
will have at least one of the above specialty codes:

-   on the provider stem, and
-   open on at least one location

Eligible medical practitioners can continue to be enrolled on any of the
four programs until 30 June 2023. Eligible medical practitioners may
also apply to be enrolled on the existing OMPs program or on another
OMPs program at different provider number locations.

Temporary Resident Other Medical Practitioners (TROMPs) program

The TROMPs program is not affected by the Budget changes.

Overview of OMPs programs

The OMPs programs provide access to items in Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) for non-vocationally recognised medical practitioners who provide
services in approved locations. Medical practitioners must also meet
other eligibility criteria specific to the particular program.

A medical practitioner is considered non-vocationally recognised when
they have not at any time been vocationally registered, nor a Fellow of
the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) or the
Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) and who was
registered with a state or territory medical board before 1 November
1996. In addition to this, a non-vocationally recognised medical
practitioner is one who is not subject to section 19A or 19AB of the
Health Insurance Act 1973. The References page has a link to
legislation.

Services Australia administers the OMPs programs on behalf of the
Department of Health and Aged Care (Health).

Types of OMPs programs

The OMPs Programs are:

-   After hours Other Medical Practitioners (AHOMPs) program
-   MedicarePlus for Other Medical Practitioners (MOMPs) program
-   Outer Metropolitan Other Medical Practitioners (OMOMPs) program
-   Rural Other Medical Practitioners (ROMPs) program
-   Temporary Resident Other Medical Practitioners (TROMPs) program

Information about OMPs program specialty codes can be found on the
Resources page.

Applying for inclusion in an OMPs program

All applications to apply for inclusion in an OMPs program are available
on Health’s website. Comprehensive program guidelines are also available
on the website.

The Resources page contains a link to Health’s website.

The medical practitioner must complete the form and provide all relevant
supporting documentation outlined on the form to apply. The application
should then be submitted as per the instructions on the form.

It is the responsibility of individual medical practitioners to ensure
they have current medical registration and have received written
confirmation of inclusion on an OMPs program before billing for general
practitioner items.

Services Australia notifies applicants of the outcome of their
application.

Registration in an OMPs program

OMPs programs closed to new applicants from 1 January 2019. Medical
practitioners registered on an OMPs program before 1 January 2019 may
transfer between OMPs programs, provided all relevant eligibility
requirements are met.

Approval for inclusion in an OMPs program requires assessment for each
individual practice location.

Unrestricted access to Medicare

If the medical practitioner has unrestricted access to Medicare, the
specialty codes are added to the:

-   provider stem, from the date the medical practitioner is approved on
    the program
-   provider location, from the same date
-   an end date of 30 June 2023 should be applied to both stem and
    location

Restricted access to Medicare

If the medical practitioner has restricted access to Medicare (by way of
a section 19AB exemption or registered 3GA program placement), the
specialty code is added to the:

-   provider stem, from the date the medical practitioner is eligible
    for Medicare benefits or the date the medical practitioner is
    approved on the program, whichever is the latest
-   provider number location, from the same start date as at stem level
-   the end date is in line with either the 19AB exemption, the 3GA
    placement or the 30 June 2023 whichever is earliest

The applicant is advised in writing of the eligibility to access
Medicare benefits and the date on which this commences.

AHOMPs program - eligibility

The After Hours Other Medical Practitioners (AHOMPs) program closed to
new applicants from 1 January 2019. See Important Changes to OMPs
Programs for more information.

The intent of the AHOMPs program is to recognise the value of
after-hours services provided by non-vocationally recognised general
practitioners.

The program provides access to higher general practitioner Medicare
benefits (group A11 and A22 in the MBS) for non-vocationally recognised
medical practitioners providing after-hours general practice services
through an accredited general practice or an accredited Medical
Deputising Service (MDS)

Medical practitioners on the AHOMPs are required to obtain fellowship
within 6 years of registration on the AHOMPs program. Under the AHOMPs
guidelines the period can be extended if there are extenuating
circumstances. Requests for extensions are approved on a case by case
basis by the Department of Health and Aged Care. All enquires and
applications for extension should be referred to Health.

Applications to apply for inclusion in the AHOMPs program are available
on Health’s website. The Resources page contains a link to the website.

The specialty code for AHOMPs is 199.

Eligibility requirements

To be eligible for the AHOMPs program, a medical practitioner must
satisfy all the following criteria:

-   Be a participant in an Other Medical Practitioners (OMPs) program on
    or after 1 January 2019
-   Be registered as a medical practitioner with the Medical Board of
    Australia
-   Be a non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner
-   Already be eligible to claim Medicare benefits, as the AHOMPs
    program alone will not allow access
-   Provide after-hours general practice services through an accredited
    general practice or Medical Deputising Service (MDS)
-   Commit to undertake assessments and attain Fellowship of the RACGP
    or ACRRM within 6 years of starting on the Program
-   Satisfy ongoing continuing professional development requirements

Eligible locations

To be an eligible location for the AHOMPs program, a location must be
either a general practice or an MDS that holds accreditation from one of
the Australian Government nominated accreditation bodies.

The accreditation bodies are:

-   Australian General Practice Accreditation Limited (AGPAL) and
-   Quality Practice Accreditation Pty Ltd (QPA)

These bodies accredit service providers against the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioner (RACGP) standards for general practice.

Definition of After-Hours

For the purposes of the AHOMPs program, after-hours is defined as
between 6pm and 8am on weekdays, before 8am and from 12pm on Saturday,
all day Sunday and public holidays. Participants cannot claim GP
after-hours MBS items for consultations or attendances they perform
outside of these specified hours.

MOMPs program - overview

The MedicarePlus for Other Medical Practitioners (MOMPs) program less
than (<) 5 years is closed to new applicants from 1 January 2019.

The MOMPs program greater than (>) 5 years will be closing to new
applicants from 1 July 2023.

The MOMPs program commenced on 1 February 2004 and provides access to
the general practitioner items in the MBS for services provided by
medical practitioners who:

-   are not subject to the restrictions in section 19AA of the Health
    Insurance Act 1973 and
-   practise in an area of workforce shortage

After completing 20 active quarters (based on Medicare claiming) in an
area of workforce shortage, medical practitioners participating in these
programs are granted access to the 'general practitioner' attendance
items at all of their registered practice locations. Specialty code 189
on stem only.

Applications to apply for inclusion in the MOMPs program are available
on Health’s website. The Resources page contains a link to the
Department of Health and Aged Care for more information about
applications and workforce shortage.

Where the medical practitioner does not meet the required 20 active
quarters by 30 June 2023, they will not be able to continue to access
general practitioner MBS items.

The specialty code for MOMPs is 188.

MOMPs program - eligibility

To be eligible a medical practitioner must satisfy all the following
criteria:

-   be a non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner registered
    with an Australian state or territory medical board before 1
    November 1996
-   have had access to Medicare benefits (General Medical Services
    Tables) prior to 1 November 1996
-   be providing medical services in a defined area of workforce
    shortage
-   was not previously included on the Vocational Register or recognised
    as a General Practitioner

Note: active quarters do not need to be completed consecutively, but
must be completed within the life of the Program. Active quarters may
include periods of service in related eligible Programs.

MOMPs program - active quarters

Services Australia is responsible for verifying the completion of the 20
active quarters.

When the 20 active quarters are assessed and confirmed, Services
Australia will advise the medical practitioner they are eligible to
claim the general practitioner items regardless of where they practise
in the future. This access remains dependent on the medical practitioner
meeting continuing professional development requirements with Ahpra.

Note: for the purpose of this program, an active quarter is a defined
quarter of a year (Jan-Mar; April-June; July-Sept, Oct-Dec) where
Medicare benefits paid equals at least $10,000 of general practice
attendance items.

MOMPs program - related eligible programs

Medical practitioners who have been on either the:

-   Rural Other Medical Practitioners (ROMPs) program
-   Outer Metropolitan Other Medical Practitioners (OMOMPs) program

may be able to count their service prior to 1 February 2004 in these
programs towards their 20 active quarters. Assessment of length of
service provided through these programs is based on length of active
time in the program, not necessarily the Medicare benefits paid.

From 1 February 2004, time accrued through either the ROMPs or OMOMPs
programs is not counted towards active service for the MOMPs Program.

OMOMPs program - eligibility

The Outer Metropolitan Other Medical Practitioners (OMOMPs) Program is
closed to new applicants from 1 January 2019.

The program (OMOMPs programs) is part of Health’s More Doctors for Outer
Metropolitan Areas measure to address the shortage of general
practitioners in outer metropolitan areas of Australia’s capital cities.

The program aims to encourage the retention of non-vocationally
recognised medical practitioners already practising in Outer
Metropolitan Areas. It allows access to General practitioner attendance
items at approved locations.

Applications to apply for inclusion in the OMOMPs program are available
on Health’s website. The Resources page contains a link to website.

The specialty code for OMOMPS is 615.

Eligibility requirements

To be eligible a medical practitioner must meet all the following
requirements:

-   be a non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner registered
    with an Australian state or territory medical board before 1
    November 1996
-   not be subject to Medicare provider number restrictions under
    sections 19AA or 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973
-   be currently in general practice in an outer metropolitan Approved
    Location area, and
-   be currently enrolled in a course based pathway to Fellowship of the
    RACGP or the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACCRM)

ROMPs program - eligibility

The Rural Other Medical Practitioners (ROMPs) program is closed to new
applicants from 1 January 2019.

The ROMPs program introduced in January 2001 recognises the services
provided by medical practitioners in rural and remote areas or where
there is a significant medical workforce shortage. Inclusion on the
program will allow access to the Group A1 general practitioner items in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for approved medical practitioners.

The specialty code for ROMPs is 186.

Eligibility requirements

A medical practitioner must:

already have access to 'other non-referred attendance’ (including the
Group A2) MBS items before applying for registration under the ROMP
program

be providing services at a practice located in:

-   a Rural, Remote and Metropolitan Areas (RRMA) classifications 4-7
-   approved RRMA 3 locations that are located in a Distribution
    Priority Area (DPA) for General Practitioners, or

express an interest in undertaking a pathway to:

-   Fellowship of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
    (FRACGP), or
-   Fellowship of the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine
    (FACRRM)

Note: ROMPs program registrations cannot be effective from a date
earlier than the date the medical practitioner was granted access to
Medicare benefits.

For more information about effective start and end dates for ROMPs
placements, see the Resources page.

ROMPs program - 3GA placement or 19AB exemption

National Office staff can amend the end date of a ROMPs program for a
medical practitioner in line with a 19AB exemption or 3GA placement
program date where a medical practitioner:

-   has a 19AB exemption, or
-   is participating in a 3GA placement program

This applies if the medical practitioner has a ROMPs program specialty
code on the location that is either current or has not been expired
longer than 3 months.

Note:

-   if the ROMPs program specialty code has been expired less than 3
    months a new 186 specialty code needs to be added to the location to
    reflect the gap
-   when Provider Registration staff extend a ROMPs program specialty
    code in line with the extension of a 19AB or 3GA placement, the
    details of this extension must be included in the confirmation
    letter sent to the medical practitioner
-   the ROMPs program does not override existing legislative
    requirements to access Medicare benefits

TROMPs program - eligibility

Legislative changes made in 2001 had unintended implications for a small
number of long-term temporary resident doctors to be able to access
Medicare benefits. The Temporary Resident Other Medical Practitioners
(TROMP) program was established to allow indefinite access to Medicare
benefits for eligible medical practitioners.

Medical practitioners do not need to apply for an assessment to be
conducted, and are advised of their eligibility by Services Australia.

The specialty code for TROMPS is 198.

Eligibility requirements

A medical practitioner must:

-   have been licenced or registered as a medical practitioner in an
    Australian state or territory prior to 1 January 1997 and
-   have been either a temporary resident or resident of New Zealand on
    18 October 2001 and
-   be subject to the Medicare provider number restrictions under
    sections 19AA or 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973

The Resources page contains contact details, information on
registrations, eligibility and application forms, AHOMPs specialty codes
and links to external websites.

Related links

Aboriginal health workers eligibility for Medicare

3GA Placements pre 1 January 2019

3GA Placements post 1 January 2019

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
