
Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes finalising assessment 012-17080304

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for finalising an assessment,
completing Quality Assurance (QA) of the assessment process and making a
recommendation to the delegate, for initial, subsequent, S38 response
and refund applications, submitted via the Medical Indemnity Online
Claiming (MIOC) system. In the event the MIOC system is unavailable for
a period of time (determined by the Director), an application can be
submitted with the relevant supporting documentation, via post or email.

On this Page:

Recommendations to the delegate

Recommendations to the delegate include:

-   Approved
-   Deem not payable
-   Request further info

Approved

It may be identified during the assessment process that a payment
application meets the eligibility requirements and an indemnity scheme
payment is payable. Where the delegate accepts a recommendation of
‘Approved’, payment of the application will be made to the Indemnity
Insurer.

Services Australia has the authority to recover a payment made to the
Indemnity Insurer. Where the delegate accepts a recommendation of
‘approved’ for a MIOC refund application, the funds will be recovered.

Deem not payable

The Medical Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act) does not use the term 'reject'
when referring to an application that does not meet the requirements of
a MI scheme. The Act instead refers to determining whether an 'indemnity
scheme payment is payable'.

It may be identified during the assessment process that a claim is not
eligible and should be deemed not payable. This can happen at any stage
in the assessment process if it is determined that legislative
requirements have not been met.

A claim for payment is deemed not payable if any of the following occur:

-   The eligibility requirements set out in the Act for the relevant
    Medical Indemnity Scheme are not met
-   Further information provided still does not enable the claim to meet
    legislative requirements

Where the delegate accepts a recommendation of ‘Deem not payable’ the
application will not be paid and a deemed not payable letter will be
sent to the applicant.

Further Information is required - Section 38 of the Medical Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act)

Section 38 of the Act enables the delegate to request further
information to determine eligibility or to clarify information in
relation to an MI application. Where the delegate accepts a
recommendation of ‘Further info required’ the application will not be
paid/recovered and a Request for further information (S38) letter will
be sent to the applicant. This request must be made in writing. See the
Resources page for FAQ about section 38 requests.

Insurers have the ability to request up to two 28 day extensions to
provide a response. Extension requests submitted in the MIOC system are
automatically approved. Failure to provide further information by the
due date will result in an automatic withdrawal of the application.

Quality Assurance checks

Once an application has been assessed by an Assessing Officer (AO) and a
recommendation has been determined, it may be necessary for a Quality
Assurance (QA) check to be undertaken. A QA check requires a second AO
to undertake a comprehensive assessment of the application in order to
determine if the original recommendation is appropriate and accurate.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
an external website about MI.

Related links

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes Claiming

High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)

Run-Off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)

Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)

Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)

Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AH HCCS)

Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AH ECS)

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes delegate approval process

Medical Indemnity (MI) refunds and withdrawals

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes registration

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes pay run process

Monthly Medical Indemnity (MI) administrative process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
