
Change of practice ownership for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for a change of practice ownership.

Change of practice ownership

A practice can update a change of practice ownership using one of the
following:

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

-   The practice payments will be placed on hold
-   The practice must complete the Practice Incentives Change of
    practice ownership (IP010) form

The IP010 form

Types of ownership changes

There are 2 types of practice ownership changes.

Partial change of ownership

This is when a sale of the practice has not occurred, or the ownership
has not transferred to another person or entity. This type of ownership
change is only for adding or removing names to the existing ownership.

A practice does not need to provide supporting documents.

Full change of ownership

This is most commonly a sale of the practice. The ownership legally
transfers completely to another person or entity.

A practice must provide:

-   Supporting documents
-   Accreditation certificate

If the forms need more details, place the practice payments on hold.
This will avoid the payments being paid to the wrong owner.

Once the full change of ownership is finalised, request the release of
the held payments. Escalate to the Program Support Office (PSO).

The Process page has more information.

See also Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Effect on the Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) and the practice ID

A practice will keep the below when changing ownership:

-   Practice ID
-   SWPE value

The new owner is only entitled to the historical SWPE value if the
practice’s existing accreditation is included in the sale/transfer of
the practice. This will apply even if the original owner establishes a
new practice in the same local area.

If the practice is issued with a new accreditation number, it must
re-apply for the relevant program/s and establish a new SWPE value, see
Practice application for PIP and WIP. The historical SWPE reference
period will begin from the date of sale.

See also:

-   Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream
-   Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payments

The previous owners(s) will not get any payments after the change of
practice ownership is finalised. Payments for the current payment
quarter will be paid to the registered owner at the point-in-time date.

If there are held payments, escalate to the PSO to release the held
payments.

If the new owner(s) ask for the payments to be given to the old
owner(s), escalate to the PSO for assessment.

Do not recover any payments if the old owner(s) think they should
receive the payment. The old owner(s) and the new owner(s) must resolve
this between themselves.

Date of sale discrepancies

If the IP010 includes the date of sale and both the old and new owners
have signed, the form date is accepted as the date the ownership
changed.

There can be numerous reasons why the date on the supporting documents
may not align with the date the new ‘owners’ commenced operations.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Online Services for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Health Professional Online Services

Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Confirmation Statement in PIP

Quarterly Confirmation Statement (QCS) in WIP - Practice Stream

Failed Payments (GDES) for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
