
Loading and registering a Stoma or ParaQuad claim 012-18111445

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist staff load and register
Stoma or ParaQuad claims.

Claims for Stoma or ParaQuad reimbursement requests

Stoma and Paraquad claims are received from approved Stoma associations:

-   electronically via the Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)
    claim upload function
-   via USB, and manual claims via mail

Claims submitted via HPOS receive instant claim file formatting
verification. If the file does not meet format requirements, the
association is notified. They need to review the file, amend where
possible and resubmit.

Claims submitted via USB are processed by the Stoma Processing team in
Melbourne. The Hobart team are a back-up processing site for contingency
purposes as they have a non-networked surface pro allocated. USB claims
require cleansing and a virus check using a non-networked computer. The
file is then copied and the association’s USB key is removed. A USB
(Iron Key) approved by Services Australia is then inserted into the
computer and the data is downloaded onto that USB. The approved USB is
inserted into the networked computer for loading of claim data. This
process will be decommissioned once all associations are transitioned to
HPOS to upload their claims.

A list of ParaQuad and Stoma Associations (referred to as Ostomy
associations) can be located on The Department of Health and Aged Care
website. The Resources page provides a link to the website.

The Resources page contains contact details for Stoma Appliance Scheme
(SAS) and links to the Stoma and ParaQuad claim rejection letter and the
Department of Health and Aged Care website.

Related links

Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS)

Processing a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

Enquiries regarding Stoma or ParaQuad claims

Financial delegation checking of a Stoma or ParaQuad claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
