
New Zealand medical practitioners - provider eligibility and registration 012-20090334

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about medical practitioners who are
New Zealand permanent residents or New Zealand citizens affected by
legislation amendments in 2010 to section 19AB of the Health Insurance
Act 1973 (the Act).

Section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973

Section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 imposes restrictions on
medical practitioners who did not obtain their primary medical
qualifications in Australia. For Medicare purposes, these medical
practitioners are known as overseas-trained doctors (OTD) or foreign
graduates of an accredited medical school (FGAMS).

OTD and FGAMS are subject to the restrictions of section 19AB for a
minimum period of 10 years from the date of their first medical board
registration in Australia. The restriction is commonly called the 10
year moratorium.

The 10 year moratorium

Under section 19AB, an OTD or FGAMS must work for at least 10 years in a

-   Distribution Priority Area (DPA) if they are a General Practitioner
    (GP)
-   District of Workforce Shortage (DWS) if they are a non-GP specialist
    or consultant physician

All international medical graduates are subject to the 10 year
moratorium. There are no exceptions.

The moratorium and section 19AB restrictions end after 10 years if the
medical practitioner is an Australian permanent resident or citizen.

If the medical practitioner remains a temporary resident beyond the 10
year period, the moratorium continues until they become an Australian
permanent resident or citizen.

Medical practitioners no longer subject to section 19AB from 1 April 2010

From 1 April 2010, medical practitioners are not subject to the
restrictions of section 19AB of the Act if they:

-   gained their primary medical degree from an accredited Australian or
    New Zealand medical school, and
-   were an Australian or New Zealand permanent resident or citizen at
    the time they enrolled in an accredited Australian or New Zealand
    medical school

Accredited medical schools are determined by the Australian Medical
Council Limited (AMC). See Resources for a link to the AMC website,
which lists accredited medical schools.

These medical practitioners remain subject to the restrictions under
section 19AA of the Act.

Section 19AA of the Health Insurance Act 1973

Section 19AA of the Act imposes restrictions on medical practitioners
who are an Australian or New Zealand permanent resident or citizen.
Section 19AA of the Act restricts a medical practitioner from claiming a
Medicare benefit for services rendered if the medical practitioner does
not satisfy section 19AA. A medical practitioner satisfies section 19AA
where they are:

-   a specialist
-   a consultant physician
-   a general practitioner, or
-   on an approved 3GA placement

Determining eligibility

A medical practitioner who was an Australian or New Zealand permanent
resident or citizen when they enrolled in an accredited medical school
in Australia or New Zealand must complete the application for a provider
number or appropriate questions when completing the Digital Provider
Number Registration (DPNR) process. Evidence of residency status at time
of enrolment in an accredited medical school is required with an initial
application for a provider number. Services Australia uses this
information to determine if section 19AB of the Act applies to the
medical practitioner and records this on the medical practitioner’s
provider file.

Acceptable evidence of residency status

Acceptable evidence of residency status to confirm a medical
practitioner is not subject to section 19AB may include:

Australian permanent resident visa:

-   Visa email confirmation
-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) confirmation (print
    /screen shot), or
-   Visa label in passport

Australian citizenship certificate:

-   Citizenship certificate, or
-   Bio-data (picture) page of their Australian passport

New Zealand permanent residency visa, or

New Zealand passport

Medical practitioners must provide proof of residency at the time they
enrolled in an Australian or New Zealand accredited medical school. This
ensures the medical practitioner was an Australian or New Zealand
permanent resident of citizen when they enrolled in an accredited
medical school and the restrictions of section 19AB do not apply to the
medical practitioner.

If a medical practitioner submits a New Zealand passport and the place
of birth is a New Zealand suburb or city, this is sufficient evidence
the medical practitioner was a New Zealand citizen when enrolled in an
accredited medical school.

Medical practitioners no longer subject to section 19AB from 1 April 2010 - Provider Directory System (PDS)

Medical practitioners with an existing provider file in PDS when
legislation changed

Where a medical practitioner has supplied evidence proving residency
status at the time of enrolment in an accredited medical school in
Australia or New Zealand, they are recorded in PDS as:

-   subject to section 19AB up to and including 31 March 2010
-   not subject to section 19AB from 1 April 2010

Evidence must be supplied confirming the medical practitioner was an
Australian or New Zealand permanent resident or citizen when they
enrolled in an accredited medical school in Australia or New Zealand
before the medical practitioner is recorded in PDS as not being subject
to section 19AB from 1 April 2010.

Creating a new PDS provider file for a medical practitioner with date of
first medical board registration prior to 1 April 2010

Medical practitioners impacted by the legislation changes in 2010 are
recorded in PDS as being subject to section 19AB up to and including 31
March 2010.

Medical practitioners must supply proof they were an Australian or New
Zealand permanent resident or New Zealand citizen when they first
enrolled in an accredited medical school in Australia or New Zealand.

Medical practitioners must also supply evidence they held Medical board
registration in an Australian State or Territory prior to 1 April 2010.

Creating a new PDS provider file for a medical practitioner with date of
first registration as a medical practitioner after 1 April 2010

Medical practitioners are recorded in PDS as not being subject to
section 19AB if they:

-   were a New Zealand permanent resident or New Zealand citizen when
    they enrolled in an accredited medical school in Australia or New
    Zealand, and
-   held medical board registration in an Australian state or territory
    on and after 1 April 2010

Business Structure legislation effective 1 July 2018

Important changes resulting from the Health Legislation Amendment
(Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Act 2018 (the Act)
took effect 1 July 2018. The Act amends the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Shared Debt Recovery Scheme

The Act also introduced the Shared Debt Recovery Scheme (SDRS) on 1 July
2019. The Scheme enables the Commonwealth to hold both a practitioner
(primary debtor) and another party (secondary debtor) responsible for
repayment of compliance debts, arising as a result of incorrectly
claiming Medicare benefits, through the making of a shared debt
determination. The Scheme was introduced because Medicare billing is
often delegated to non-health professionals, administered through
centralised billing areas and can be influenced by organisational
processes and policies. In some instances this has led to incorrect
billing practices

Related links

Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

Ahpra Information window

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
