
Hospital claims processing for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about hospital claims processing for
Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP).

Introduction to hospital claims processing

The Treatment Account System (TAS) allows accounts received from private
hospitals and public hospital (limited items) to be processed. Hospital
services include private hospital accommodation fees, theatre fees and
miscellaneous items such as prostheses. When processing claims received
from hospitals, ensure that:

-   claim forms are signed in accordance with business rules
-   each service entered into the system is a complete and accurate
    reflection of the services shown on the account
-   the results of processing are checked against the details on the
    account before the claim is paid

Where there is any discrepancy between the results of processing and the
amount claimed, the situation must be clarified with a supervisor.

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) and Services Australia in
collaboration have developed a paperless claiming system for hospitals
through ECLIPSE Release 6.

The majority of hospitals are now using the paperless In Hospital
Claiming (IHC) system but hospital claims may still be received
manually.

DVA has contracts with a large number of private hospitals including Day
Procedure Centres (DPC) throughout Australia in order to provide
veterans with a comprehensive range of hospital services. The contracts
governing the provision of these services are often complex and the
Hospital Contracts Maintenance System (HCVS/VAMM) is used to store
details of these contracts.

DVA is responsible for negotiating and managing contracts with private
hospitals. They are also responsible for ensuring that existing
contracts are renegotiated in a timely manner and for checking to ensure
that contract details are correct.

The contract information held by the system is used when contracted
private hospitals lodge claims for services provided to veterans. It
allows individual claims to be compared with contract details so that
claims are paid according to the rates and conditions agreed to in those
contracts.

When processing claims lodged by contracted private hospitals, the
system checks the contract that applies on the date of service involved
and calculates payment at the rate agreed to in the contract. If items
claimed are not in the contract on the date of service, the system will
not be able to calculate payment. If this situation occurs operators may
reject the service with RSN code 201. The payment made for services
rendered by contracted private hospitals will be the amount agreed to in
the contract regardless of the amount claimed. Public hospital claims
are paid according to the relevant item’s scheduled fee held on the DVA
Item Fee File (QITI).

Hospital resources page (VAP)

The Resources for hospitals page on the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) Website provides links and information that may be relevant to VAP
clients. See the Resources page for a link.

Hospital list (VAP)

The VAP hospital list can be used in conjunction with the VPQI and VPUI
screens to locate hospital information including:

-   provider numbers
-   hospital names
-   states
-   tier

The Resources page contains a link to the VAP hospital list – refer to
‘User Guides’.

Confidentiality of information (VAP)

Public service obligation under the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs)
contained in the Privacy Act 1988, prevents disclosure, by insecure
means including telephone, fax and email, of personal information such
as:

-   a provider number
-   veteran's date of birth, address
-   disabilities

If a provider requires this information their request must be made in
writing. All requests for confidential information are sent to the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) for approval. Please forward all
written requests to release confidential information to the VAP
Helpdesk.

Veterans' Affairs Processing is able to confirm the accuracy of
confidential information or respond to general processing enquiries on
the VAP Hotline.

Hospital contract information is Commercial in Confidence and must be
kept in an area that prevents access by unauthorised persons. Details of
contracts held in our processing systems must not be disclosed to
unauthorised persons.

Personal information such as a veteran's date of birth, address or
disabilities must not be disclosed over the telephone and any requests
for such information must be made to DVA.

A veteran's file number or claim information may be disclosed to
providers and hospital accounts staff if sufficient information can be
given to uniquely identify the veteran and information is requested in
the course of usual claiming procedures.

When in doubt as to whether information can be disclosed, discuss the
matter with a supervisor or manager before releasing the information
that has been requested.

The References page contains a link to the Privacy Act 1988.

Hospital data entry

Before details of a service provided in a private hospital can be keyed
in the data entry screen, the claim must be registered. Each in-hospital
claim is for a single patient only. Outpatient or emergency services may
be processed for multiple patients within the same claim.

Private hospital services are keyed on the private hospital data entry
(VKHC) screen, while public hospital services are keyed on the public
hospital data entry (VKRC) screen.

The details that need to be entered vary depending on the type of
service provided. The Process page provides instruction on the data
entry requirements for each type.

Note: for public hospitals there is no provision for entering account
reference or invoice numbers. Therefore, account reference or invoice
numbers cannot be printed on the Statement of Benefit.

The Resources page contains information on PF function keys and H and R
screen coding.

Same day/day only accommodation hospital processing

Services that are provided to an eligible patient in a Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) contracted private hospital or day procedure
centre where the patient is admitted and discharged on the same date,
are considered same day hospital claims.

When day only accommodation is being processed, enter accommodation
details as outlined on the Process page within the same date for both
admission and discharge.

Details of the operation or procedure performed must also be entered.

The Resources page has information on how to process same day hospital
accounts. See User Guides – “Introduction to same day hospital
processing for Veterans' Affairs”.

Overnight accommodation

Single line

Enter the following details when a single overnight accommodation line
is being processed:

-   accommodation period (from and to dates)
-   patient’s admission
-   discharge status

It is important that admission indicators and disposal codes are keyed
correctly as they can impact on subsequent (continuation) claims.

Multiple line

When more than 1 accommodation line is being processed for a continuous
period of hospitalisation the accommodation dates must not overlap. The
admission indicator and disposal codes must also reflect the patient's
status for each period involved.

Ensure accommodation claims submitted with overlapping dates are keyed
using the correct itemisation method. This will help the pend operator
by not having to correct the details during pend processing.

Leave days

When a patient is temporarily absent (on leave) during a period of
hospitalisation, details of leave days must be entered so that all
possible bed days in the period are accounted for.

The dates of service and number of days involved must be keyed so there
are no gaps in the hospitalisation period entered.

Acute care (3B) certificate

When a 3B certificate is attached to a continuation claim, these details
are keyed when the accommodation is entered. Check the certificate
belongs to the patient whose claim is being processed.

3B details are not keyed at data entry for new admissions:

-   Enter service details as outlined on the Process page
-   Add the 3B (CERT) line details during pend processing

Theatre fees

Overnight accommodation claims and day only claims containing theatre
fees require details of the operation or procedure performed to be keyed
in addition to the accommodation lines involved. The details determine
the benefit payable.

A certified complex procedure is when the following Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) items are involved:

-   40300
-   40301
-   40303
-   40306
-   40309
-   40312

The claim certifies the procedure involved was complex. Complex
certification increases the amount paid for theatre fees for the items
involved.

Procedure groupings are used to determine the amount paid for theatre
fees. When all of the services are rendered at the same attendance, the
procedure discount rule will be applied to:

-   all of the services involved
-   each individual group of services, where they are rendered at
    different times on the same day

When the amounts claimed for theatre fees rendered on the same day are
not listed in amount order, it is advisable to key them in amount order
to avoid additional pend actions. This will also ensure the correct
amounts are printed on the statement of benefit.

Day only package deals

When a day only package deal is being processed, enter accommodation
details as normal, with the same date for both admission and discharge.

Details of the operation or procedure performed are not entered.

Day only overnight theatre fee package deal

When a day only package deal involving an overnight stay is being
processed, enter overnight accommodation details as outlined on the
Process page, and:

-   details of the operation or procedure performed

Prostheses

When surgically implanted prostheses items are claimed, the appropriate
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) item number must be identified in
the Schedule.

The system will pay up to the amount shown on the Schedule. Payment will
be limited to the amount claimed, if the amount claimed is less than the
amount listed.

If the hospital lodges a prostheses claim and no claim is made for
accommodation services, the prostheses item can be processed on its own.

The system will pay up to the maximum amount shown on QITI for the
prostheses item claimed. Refer to the appropriate prostheses list to
confirm the maximum fee payable. If the amount claimed for the
prostheses item is less than the amount listed in the schedule, payment
will be limited to the amount claimed.

Where multiples of the same prostheses item are claimed, these items can
be bulked by entering the total number of prostheses claimed in the NO
field and adding the total charge together and entering the total charge
in the amount field.

A restriction applies to some prosthetic items when claimed multiple
times on the same date of service from the same hospital. The
restriction is applied by the Department of Health and Aged Care, and
therefore also applied to DVA prostheses claims and payments. If there
is a restriction in QITI on claiming a prostheses item more than once on
the same date of service, payment should not be made unless there is a
DVA approval for the second and subsequent prosthetic item(s).

DVA no longer pays handling fees for prosthesis claims.

Public hospital claims for prostheses

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) has advised that all claims
from public hospitals where the date of service is after 30 June 2016
should be rejected with RSN 547.

When surgically implanted prosthesis items are claimed:

-   the invoice should be checked
-   the appropriate Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) item number
    should be identified in the schedule

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care Prostheses List.

Provider claims for prostheses

Claims for prostheses can be paid to individual practitioners when an
invoice shows the prosthetic was purchased by that provider.

Prostheses claimed by individual providers where the treatment location
is ‘Hospital’ and no invoice has been supplied, should be rejected with
reason code RSN 546.

A request to the VAP Helpdesk to temporarily update a prostheses
servicing provider code may be required.

Certain prostheses items can be paid to individual practitioners without
the need to site the prosthetic invoice and irrespective of the
treatment location:

-   Vascular Diagnostic Radiologists (C01 047) can claim Category 10 -
    Vascular prosthetics
-   Opthalmologists (C01 054) can claim Category 1 - Opthalmic
    prosthetics
-   Otolaryngologists (C01 055) can claim Category 2 - Ear, Nose and
    Throat prosthetics

See also the Department of Health and Aged Care Prostheses List on the
Resources page.

ICD codes

When a medical accommodation item is claimed by a hospital the
International Classification of Diseases (ICD) code shown on the claim
form must be entered immediately following the accommodation line.

VQME data for DVA online

The VQME screen displays and stores the claim data that is transmitted
by a provider. Service Officers processing Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) In Hospital claims (IHC) should refer to VQME whenever
additional information is required to support payment of a service.

IHC for DVA online

In Hospital Claims (IHC) for the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
online are transmitted in segments. The claims are split into segments
that are transformed to the mainframe to assist in the assessment of a
claim.

Hospital claims pend resolution

A claim that has been assessed with errors is given a status of ASS/ERR.
When selected, the status of the claim is automatically changed to
‘PEND’ and must be resolved via the pend resolution basic screen.

Resolution of vouchers will result in either:

-   the payment of the service
-   the rejection of the service, or
-   the rejection of the service and return of the claim to the
    provider/facility

Hospital pend processing additional services – adding an item line

It is not possible to insert a hospital accommodation or leave day item
line in a voucher containing accommodation services because the dates of
service will differ.

The system allows:

-   a CERT line to be inserted in a voucher even when the dates of
    service in the accommodation lines are different
-   prostheses, theatre fee and International Classification of Diseases
    (ICD)codes lines to be inserted providing the dates of service are
    the same as those of the voucher involved

Hospital contracts enquiry (VAMM)

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) has contracts with a large
number of private hospitals throughout Australia in order to provide
veterans with a comprehensive range of hospital services.

The contracts governing the provision of these services are often
complex and the Contracts Maintenance (VAMM) system is used to store
details of these contracts.

DVA state office private hospital negotiators are responsible for:

-   negotiating private hospital contracts in their state
-   ensuring existing contracts are renegotiated in a timely manner
-   checking to ensure that contract details held are correct

The VAMM screen enables staff to display details of contracts applicable
for each hospital. This information may need to be accessed for claims
processing and answering enquiries on payments processed by VAP.

Accuracy of information held in a contract is the responsibility of DVA
and Services Australia staff must not engage in debate regarding the
contents of the contract.

Discrepancies or disputes regarding the content of a contract in
relation to payments received by a hospital are to be referred to DVA.

Individual Service Officer claim selection (VQOF) transaction

The individual Service Officer claim selection transaction (VCPI) is
used to display details of any claims not yet finalised by that Service
Officer. This includes claims with a status of RECEIVED, IN D/E or
ASS/PAID.

For details on how to display different claims using the VQOF screen
refer to Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Source office claims selection (VQRF) screen

The source office claims selection screen (VQRF) is used to display
details of all claims processed within a particular site.

For details on how to display different claims using the VQRF screen see
‘Pend Resolution’ in Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) hospital resources page, the Department of Health and Aged
Care private health insurance rules 2007, the VAP hospital list,
information on International Classification of Diseases (ICD) Medical
Group accommodation codes for VAP and links to describe the PF function
keys that can be used on the Pend Resolution Basic screen.

Related links

Hospital claims pend processing in Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
