
Eligibility for track and scale of overseas trained doctors and foreign graduates of an accredited medical school 012-42080000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures related to the track and scale of
eligible overseas trained doctors and foreign graduates of an accredited
medical school.

About track and scale of 19AB medical practitioners

Track and scale of eligible overseas trained doctors and foreign
graduates of an accredited medical school (subject to the restrictions
in section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973) commenced on 1 July
2010.

All overseas trained doctors and foreign graduates of an accredited
medical school are able to access scaling from the date of effect while
they are:

-   subject to section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973, and
-   currently in their 10 year moratorium period

Medical practitioners who completed their 10 year moratorium
(obligation) period between 1 July 2010 and 30 September 2010 were not
included in track and scale. The Department of Health and Aged Care
manually calculated scaling discounts for these medical practitioners
and advised Services Australia of the relevant dates. The s19AB scaling
class exemption was manually applied to these medical practitioners.

Application of scaling

Track and scale is automatically applied to eligible medical
practitioner's records. Specialty code 500 is used to identify providers
eligible for track and scale.

Scaling is applied each month if the medical practitioner:

-   has met a 'value of claims' threshold for that month,
-   provided services in an eligible Australian Standard Geographical
    Classification - Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) 2-5, and
-   holds a current section s19AB exemption

Professional services provided by eligible medical practitioners with
s19AB exemptions for locations in RA2 - RA5 count towards the claiming
threshold calculation and are eligible for scaling discounts.

Professional medical services provided in RA1 locations do not count
towards the total 'value of claims' threshold each month. This is
regardless of whether the location is considered to be a district of
workforce shortage or distribution priority area.

Eligible services

The schedule fee of the following services is counted toward the value
of schedule fee total for each month:

-   all Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items, including assist at
    operation item numbers
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) MBS services

The following services will not be included:

-   rejected claims
-   bulk billing incentive items

Australian Standard Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) classification system

Australian Standard Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area
(ASGC-RA) classification is a geographical classification system that
was developed by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), as a
statistical geography structure, which allows quantitative comparisons
between 'city' and 'country' Australia.

The purpose of the structure is to classify data from census collection
districts into broad geographical categories, called Remoteness Areas
(RA). The RA categories are defined in terms of 'remoteness' the
physical distance of a location from the nearest urban centre (access to
goods and services) based on population size.

Track and scale is assessed against the RA rating allocated to a
provider location. This is referred to as the Geocoded RA. The RA for
each location is displayed on the provider location within the Provider
Directory System (PDS). The RA displayed is not program specific and
displays the Geocoded RA.

Scaling discounts

The Resources page contains details of the Australian Standard
Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) classification,
RA category, associated scaling discount rate and reduction in the
restriction period, as well as a list of the number of days discounted
per month based on days in the month and examples of application of
scaling discounts.

This information is based on a provider who remains at a location that
is within the same ASGC-RA classification for their entire restriction
period. For example, Provider in a RA 5 location for 5 years would
reduce their restriction period to 5 years.

Completion of scaling

Scaling is automatically switched off when the credited date is equal to
the actual date. If scaling is never applied this will match the end
date of the 500 code on stem.

A system generated letter is automatically sent to the eligible medical
practitioner via:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), where they have
    subscribed to this facility, or
-   post to the medical practitioner's preferred mailing address

Application of the 's19AB Scaling Class exemption' is then recorded on
the medical practitioner's stem under the personal tab.

Eligibility for track and scale class exemption

There are different categories of health practitioners and they have
different requirements for billing post their original 10 year
moratorium period

Group 1 – Permanent residency granted prior to 10-year period expiring.

-   19AB restrictions end in line with original 10 year period (500 end
    date) or track and scale revised end date. After this Medicare
    billing is in line with 19AA restrictions being met or not.

Group 2 - Still a temporary resident when the original 10 year period
expires AND has their first date of registration with a Medical Board
between 1^(st) January 1997 and 17^(th) October 2001

-   19AB restrictions end in line with original 10 year period (500 end
    date). They are no longer subject to 19AB restrictions and are not
    eligible for any 19AB exemption (including track and scale).
    As a 19AB exemption also covers 19AA, Medicare billing is in line
    with 19AA restrictions being met or not.

Group 3- Still a temporary resident when the original 10 year period
expires AND their first date of registration with a Medical Board is
after 18th October 2001

-   19AB restrictions apply indefinitely, until health practitioner
    gains permanent residency.
-   If the health practitioner has been granted any track and scale
    credits, the track and scale class exemption covers 19AB and 19AA.
    As this class exemption is not location specific, access to Medicare
    billing is ongoing until permanent residency is granted.
-   If the health practitioner has not been granted any track and scale
    credits then individual 19AB exemptions must be applied for (either
    class exemptions or Department of Health and Aged Care issued)

Scaling results

Scaling results are available to authorised Service Officers to assist
with enquiries.

Eligible medical practitioners can view their scaling results via the
Health Professional Online Services (HPOS). If the eligible provider has
Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) access, the following
information will be available:

scaling start date

obligation end date (this is the 500 specialty code end date)

total time credited

revised scaled end date (the obligation end date minus the total time
credited)

scaling outcomes listed by month:

-   Australian Standard Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area
    (ASGC-RA)
-   days credited
-   scaling rate applied

all locations where the medical practitioner has a current S19AB
exemption

For more information, see to Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

Where a provider is disputing their track and scale credits, contact a
provider registration PSO who will raise the enquiry to the appropriate
area.

Enquiries

Enquiries about the track and scale classification system and discounts
should be directed to Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2.

The Resources page contains contact details, a ASGC-RA scaling discounts
table, ASGC-RA rates of discount table and scaling discount examples
table. .

Contents

Medical practitioners registered on Medical Rural Bonded Scholarship
Scheme or Bonded Medical Places

Eligibility for the 5 Year Overseas Trained Doctor (OTD) Scheme

Related links

Eligibility for track and scale of overseas trained doctors and foreign
graduates of an accredited medical school

Eligibility for scaling Medical Rural Bonded Scholarship Scheme and
Bonded Medical Places

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
