
Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for seed organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the creation of Healthcare
Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for seed organisation
in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Online registration form

If an applicant is unable to apply online, they can request the
Application to register a Seed Organisation form (HW018) and apply
manually. Download the HW018 via the intranet and send to applicant.

See Handle call for request for HI Service hard copy forms.

Definition of seed organisation

A seed organisation is an entity registered in the HI Service by the
organisation's Responsible Officer (RO) and may have multiple network
organisations in its hierarchy. The seed is the senior level within an
organisational hierarchy or structure. Organisation Maintenance Officers
(OMO) from seed organisations have the authority to update, maintain or
otherwise manage the HPI-O records of all network organisations in the
seed organisation's network hierarchy.

A seed organisation must:

be created by a Service Officer

have:

-   1 RO linked and
-   at least 1 OMO linked

The RO of the seed organisation:

-   is the only individual who can apply to create a seed organisation
    in the HI Service
-   must be registered with an active record in the HI Service before
    they can create a seed organisation
-   can nominate themselves to also be the OMO

The OMO of the seed organisation:

-   has administrative access to the organisation records they are
    linked to
-   can add or remove links for other OMO or Healthcare Providers within
    the organisational hierarchy that they are responsible for
-   can create network organisations in the organisations hierarchy
-   can update the Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD) for the
    organisation they represent

Seed organisation applicant located overseas

All applications from companies located overseas applying for a HPI-O
must be referred directly to Tier 3.

Sole Trader

A sole trader is a type of business entity that is owned and run by 1
individual, and in which there is no legal distinction between the owner
and the business.

A sole trader must supply:

-   An Australian Business Number (ABN) which is registered in their own
    name. This must be verified using the ABN website by Service
    Officers when the application is being processed
-   Required evidence to identify themselves, unless they satisfy the
    known customer criteria. This is also taken as the evidence of
    identity for the business entity

If the 'Individual/Sole Trader' is the same name as the Responsible
Officer (RO) in the application, there is no requirement for the sole
trader to:

-   provide evidence of business identity
-   supply an authority to act on behalf of the 'business'

Create a seed organisation by a Service Officer

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer identification details, the
details of the requestor are also recorded.

An organisation must not be created with the same name details as
another organisation already registered in the HI Service. Where a
search returns an exact match to an organisation name already
registered, part of the name must be amended to make the name unique.

To create a seed organisation the Responsible Officer (RO) must provide
to a Service Officer:

A completed application form

Documentary evidence that the Organisation is a legal business entity,
for example:

Option 1: an original or certified copy of the notice issued by the
Australian Business Register (ABR) bearing the business entity’s name
and Australian Business Number (ABN). The RO must be named as the Public
Officer on the document, or

Option 2: a legal or regulatory document that established the RO has the
authority to commit the business and the ABN on the form.
Some types of legal documents acceptable are:

-   an affidavit or statutory declaration sworn by a member of the board
    or executive of the seed organisation
-   a deed of appointment, or
-   any other legal documentation which displays that the RO has the
    authority to commit the seed organisation
-   if the RO is the CEO or Director of the organisation applying to
    register they would be regarded as the authorised person to commit
    the business

In addition to either Option 1 or Option 2 a Service Officer must always
verify online with the Australian Business Register website to match the
organisation’s ABN to its business name.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Business Register
website.

Organisations applying with a future start date

If an application is received with a future start date, contact the
organisation to confirm the correct date has been provided on the form.

If the start date is correct:

-   and the evidence supplied with the application shows that the entity
    is a current legal entity then the application can be processed
    immediately, see Apply for a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
    certificate for more information
-   but the evidence supplied with the application shows that the entity
    has a future start date, then the application will be held for
    processing until the start date on that piece of evidence (not the
    application), and the applicant will be notified

A seed organisation that has a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) location
certificate issued by Services Australia is not required to provide
documentary evidence that the organisation is a legal business entity
(as listed above). In this instance the seed organisation is regarded as
known to Services Australia.

The Service Officer must perform a search within the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service to ensure an HPI-O record does not already
exist with the same organisational details. If a record:

-   exists, Service Officers can amend the HPI-O record
-   does not exist, Service Officers can start the creation process

The HI Service creates a unique HPI-O number.

A letter will be generated and addressed to the Responsible Officer (RO)
notifying them of the creation. The letter will be addressed to the RO
and sent to their preferred address.

Note: if requested, the Service Officer must initiate the creation of:

-   a new HI Service PKI certificate or linking of an existing PKI
    certificate to enable access to the HI Service
-   a new My Health Record or National Authentication Service for Health
    (NASH) PKI certificate to enable access to the My Health Record
    system (available to Tier 3 only)

The RO or Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO) may authorise
publishing for an entry to appear in the HI Healthcare Provider
Directory (HI HPD).

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Business Register
(ABR) and the organisation type reference guide.

Related links

Process online registration for Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O)

Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifier Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Create Responsible Officer (RO) record in the Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) Service

Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for
network organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity processing for an organisation in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Apply for a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate

Handle call for request for HI Service hard copy forms

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
