
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Growth Hormone Program 012-63030010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines the administration of the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) Growth Hormone (GH) Program.

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Growth Hormone (GH) Program (paediatric use)

The administration of the GH Program transferred from the Department of
Health and Aged Care to Services Australia (the agency) on 1 September
2015 as a prescription based program. PBS subsidised GH remains as a
special arrangement under Section 100 of the National Health Act 1953.

Medicines listed under the GH Program require written authority.

Conditions treated under the GH Program (paediatric use):

-   short stature and slow growth (SSSG)
-   short stature associated with biochemical growth hormone deficiency
    (BGHD)
-   growth retardation secondary to an intracranial lesion, or cranial
    irradiation (CL/CI)
-   hypothalamic-pituitary disease secondary to a structural lesion,
    with hypothalamic obesity driven growth (HO)
-   risk of hypoglycaemia secondary to growth hormone deficiency in
    neonates/infants (N)
-   biochemical growth hormone deficiency and precocious puberty (PP)
-   short stature associated with Turner syndrome (TS)
-   short stature due to short stature homeobox gene disorders (SHOX)
-   short stature associated with chronic renal insufficiency (CR)
-   short stature and poor body composition due to Prader-Willi syndrome
    (PW)

Processing Growth Hormone (GH) authority applications

All GH applications will be assessed and processed by a Complex Drugs
Pharmaceutical Adviser (PA).

Processing in Online PBS Authorities (OPA) system

All paediatric Growth Hormone applications can be processed using the
OPA system regardless of the treatment and condition combination.

From 1 September 2020, prescribers can submit their PBS GH authority
applications in OPA and receive a real time assessment result.

The OPA system will:

-   provide prescribers with a real time assessment result
-   help patients get their approved authority prescriptions sooner, and
-   remove the need for prescribers to post supporting documentation

To use the OPA system or the form upload in HPOS, prescribers must
register for a Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account.

Patients can take their GH approved PBS authority prescription to a
pharmacy of their choice.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, links to the
Services Australia website, the Department of Health and Aged Care
website and Frequently Asked Questions.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Authority required and Section
100 - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
