
Approved Medical Deputising Service program for Medicare 012-42030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Approved Medical Deputising
Service (AMDS) program for Medicare.

On this Page:

AMDS program

The AMDS program aims to expand the pool of available medical
practitioners providing after hours services. The program allows medical
practitioners who are otherwise restricted from accessing Medicare
benefits to provide a restricted range of professional services for
which a Medicare benefit is payable, where the medical practitioner
works for an approved medical deputising service.

Placement approvals and removals

Placements on the AMDS program are approved, or revoked, by the Rural
Workforce Distribution section in the Department of Health Canberra.

Register an AMDS placement

The AMDS program is an approved program under section 3GA of the Health
Insurance Act 1973. The Chief Executive Medicare maintains a Register of
Approved Placements.

The Department of Health sends the approved placement to the Provider
Registration team for the state or territory of the location of the
placement.

To register the placement, the AMDS participant must:

-   be a registered medical practitioner, and
-   have a provider number for the specific practice location

Placement approvals are time and location specific. The legislation
prevents registering a placement with a start date earlier than the date
Services Australia receives the placement advice.

When the medical practitioner is included on the Register of Approved
Placements, a delegate of the Chief Executive Medicare notifies them of:

-   the location address
-   their provider number, and
-   the effective period of the registered placement

Medical practitioners must take note of the expiry date.

Note: Services Australia does not send reminder letters about approved
program placements.

Revoke an AMDS placement

The Department of Health advises Services Australia when it revokes an
AMDS program placement.

When a placement is revoked, a delegate of the Chief Executive Medicare
must give 14 days' notice and notifies the AMDS participant of:

-   the location address
-   their provider number, and
-   the date access to Medicare benefits under the program placement
    ends

Access to Medicare benefits

The AMDS program allows access to:

-   other non-referred attendance items (including the Group A2
    attendance items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS))
-   relevant procedural items at the specific location, and
-   for the registered period and hours specified

Information about the items and rules can be found in the MBS.

Payment of Medicare benefits is subject to the AMDS participant being
registered as a medical practitioner with the Medical Board of Australia
and satisfying any other legislative provisions that may apply at the
date of service.

Some program participants may be subject to the restrictions on
accessing Medicare benefits under Section 19AB of the Health Insurance
Act 1973. AMDS participants must therefore have a valid section 19AB
exemption for the location and period of the placement to access
Medicare benefits, in addition to the approved placement.

Enquiries

Enquiries about the AMDS program, placements or approved medical
deputising services should be directed to the Department of Health.

Enquiries about registering AMDS program placements should be directed
to Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration and Approved placement programs for health
professionals, and links to the Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) Online
and Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) websites.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
