
Processing provider number applications for Interns in Medicare 012-42010070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on processing provider number
applications for interns in Medicare.

How to apply for a provider number

A health professional:

-   completes, signs, and dates an application for a provider number
    form for their health profession
-   attaches the documentation as indicated on the form
-   mails or faxes the documentation to the Provider Registration team
    to the postal address or fax number on the application form

Address and fax details are listed on the application form 'Returning
your form'.

From 8 December 2019, a new function in PDS creates Medicare shell
records. It uses a data feed directly from the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Eligible medical interns can use the Digital Provider Number
Registration (DPNR) function in Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) to complete their Medicare registration. Note: this only applies
to medical interns trained in Australia or New Zealand without
conditions or notations.

For manually submitted applications where a Medicare shell record exists
in PDS Service Officers will use the shell record along with information
provided in the application form to complete the Medicare Provider
Number registration process. The current Medicare provider number
process will continue to apply where a Medicare shell record does not
exist.

The Resources page contains a link to the Application for a provider
number form.

Medical Interns

From 8 December 2019, eligible medical interns are able to complete
their initial DPNR process in HPOS. They are also able to apply for
subsequent provider locations and request a prescriber number through
HPOS.

When PDS creates a Medicare shell record, eligible medical interns:

-   receive an email from Services Australia inviting them to complete
    their Provider registration online through HPOS. This includes
    uploading any additional documentation that may be required, such as
    proof of residency

Service Officers only need to action applications:

-   where the medical intern is subject to section 19AB of the Act , and
-   further documentation such as proof of residency needs reviewing

Current restrictions with the DPNR function

The DPNR process is for eligible medical interns during their
internship. Eligible medical interns who have completed their internship
will be required to submit an Application for a Medicare provider number
and, or prescriber number for a medical practitioner (HW019).

Eligible medical interns can use the current DPNR process through HPOS
to:

-   lodge an initial Medicare provider number registration
-   request a prescriber number when completing the DPNR process
-   apply for extra locations

A medical practitioner cannot use DPNR once they:

-   complete an internship, and
-   no longer have provisional registration with Ahpra

All other medical practitioners who need an initial or extra Medicare
provider registration must:

-   complete an Application for a Medicare provider number and, or
    prescriber number for a medical practitioner (HW019), and
-   lodge any supporting documents

Medical practitioners only need to complete the Application for a
Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number for a medical
practitioner (HW019) when:

-   they need to request extra provider numbers, and
-   they are not eligible to create a new provider location in HPOS

Enquiries

Refer all enquiries about eligibility to access Medicare to Medicare
Provider Registration.

Enquiry Escalation

Trained Service Officers handle all provider registration enquiries via
the Provider Registration Tier 2 telephony line. Provider Registration
Service Officers escalate complex enquiries to a Provider Registration
Programme Support Officer (PSO). A PSO can then liaise with a Programme
Officer (PO) if required

The Resources page contains a table of provider types, links to external
and internal websites and contact details.

Related links

Provider registration Coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Provider registration Coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Section 19(2) and 19(5) directions

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Applications for a provider number for medical practitioners and
sections 19AA/19AB requirements

Provider numbers for health professionals in Medicare and the Provider
Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
