
Prescriptions and claims for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-62030100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Approved Suppliers are no longer able to submit Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) and Repatriation Benefits Scheme (RPBS) claims for
processing to the agency via the CTS diskette claiming channel.
This channel remains in place to support the Stoma Appliance Scheme
(SAS) and Section 100 Paraplegic and Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) programme
only. Services Australia’s primary claiming channel is PBS Online.
Manual claiming continues as normal.

This document outlines information for prescriptions and claims for the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

On this Page:

Prescription previously paid

Where there is no signature block on the Services Australia/Department
of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) copy, and the system displays a warning
reason code, refer to the reason code applied to the prescription.
Service Officer 'action' describes how to resolve the same day
prescribing issue as the incorrect copy with the original signature may
have been previously paid.

Claims for payment where prescription(s) or claim-related paperwork is declared lost/missing by a Statutory Declaration

A pharmacy can complete a Statutory Declaration if:

-   they have lost or damaged prescriptions or claim related paperwork,
    and
-   this is due to circumstances outside of their reasonable control

The declaration will include a statement about the lost or missing
paperwork. The declaration should also include information about the
nature of the loss, such as natural disaster. The pharmacy will need to
retain this for a period of 2 years for audit and verification purposes.

Pharmacists can download a Statutory Declaration form from the
Attorney-General’s Department website or purchase one from any post
office or newsagent. Services Australia can only accept Commonwealth of
Australia Statutory Declaration forms from these sources.

Suggested text for a statutory declaration

I declare that:

-   I cannot provide the paper prescription(s) to support this claim
    because of the effects of the disaster, for example a bushfire or
    flood
-   I have not, and will not, make a claim against my insurance company
    for this claim. If the prescription(s) or claim paperwork are
    recovered I will forward them to Services Australia with a note of
    explanation stating that I will not resubmit these prescription(s)
    or claim paperwork for payment

See the Resources page for a link to the Attorney-General’s Department
website.

Manual claiming

If claiming manually, a completed Statutory Declaration with other
supporting information can be sent to Services Australia for processing.
For example, after a claim period has closed,

Manual claims are assessed on a case-by-case basis. Services Australia
staff cannot pre-empt the outcome, or provide confirmation of payment
until the claim and supporting documentation has been assessed.

Note: missing prescriptions which have been lost or not obtained due to
poor administrative practises cannot be claimed with the submission of a
statutory declaration. For example, owed prescriptions, or where the
patient left the pharmacy with their prescription in hand.

See the Process page for how to process a manual claim for payment
claimed with the submission of a statutory declaration.

Owing prescriptions (urgent supply)

In a case of urgency, an approved pharmacist may only supply a PBS
medication without a prescription if:

-   the PBS prescriber has advised the approved pharmacist of the
    prescription details, and
-   in the case of authority required medicines (including streamlined
    items) the required approval number has been communicated to the
    approved pharmacist

The prescriber must provide the approved pharmacist with the original
valid prescription no later than 7 days to comply with the current
legislation - the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Regulations
2017, section 48. However, an approved pharmacist will not be penalised
where the PBS prescriber has not forwarded the paper prescription for
the urgent supply of a pharmaceutical benefit within 7 days.

When the approved pharmacist receives the prescription they must use the
owing mark-off functionality to enter in the prescribing date and
mark-off the prescription recorded in the Prescription Dispensing
Software (PDS). The supply date must not be amended by the approved
pharmacist.

Note:

-   Services Australia recommends that the approved pharmacist asks the
    PBS prescriber for a faxed copy of the approved authority, authority
    approval number or the streamlined authority code to ensure approval
    has been obtained prior to dispensing.
-   If a pharmacist supplies an ‘authority required’ prescription prior
    to approval by Services Australia or Department of Veterans'
    Affairs, the script is not valid for payment. Authority approval
    cannot be granted retrospectively after the item has already been
    dispensed by the pharmacist.
-   Where the prescription has been dispensed as an 'owing'
    prescription, the original prescription will not be available for
    the patient or agent to sign for receipt of the medication. In this
    instance the pharmacist will certify supply.

Receipt of PBS prescriptions by patient or agent

Patients who receive PBS medicine must acknowledge on the prescription
or repeat authorisation that they have received it by signing and dating
the prescription.

Note: a patient or their agent should not sign for receipt of a PBS
medicine before the medicine has been supplied.

Where an agent is collecting a PBS medicine on behalf of someone else,
the agent is required to:

-   sign
-   date, and
-   provide their address

on the prescription as part of the receipting requirements.

Certification of a prescription by an approved pharmacist

If it is not practical or possible for a pharmacist to obtain a receipt
from a patient or their agent for the supply of a PBS medicine, the
pharmacist who made the supply must certify on the prescription:

-   date of supply
-   the reason why it was not practical to obtain a receipt from the
    patient or their agent, and
-   provide their name and sign the prescription

Note:

-   Certification by the pharmacist also applies to owing prescriptions.
-   Payment of a claim is not dependent on the nature of the reason
    given, however a reason must be provided.
-   An approved pharmacist must certify the prescription. Pharmacy staff
    must not certify prescriptions.

Certified supply endorsement

A certification can include the reasons below, however these are only
provided as examples. There is no comprehensive list, as long as a
reason is provided this is acceptable:

-   patient unable to sign
-   delivered by courier
-   delivered and receipt impractical
-   patient too ill to sign
-   mailed to patient on (date)
-   patient has broken arm and is unable to sign
-   owing prescription/owed script (or words to this effect)

Unacceptable certifications

Below are examples of unacceptable certifications:

-   signed and dated by pharmacy staff not an approved pharmacist
-   'I certify the above medication has been supplied'
-   prescriptions signed by pharmacist but no reason given

Use of stamps for pharmacist certification

Policy 1 - Use of stamps for certification

Services Australia accepts the use of a stamp that explains the reason
why it was not practical or possible to obtain a receipt from a patient
or their agent. A date stamp can also be used. However, the pharmacist
must still provide a handwritten signature as part of the certification.
Certifications with stamps showing an embedded pharmacist signature are
not allowable.

PBS and patients with compensation claims

PBS and Compensation

Service Officers who are answering enquiries relating to PBS and
compensation claims.

Entitlement to pharmaceutical benefits

Regardless of whether a patient is making a compensation claim or not,
all Australian residents are entitled to pharmaceutical benefits at the
appropriate level of eligibility. This means that:

-   a compensation claim does not need to be declared at time of
    prescribing or supply
-   a patient is required to pay the patient contribution appropriate to
    their level of entitlement at the time of supply
-   the pharmacist submits a claim for pharmaceutical benefits as usual
-   any attempt at recovery of the patient contribution by the patient,
    is outside the PBS, and is between the patient and their insurance
    company

Once the compensation claim is finalised, there are no legal provisions
available to Services Australia to recover any benefits paid to a
pharmacy.

PBS or non-PBS (private) prescription

The prescriber determines whether a prescription is written as a PBS
prescription or a non-PBS (private) prescription. If the prescription is
written as a PBS prescription for a PBS medicine, the patient is
entitled to receive the medicine at the appropriate patient contribution
rate.

Compensation and the PBS Safety Net

All PBS medicines supplied can count towards a PBS Safety Net threshold
for the patient and patient's family, regardless of whether or not it is
a compensable injury.

Deferred supply of medicine

The original supply of a medicine may be deferred when:

-   a prescription has more than one medicine and the patient does not
    require all medicines
-   the medicine is unable to be supplied immediately
-   the patient changes PBS Safety Net entitlement status

The pharmacist needs to endorse each deferred medicine with the words
'Original Supply Deferred' on the Services Australia/Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) copy of the original prescription.

Pharmacists can only defer an Authority required medicine if it appears
on a hospital prescription form from a prescriber within a public
hospital participating in Pharmaceutical Reforms.

The Resources page contains example circumstances for lost/missing
prescriptions and the suggested outcome, links to Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) letters and a link to the Attorney-General’s
Department website.

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) reason codes for online claiming
for PBS pharmacies

Pricing and fees in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Pharmacies affected by emergency or disaster events

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
