
Amend Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03070030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to amend Contracted Service
Provider (CSP) organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service.

Requirements to amend the CSP organisation record

The CSP Officer is the registered individual responsible for maintaining
accuracy of the CSP organisation record details in the HI Service.

A request to amend a CSP organisation record must come from its
authorised CSP Officer.

Before a Service Officer can complete this process the following must be
provided:

-   security check for the CSP Officer requesting the amendment
-   completed Application to amend details of a Contracted Service
    Provider organisation record form
-   original or certified copies of documents to support amendments
    (where required)

Duplicate checking will occur automatically in the system to ensure that
a change made to a record will not cause a duplicate of an existing
record.

Where necessary, relevant information is automatically sent to the
Certificate Issuance and Management System (CIMS) to create, revoke or
amend HI Service Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate
permissions.

The start and end dates can be amended to any day in the past or future,
but the end date cannot be prior to the start date.

All details relating to a CSP organisation can be updated if the CSP
record has a status of Active, Deactivated or Retired.

A CSP organisation must have at least 1 and up to a maximum of 3 CSP
Officers linked to it.

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officers details, the details of the
requestor are also recorded.

Related links

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using
eHealth Program (EHP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
