
Processing provider number applications for overseas trained or temporary resident medical practitioners 012-18051000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about assessing and processing
applications received from overseas trained medical practitioners, or
temporary resident medical practitioners.

Assessing and Processing applications

Services Australia is responsible for assessing and processing
applications received from:

-   Overseas trained medical practitioners (also referred to as overseas
    trained doctors or OTD), or
-   Temporary resident medical practitioners (also referred to as
    temporary resident doctors or TRD)

The Department of Health and Aged Care website provides comprehensive
information to medical practitioners intending to work in Australia and
access Medicare.

Ten year moratorium and Medical Board Registration

From 1 January 1997, restrictions were introduced for medical
practitioners who were trained overseas or are temporary residents of
Australia and first registered as a medical practitioner on and after 1
January 1997. This change introduced the 10 year moratorium (500
specialty code in Provider Directory System (PDS) which is the period of
time these practitioners cannot access Medicare benefits unless they
satisfy the requirements of section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act.

Registered between 1 January 1997 and 17 October 2001

TRDs with first medical board registration between 1 January 1997 and 17
October 2001 are only subject to the 10 year moratorium for the 10 year
period. The moratorium period applies for 10 years from the date of
first medical board registration regardless of their residency status at
the time of completion (identified by the end date of the 500 specialty
code in PDS).

Registered from 18 October 2001

For medical practitioners first registered on and after 18 October 2001,
they remain subject to section 19AB for a minimum period of 10 years and
section 19AB continues to apply while the medical practitioner remains a
temporary resident of Australia.

-   If the medical practitioner becomes an Australian permanent resident
    or Australian citizen within the 10 year moratorium, the medical
    practitioner remains subject to section 19AB for the period of the
    10 year moratorium
-   Where a medical practitioner remains a temporary resident beyond the
    ten year moratorium period and then becomes an Australian permanent
    resident or Australian citizen, the medical practitioner is no
    longer subject to section 19AB from the date of permanent residency
    or citizenship (identified by the start date of the 110 specialty
    code)

The References page contains a link to section 19AB of the Health
Insurance Act.

Disclosure of information/privacy incidents

Services Australia has a responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding the agency will protect this from unauthorised access,
use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain confident
that the agency will protect their information and comply with the
privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia's Privacy and
Secrecy page and the Operational Privacy Policy.

Enquiry Escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by Service Officers. These
Service Officers escalate complex enquiries to a Programme Support
Officer (PSO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team in
National Office for assistance if required.

Business structure information measure

The mandatory collection of employment status and business structure
information began on 10 September 2018. This was introduced to improve
recovery arrangements for Medicare debts owed to the Commonwealth under
the Health Legislation Amendment (Improved Medicare Compliance and Other
Measures) Bill 2018.

Health professionals who intend to claim Medicare benefits are required
to provide employment status and business details when:

-   Submitting a new application for a provider number
-   Backdating an existing location start date
-   Re-opening a previously closed provider number
-   Opening a second provider number at an existing location (with a
    different ABN)

The Resources page contains for a link to the Department of Health and
Aged Care - Changes to Legislation - Improved Medicare Compliance
website. Direct all enquiries about this measure to the Department of
Health and Aged Care.

The Resources page contains a list of acceptable abbreviations for
medical degrees, links to contact details, specialty codes and
eligibility criteria, forms, letters, intranet links, Services Australia
website links and external links.

Related links

Applications for a provider number for medical practitioners and
sections 19AA/19AB requirements

Processing a change in residency status for a medical practitioner

Processing provider number applications for Interns in Medicare

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for health
professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
