
Chiropractor - provider eligibility and registration 012-18070311

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for chiropractors.

Chiropractors

Chiropractors are allied health professionals who are mostly concerned
with the diagnosis and treatment of mechanical disorders of the
musculoskeletal system, especially the spine.

The main chiropractic treatment technique involves manual therapy,
especially spinal manipulation therapy, as well as manipulations of
other joints and soft tissues.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra). The Resources page has the
contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must:

-   have current registration to practice with the Chiropractic Board of
    Australia. This is a board supported by the Australian Health
    Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

Evidence of registration may be:

-   a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate submitted with an
    initial application for a provider number, and/or
-   where there is an existing 'shell' record in PDS, registration
    details are pre-populated within the 'shell' record, and/or
-   Ahpra Information winder (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November. The Resources page has
a link to the Ahpra website.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. Service Officers raise complex
enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer (PSO) for
assistance. Where required, the enquiry is escalated to a Programme
Officer (PO), who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team in
National Office.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, useful contacts,
and links to external websites.

Related links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Chiropractic services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
