
Telehealth consultations in Medicare 012-41050010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Telehealth consultations in
Medicare.

On this Page:

Video consultations

A Telehealth consultation is where an eligible specialist, consultant
physician or consultant psychiatrist provides a consultation to an
eligible patient, via video conference.

Minimum distance requirement

From 1 November 2012, changes to Telehealth announced in the 2012-2013
Budget, required that there is at least a 15 km distance between
patients and specialists or consultants.

Exception - the distance requirement does not apply to the following, as
they can be located anywhere in Australia:

-   residents of Residential Aged Care Services (RACS)
-   patients of eligible Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS)/Aboriginal
    Community Controlled Health Services (ACCHS)

Reason for the change

Telehealth items were introduced to provide patients in remote, regional
and outer metropolitan areas with access to specialists sooner than
would otherwise be the case, and without the time and expense involved
in travelling to major cities.

The original item structure has been successful in encouraging
practitioners to provide video consultations to eligible patients. This
structure allows doctors to provide video consultations to a patient who
is located near the specialist when it could be more appropriate to have
a face-to-face consultation.

The introduction of a 15 km distance requirement ensures that funding is
targeted at patients for whom distance is a genuine barrier to accessing
specialist care.

Impact on patients

The only patients who may be affected are those who are within 15 km of
the relevant specialist, and are unable to physically attend a
consultation.

The Resources page contains questions and answers for practitioners and
patients.

Video consultation eligibility requirements

For a Telehealth video consultation, the specialist or consultant must:

-   Have an audio and visual link with the patient.
-   Be satisfied that it is clinically relevant to provide a video
    consultation to a patient. Advice from the referring practitioner
    may assist in this decision.

Eligible areas

Both patient, and Telehealth specialist or consultant must be located in
Australia for the Telehealth video consultation.

There is no geographical restriction on where the specialist, consultant
physician or psychiatrist is located. At the time of the video
consultation the patient (at the other end of the video link) must be
located in a Telehealth eligible area.

Note: there must be at least 15 km distance between patients and
specialists, consultant physicians or psychiatrists.

Exception: no geographical area restrictions or distance requirements
apply to:

-   residents of Residential Aged Care Services (RACS)
-   patients of Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS)/Aboriginal Controlled
    Community Health Services (ACCHS)

The Resources page provides a table showing eligible areas where
Telehealth services are located and links to further information on
eligible geographical areas on the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
Online and the Department of Health and Aged Care websites.

Eligible patients

Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) and Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) rebates are payable for Telehealth services provided to:

-   patients in remote, regional and outer metropolitan areas
    (Remoteness Areas RA2-5)
-   residents of residential aged care services (RACS)
-   patients of Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS)/Aboriginal Controlled
    Community Health Services (ACCHS)

Notes:

-   patients must be located in Australia for the Telehealth video
    consultation
-   admitted public or private hospital patients are not eligible for
    Telehealth services
-   there must be at least 15 km distance between patients and
    specialists, consultant, physicians or psychiatrists

Exception: the distance requirement does not apply to:

-   residents of RACS
-   patients of AMS/ACCHS

Facility hosting video consultations

It is expected that video consultations are provided from a medical
facility or a facility with the capacity for professional medical
support. In more remote areas, video consultations can be provided in a
range of other locations, such as a patient's home, when considered
clinically relevant.

Telehealth consultations can take place in the following locations that
have suitable video conferencing equipment:

-   a medical practice
-   a patient's home
-   eligible Aboriginal Medical Services (AMS)/Aboriginal Community
    Controlled Health Services (ACCHS)
-   eligible residents of residential aged care services (RACS)
-   other location

Note: Telehealth consultations must be out of hospital services and are
not payable for admitted public or private hospital patients.

The Resources page provides a table showing the requirements for a
medical facility or a facility to conduct Telehealth consultations.

Eligible practitioners

To claim Telehealth services provided to their eligible patients,
Telehealth practitioners must:

-   have a Medicare provider number
-   work in a private capacity
-   meet the Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) item description

The Resources page contains a link to the Telehealth program guidelines
on the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Online.

Specialists or consultants

Specialists, consultant physicians and consultant psychiatrists who have
a Medicare provider number are eligible to provide Telehealth
consultations from any location.

There is no geographical restriction on where the specialist or
consultant is located, however, at the time of the video consultation
the patient (at the other end of the video link) must be located in an
eligible Telehealth area.

Exception: when the patient is an approved care recipient of a
residential aged care facility or a patient at an eligible Aboriginal
Medical Service they can be located anywhere in Australia.

See also: Claims for Telehealth video consultations in Medicare.

Supporting health professionals

The following health professionals who have a Medicare provider number
linked to an eligible patient location can provide a Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) Telehealth support service:

-   registered medical practitioner (including locums)
-   non-vocationally recognised medical practitioner (non-VR MP)
-   midwife
-   nurse practitioner
-   practice nurse*
-   Aboriginal health worker*

*For and on behalf of a general practitioner (GP) or non-VR MP.

The supporting practitioner does not need to be present for the entire
consultation, only as long as is clinically relevant.

When the consultation takes place at a location other than consulting
rooms (such as the patient's home), the practitioner should use the
provider number for the location where the patient's clinical records
are kept. This location must be within an eligible Telehealth area.

Practice nurses and Aboriginal health workers employed or engaged by a
general practice or health service can assist medical practitioners in
Telehealth consultations by accepted medical practice and under the
supervision of the medical practitioner.

Practice nurse/Aboriginal health worker item numbers are billed using
the supervising medical practitioner's provider number.

Midwives are restricted to providing support to patients for Telehealth
consultations with Obstetricians or Paediatricians only.

The Resources page provides a table showing the requirements for a
supporting health professional to conduct Telehealth consultations.

Clinical notes, referrals and requests, and prescriptions

Clinical notes

Telehealth practitioners are required to keep contemporaneous notes and
document evidence of Telehealth consultations including the time and
people who participated.

Only clinical details recorded at the time of the attendance count
towards the time of the consultation. It does not include information
added at a later time, such as reports of investigations.

Referrals and requests

Referral requirements for a Telehealth consultation are exactly the same
as those for a standard face-to-face consultation.

Pathology and diagnostic imaging tests can be requested just like in a
face-to-face consultation. The arrangements for ordering tests could
vary between email, fax, mail and/or in consultation with the supporting
health professional.

Prescriptions

Supporting health professionals can provide prescriptions ordered by
specialists during a video consultation.

When the drug to be prescribed can only be ordered by an eligible
specialist, consultant physician or psychiatrist, or when a supporting
health professional is not involved in the video consultation, they can
mail a prescription to the patient or the patient’s pharmacist.

Technical requirements

Telehealth consultations must have a visual and audio connection
established between the patient and the specialist or consultant in
order to bill Telehealth Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) items.

This visual and audio connection can be:

-   1 technology (for example audio enabled video conferencing)
-   multiple technologies (for example video conferencing plus
    telephone)

Equipment

The Department of Health and Aged Care and Services Australia do not
mandate any specific Telehealth equipment or 'system' for Telehealth
consultations but Telehealth practitioners should be confident that the
technical solution provides satisfactory:

video quality for the clinical service being provided, and

security to meet relevant security and privacy laws for health
information (patient information and medical records). This includes the
transmission of information relating to the Telehealth consultation,
such as:

-   sound
-   images
-   other data

For any requirements or recommendations on suitable equipment for
Telehealth consultations specific to their discipline, Telehealth
practitioners can contact their professional college.

Note: the MBS Telehealth consultation items are not payable for
telephone only or email consultations.

The Resources page provides a table outlining resolving technical issues
in Telehealth consultations and a link to the technical issues for
Telehealth on the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Online.

See also: Claims for Telehealth video consultations in Medicare.

Privacy requirements

Video consultations:

general privacy requirements as the same as for face-to-face
consultations, such as:

-   confidentiality
-   patient consent
-   security of patient information and medical records

involve the transmission of sound, images and other data relating to the
consultation

should be conducted using secure infrastructure or encryption

Note: when the possibility of a third party interception exists, the
patient should be told and asked for their consent to proceed.

The Resources page contains information and links to websites providing
additional information on Telehealth consultations in Medicare and a
link to contact details for Telehealth.

Related links

Claims for Telehealth video consultations in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
