
Payments for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about payments made to Veterans'
Affairs Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

General AMD procedures

VAP may require an adjustment to an incorrect payment, designated as
amendment (AMD).

The following procedures apply when a file fix is not required.

See also: Request a file fix for claims in Veterans' Affairs Processing
(VAP)

Note: adjustment claims should be keyed using the original claim ID with
an alpha suffix.

Adjustments for underpaid AMD or travel not paid AMD

The procedures for amendment (AMD) adjustments involve:

-   incorrect location, underpaid
-   same item, same date of service, underpaid
-   different item, same date of service, underpaid

Note: current processing rules must be followed when processing a
request for adjustment. Service Officers should refer to Medicare's
payment enquiry system, Operational Blueprint or the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) to assist in the adjustment of item number.

The Process page contains processing information for underpaid AMD and
travel not paid AMD.

Category specific AMD procedures

Community nursing NO items:

Community nursing items have a NO prefix

See also: Community nursing services for Veterans' Affairs Processing
(VAP)

Dental:

-   Items 771, 743 and 744 reason code amendment (AMD) cannot be entered
    in the RSN field as the system must display UPR or LWR for these
    items. The presence of PI58 is the only indication of why an amended
    fee has been paid.
-   All other dental items can be treated as general AMD adjustments.

Speech pathology:

The Process page has information for AMD adjustments relating to speech
pathology items.

Note: adjustment claims should be keyed using the original claim ID with
an alpha suffix.

DVA GDES report - redirect or write back of failed EFT payments

This information is aimed at eBusiness Service Centre (eBSC) staff who
are responsible for actioning the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
Government Direct Entry Services (GDES) report.

The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) provides Services Australia with a
GDES report identifying Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) failures. A
specific report for VAP is generated and shown as Veteran Treatment
Account (VTA) Benefits in the Remitter Name field on the daily report.

The Finance section in Services Australia receives the DVA GDES report
from the RBA and forwards it to the eBusiness Service Centre to action.

The GDES report must be actioned daily to fulfil the Australian National
Audit Office (ANAO) requirement of no outstanding amounts over 90 days.

eBusiness Service Centre staff must action all manual and online
returned funds.

A write back is where an EFT payment can’t be made and the money is
credited back to benefits.

Request for write back of a failed DVA EFT payment occurs when:

-   a provider who, after 45 days, still fails to supply alternative EFT
    details after they had been a advised.
-   it can be established that alternative bank account details will not
    be able to be collected for a provider, for example provider has
    left practice with no forwarding address or provider deceased

See also:

-   DVA GDES report processing table on the Process page.
-   List of DVA GDES rejection codes table on the Resources page.

Contacts for DVA GDES redirect or write back failed EFT payments

Any questions about redirecting a failed Department of Veterans' Affairs
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) payment or write back process should be
directed to the VAP Helpdesk. Sites responsible for Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Government Direct Entry Services (GDES) reports
should email eBusiness. See also: Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP).

Provider requests for treatment data requests (TDR)

When statements 2 years and older cannot be generated by VAP, a
provider/practice must submit a written and signed request to DVA
enabling production of a TDR of claiming history. See also: Veterans'
Affairs Processing (VAP) for contact details. The Process page contains
the procedure Reissue of statements using VCEI.

The Resources page contains information on payments for Veterans'
Affairs Processing (VAP), including rejection codes, mainframe field
details and forms, and a link to contact details for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Related links

Request a file fix for claims in Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Community nursing services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
