
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process the Practice Incentives
application (IP001) form for practices applying for PIP and/or WIP -
Practice Stream.

Practice Incentives applications

Applications can be lodged:

-   Electronically via Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) in PIP
    Online or WIP Practice Stream Online, or
-   By manual fax submission

The following forms and documents must be submitted for assessment and
processing:

-   Practice Incentives application (IP001) form
-   Current Accreditation certificate

A practice can be registered for the:

-   PIP
-   WIP - Practice Stream as a PIP consenting practice
-   WIP - Practice Stream only

The IP001 form consists of the below parts:

-   Part A - Eligibility requirements and practice details
-   Part B - Additional practice branches
-   Part C - Individual PIP Incentives (optional)
-   Part D - Workforce Incentive Program - Practice Stream (optional)
-   Part E - Practice ownership details
-   Part F - Individual general practitioner or nurse practitioner
    details and declaration

If the practice is applying for the WIP - Practice Stream as a PIP
consenting practice, Part F is not mandatory.

If the practice is already approved for the program, check that the
details on the IP001 form match the practice profile. Any changes to
practice details must be made via HPOS or the relevant form by the
point-in-time date.

Process PIP/WIP - Practice Stream application to Initial status

An application in Initial status allows the application to be registered
into PIP Online and/or WIP - Practice Stream Online without being
approved for the relevant program/s.
This records the application being received and the action taken.

If a practice is applying for:

-   PIP only, the application can be registered to initial stage for the
    PIP only
-   PIP and WIP - Practice Stream, the application can only be
    registered to initial stage for the PIP only
-   WIP - Practice Stream only, or is not PIP consenting, the
    application can be registered to initial stage for the WIP -
    Practice Stream only

If accreditation details have not been provided, the practice cannot be
registered to a status of Initial in PIP Online and/or WIP - Practice
Stream Online. Practices with no accreditation details are to be
recorded on the spreadsheet G:\INCENTIVESWORKFLOW/PIP and WIP - Practice
Stream New Applications UNABLE to Register Online.

Include the Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA) work item
ID and work type on the spreadsheet.

Assessing individual PIP incentives

A practice can apply for most of the Individual PIP Incentives at the
time of applying for the PIP using the IP001 form. The individual
incentives included on the practice application form are:

-   After Hours incentive
-   Indigenous Health Incentive
-   Procedural General Practitioner (GP) payment

Do not reject a practice application form if the practice does not apply
for any individual incentives.

A practice can only apply for the eHealth or Quality Improvement
incentives via HPOS after the practice's application has been approved
and they are issued a practice ID.

If a practice applies for PIP via HPOS, all of the PIP incentives can be
applied for in the online application.

The Resources page contains information on PIP consenting WIP - Practice
Stream practices, signatory requirements, accreditation descriptions,
processing new applications for withdrawn or closed practices and
contact details.

Related links

Incentive Programs

General policy and procedures for Incentive Programs

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

KOFAX for Incentive Programs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
