
Request a file fix for claims in Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17110000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to request a file fix for claims in Veterans'
Affairs Processing (VAP).

File fixes

File fixes are used to correct patient history in instances where
incorrect data will cause future processing problems.

File fixes are requested in one of two ways, depending on the type of
file fix:

-   History, Whole Claim Delete, Incorrect Provider, Incorrect Patient,
    PIN Mismatch, Add Goods and Services Tax (GST), and Remove GST file
    fix types are requested through the DVA Maintenance System (DVAMS)
-   For more complicated file fixes or DVAMS issues, Service Officers
    are to email the Help Desk

The Process page contains the file fix process for fixes through DVAMS,
and manual requests.

Determining if a file fix is required

A file fix is always required:

-   if the item or date of service originally claimed will create future
    time dependency or restrictive problems
-   if the Dental Schedule C limit will be affected
-   if recovery action has been taken for a denture item (T/D/S
    711,712,719,721,722,727,728,741,743,751,752,753)
-   to amend incorrect provider paid
-   to amend incorrect patient paid
-   if travel (Kilometres or OT80) has been underpaid
-   if GST component needs to be added or removed
-   if changing to an item number with a different GST item type

A file fix may be required following selected overpayment or recovery
actions.

Refer to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) if you require assistance in
determining the need for a file fix.

Note: where possible it is preferable to process an adjustment rather
than request a file fix.

Requirements depending on GST item type

Every item number has a GST item type which is recorded on the Item Fee
File. The GST item type can be obtained from QITI PF5.

The three GST item types are Direct, Third Party or General. If an item
attracts Direct GST, Services Australia issues an RCTI statement in
addition to the standard Statement of Benefits. If an item attracts
Third Party GST, GST will be paid, but an RCTI statement will not be
issued. If an item is General no GST is paid.

The Resources page contains information on what amendment action to take
depending on the item number's GST type.

System limitations

There are some circumstances where a file fix cannot be requested due to
system limitations.

If a file fix cannot be requested due to system limitations:

-   Contact the provider and seek recovery of payment for the claims
    involved
-   Once payment has been recovered, request a file fix to delete whole
    claim and process a new claim using the correct details
-   If provider does not want to refund the money, refer to PSO

The Resources page has information on limitations for all claims and
limitations specific to paperless online claims.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
