
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implementation (TAVI) - recognition and removal 012-18062120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition and removal of
specialists or consultant physicians as eligible to provide
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implementation (TAVI) for Medicare purposes.

On this Page:

Recognition of Training in TAVI

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in TAVI,
acknowledges that training and ongoing education are important elements
of maintaining high quality standards within the provision of TAVI
services.

Access to Medicare

Recognition for Medicare purposes as a specialist or consultant
physician trained in TAVI allows the medical practitioner to access
relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Continued access to relevant MBS items requires the medical practitioner
to continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the
Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services – Transcatheter
Aortic Valve Implantation) Determination 2018.

Eligibility for Recognition

To be recognised as trained in TAVI for Medicare purposes, a specialist
or consultant physician must be accredited by the Cardiac Accreditation
Services Limited (CASL).

Application for Recognition

Specialists or consultant physicians accredited by CASL do not need to
complete an application for recognition for Medicare purposes. Services
Australia is advised directly regarding a medical practitioner’s
recognition of training in TAVI by the CASL.

Legislation Recognising TAVI

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in TAVI
service is made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate)
under the Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services –
Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation) Determination 2018.

Recognition is recorded on the medical practitioner’s stem on the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The Reference page contains links to the legislation and determination.

Removal of Recognition

A medical practitioner may ask to no longer be recognised for Medicare
purposes as trained in TAVI by making a written request to Services
Australia. The agency will also remove a medical practitioner’s
recognition of training in TAVI if notified by CASL the medical
practitioner no longer meets Medicare eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a specialist or consultant physician wishes to dispute the removal of
their recognition as trained in TAVI they should be directed to contact
the TAVI Accreditation Committee.

The Resources page contains a link to the TAVI Accreditation Committee -
Contact internet page.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition/removal
to the Provider Registration team.

Continuing Professional Development Enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development to the TAVI
Accreditation Committee.

The Resources page contains a link to the TAVI Accreditation Committee -
Contact internet page.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has the responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding that our agency will protect this from unauthorised
access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain
confident that our agency will protect their information and comply with
the privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the Privacy and Secrecy intranet
page.

The Resources page contains links to letters, contact details, intranet
and external websites, and document examples.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
