
Assessing Pathology claims 012-40020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Coronavirus (COVID-19) information relating to MBS items, see
Temporary Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items in response to
Coronavirus (COVID-19)

This document outlines information to support the processing of claims
for pathology services.

Multiple Service Rule

The ‘Multiple Service Rule’ (Rule 3) places limits on the benefits
payable for items in the Pathology Services Table. This depends on the
range of services performed during a single patient episode.

See Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare for more
information about patient episodes.

Rule 3 Exempt

Rule 4 lists specific circumstances that exempt services from Rule 3.
These services are referred to as Rule 3 Exempt.

See Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

S4B(3) Exemption

When the account/claim contains the notation ‘S4B(3)’, pend the claim.
This allows a delegate to decide whether the individual items are
payable.

Example of S4B(3):

An exemption can be claimed under S4B(3) for chromosome studies
performed on multiple foetuses.

All items for the foetuses are claimed under the mother’s Medicare
number and Individual Reference Number (IRN). Item 73287 would be
payable twice as there have been chromosome studies performed on Twin 1
& Twin 2.

The delegate would review the claim for notation that a multiple
pregnancy was the reason for claiming the item twice in the one episode.

Note: the delegate can be secure in their decision as all payment
inaccuracies will be identified in post payment audit.

See Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

The Resources page has more information on returned messages and reason
codes for S4B(3) claims.

Claiming channels

Health professionals use a number of different claiming channels for
pathology services. Whilst the legislative rules are the same across the
different channels, process the claims according to the error message.

Patient episode coning (PEC) rule

The PEC rule limits items payable in a patient episode to 3.

The system automatically calculates any rejections and/or adjustment/s
and applies the PEC rule

The Resources page has more information about Warning Messages 8-AUTO
CON and 8–PATH CON.

Exemptions to PEC rule

The PEC rule does not apply to the following services:

services requested by Specialists or Consultant Physicians

services relating to hospitalised patients

Items in:

-   Group P10 (Patient Episode Initiation (PEI))
-   Group P11 (Specimen Referred)
-   Group P12 (Management of Bulk Billed Services)
-   Group P13 (Bulk-Billing Incentive)

Item 69484 (Hepatitis Test)

Item 66900 (carbon-labelled urea breath test)

Items 73070 -to 73076 (Pap smear Testing)

Designated Pathology Items

The Resources page has a table that list requirements for Bulk Bill
Incentives and PEIs.

Instances where 2 or more Patient Episode Initiations (PEI) are payable

Four exceptions allow for the payment of more than one PEI service per
patient episode:

-   When a PEI item is claimed with ‘Rule 3 Exemption’ (‘R3EX’) endorsed
    eligible items
-   When a PEI item is claimed with ‘S4B(3)’ - endorsed items. Contact a
    PSO or Team leader when this occurs
-   When Group P5 (Tissue Pathology) items are billed by one Approved
    Pathology Authority (APA) and another APA bills for items which are
    not in Group P5
-   When Group P6 (Cytology) items are billed by one APA and another APA
    bills for items which are not in Group P6

See Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare for the
definition of Approved Pathology Authority.

Specimen referred (claimed by second unrelated APA)

Item 73940 is payable:

-   only once per patient episode
-   on its own even if the associated tests are all coned and not
    payable
-   if the original requesting practitioner and date of request are
    endorsed on the account and NOT the request details of the
    forwarding pathologist

Do not adjust Item 73940 against the benefits of any other PEI item.

The Resources page has a table that lists items that are applicable to
tests referred between unrelated APAs.

Self-determined pathology services

A request is not required when a pathology item is:

-   self-determined and rendered by the treating practitioner, or
-   a self-determined prescribed service by the APP

A self-determined prescribed service is:

-   when a treating practitioner requests a service, and
-   the Approved Pathology Practitioner (APP) determines that
    pathologist-determinable tests are also necessary

See Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare for more
information.

MBS item 73320 is a pathologist determinable service

The restriction between item 71147 and 73320 can be overridden where:

-   the practice has used the self-determined (SD) indicator in their
    claim for item 73320; or
-   text/notation in the claim indicates that service item 73320 was
    ‘self-determined’. The same APA cannot be paid for both 73320 and
    73321 in the same patient episode

APA1 can be paid for item 73320 and the APA2 item 73321.

APA1 does not have to be paid for item 73320 for APA2 to be paid for
referred test item 73321.

Somatic Tumour Gene Testing

Items for somatic tumour gene testing are located in Category 6, Group
P7.

The Resources page has a table with a quick reference guide explaining
the limitations on claiming the items for Somatic Tumour Gene Testing.

Genetic testing for childhood syndromes

Items for genetic testing for childhood syndromes are located in
Category 6, Group P7.

The Resources page has a table with a quick reference guide explaining
the rules and limitations when claiming items for genetic testing for
childhood syndromes.

Hereditable Mutations for Familial Hypercholesterolemia

Items for tests to detect hereditable mutations causing familial
hypercholesterolemia are located in Category 6, Group P7.

Items 73352 and 73353 can only be requested by a specialist or
consultant physician, and are only claimable once in a lifetime.

Limitation on certain items

There are specific items in the pathology table where limits apply. The
restriction could be:

-   The number of services
-   The claiming period
-   Time dependencies with other items

The Process page has a table that outlines the items that have
limitations.

Pathology claims – manual intervention

The mainframe system assesses claims in order of the pathology rules.
When processing pathology claims follow return messages as they appear.

The system will do a number of checks and will apply most of the rules
automatically.

Assess the claim carefully and do not simply accept the warning message
(F9).

The Resources page contains information on how to process return
messages that can occur when processing pathology claims and quick
reference guides to help processing.

Related links

Pathology processing in Medicare

Approved Pathology Authority (APA)

Accredited Pathology Laboratory (APL)

Approved Collection Centres (ACC)

Latter day adjustment pathology services in Medicare

Forms and letters for pathology processing in Medicare

Understanding pathology assessing rules in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
