
Psychologist - provider eligibility and registration 012-18062107

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for psychologists.

Psychologists

Psychologists work in diverse areas such as:

-   providing assessment and therapy to clients
-   helping facilitate organisational or social change
-   conducting psychological research
-   administering psychological tests to individuals or groups.

For Medicare purposes, eligible psychologists can be either (or both) a:

psychologist

-   has a degree in psychology and holds general registration with the
    Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra)

clinical psychologist

-   has general registration with an additional endorsement indicating
    ‘Approved area of practice – clinical psychology’ or ‘Endorsement
    for Clinical Psychology’
-   provides advanced expertise in the assessment and treatment of
    mental illness and behavioural problems

Note: for the purposes of this document, the generic use of the term
psychologist covers both psychologists and clinical psychologists.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about registration to Ahpra. The Resources page has
the contact details.

Non-directive Pregnancy Support Counselling (PSC)

Psychologists can also undertake additional training in non-directive
pregnancy support counselling (PSC) with the Australian Psychological
Society (APS).

Unlike clinical psychologist endorsement, PSC endorsement is not
recorded on a psychologist’s Ahpra registration, only on their Medicare
Provider Directory System (PDS) record.

The Australian Psychological Society (APS) advises Services Australia if
a psychologist has undertaken PSC training and have been granted a
certificate of completion. Endorsement is then recorded on PDS.

Medicare eligibility and registration

To be registered as a psychologist with Medicare, an applicant must:

-   be currently registered to practice with the Psychology Board of
    Australia. This is a board supported by the Ahpra

Evidence of registration may be at least 1 of the below:

-   Copy of the Ahpra registration certificate with the Initial
    application for a provider number
-   Registration details prepopulated within the ‘shell’ record in PDS
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Note:

-   Psychologists are required to renew their registration annually on
    30 November
-   Medicare benefits cannot be paid for services provided or requested
    when they are not registered with Ahpra
-   Gaps in registration results in gaps in eligibility to access
    Medicare

Endorsement

Clinical psychologist

-   Ahpra registration will have Approved area of practice – clinical or
    Endorsement for Clinical Psychology displayed in Endorsement section

Non-Directive Pregnancy Support Counselling (PSC)

-   The Australian Psychological Society (APS) advises the Services
    Australia the details of who has completed this training
-   Registration is recorded on the Medicare provider stem in the PDS

Further confirmation of completion (such as a certificate) is not
required if PDS shows a current Australian (AUS) registration in the
Registration section of the health professional’s record.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers raise
complex enquiries to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) for assistance.
Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a Programme Officer
(PO), who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team in National
Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, contact details,
links to an example certificate and external websites.

Related links

Ahpra Information window

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Business structure and bank account details for health professionals

Mental Health services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Focussed psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
