
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines enquiry management including telephone, written
and processing enquiries for the Incentives Programs.

Incentives customers

Business owners of medical practices and their staff, including:

-   Practice Managers
-   Receptionists
-   Medical Practitioners
-   Practice Nurses
-   Allied Health Workers
-   Persons who are nominated on behalf of business owners

General Public

Primary health networks – organisations that work directly with GPs to
improve access to primary care services to patients

Other customers

-   Medicare Engagement Officer (MEO)and AIR Business Development
    Officers (AIR BDOs)

Types of calls

Enquiries can include:

-   general enquiries about the Incentive programs
-   who is eligible
-   how to apply
-   payment enquiries
-   what form to complete
-   notification of changes to existing registrations
-   how to use online services
-   adding a user’s RA number to the practice profile

Direct customers to the specific area of the guidelines where
appropriate. The Resources page has a link to the guidelines.

IVR Options

When calling the agency, Incentives Programs line, the options available
to customers are:

1. Practice Incentives Program

2. Workforce Incentive Program – Practice Stream

9. To hear these selections again

Release of practice information

-   Staff must only give detailed practice information to practice
    owner/s or authorised contact persons. Authorised contact persons
    are nominated by the owner/s to act on the owner’s behalf for PIP
    and WIP – Practice stream
-   Before releasing information to a customer, staff must conduct a
    security check for both inbound and outbound calls

See the Process page for more details about how to check a practice’s
owner or authorised contact persons.

Release of practice information to AIR Business Development Officers
(AIR BDOs) and Medicare Engagement Officer (MEO)

AIR BDOs and MEOs and may seek information from Incentives Programs
staff

Staff must perform a security check before releasing any information to
an AIR BDO or MEO:

-   the Process page contains information about telephone security
    checks for AIR BDOs and MEOs
-   the Resources page contains information about releasing practice
    information to AIR BDOs and MEOs

Aged Care Access Incentive (ACAI)

-   The ACAI is a payment made to general practitioners (GP)
-   Details can only be given to the GP who provided the services
-   If the GP is not available to take the call, they can give verbal
    permission to discuss their services and payments with someone else.
    Verbal permission is valid for the current call only

The Process page contains information about how to check a GPs details.

Warm transferring calls

Service Officers must try to finalise an enquiry at the first point of
contact

If the Service Officer cannot resolve the enquiry direct the call to the
correct business area or person using a warm transfer

-   Use the ‘internal transfer number’ to transfer calls for other areas
    of the agency
-   Provide the actual business line phone number to the customer in
    case they get disconnected during the transfer and for future
    enquiries

See Conditions for transferring or referring calls to specialist staff
and managers for more information.

Interpreter Service

-   Interpreters help customers who speak a language other than English
    conduct their business with Services Australia

See Interpreter Services for more details.

Language services provides a free interpreting and translating services
for customers with limited English language proficiency

The Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)
service:

-   is solely for staff, and
-   provides immediate telephone access to an interpreter

See Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter (Interpreter Connect)
for more details.

Complaints and feedback

A customer can submit feedback to the agency. Feedback includes:

-   complaints
-   compliments, and
-   suggestions

The agency’s webpage has more information on how customers can submit:

-   Complaints, and
-   feedback

See Managing customer complaints and feedback for more details.

Telephone and processing escalations

Health Service Delivery uses an Operator Support Model that includes
Program Support Officers (PSOs).

Before contacting a PSO, check all available reference material. This
includes:

-   Operational Blueprint
-   Training Manuals
-   Guidelines
-   Incentives News Updates
-   PaNDA for any relevant processing notes
-   PIP / WIP – Practice Stream Online – Comments and Associated
    documents

If the enquiry cannot be resolved immediately, take a message and follow
up with the customer at a later time.

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division PSO has more information
on contacting a PSO and escalating telephone enquiries.

Registration Authority (RA) numbers for general practitioners

In PIP and WIP – Practice stream the practice is our customer not the
individual general practitioner (GP). A GP can only update their own RA
number verbally if they are also an:

-   owner, or
-   authorised contact person

Tell GPs calling to request an RA number update that only an authorised
contact person or owner can do this over the phone. Practices must
submit a completed Practice Incentives individual general practitioner,
nurse practitioner or health professional details form (IP003) form to
link an RA number to the practice profile

A GP can provide verbal authorisation for an authorised contact or owner
to update the GPs RA number over the phone. The Process page contains
information about how to update an RA number from a verbal request

Audit and compliance

-   The Department of Health and Aged Care complete audit and compliance
    activities
-   A customer should contact the relevant area to discuss any audit or
    compliance enquiries. A customer can find the relevant contact
    details on the correspondence they get.
-   Customers may still call and enquire about these matters
-   The Process page has more information about handling audit and
    compliance enquiries.

Review of Decision

-   The PIP and WIP – Practice Stream has a review of decision process.
    This is separate to reviews relating to audit and compliance
    processes
-   Decisions are based on the published guidelines at the date of the
    event
-   An owner or authorised contact person must submit a completed
    Practice Incentives Review of Decision (IP027) form within 28 days
    of receiving the decision they want reviewed

The Resources page has a list of review of decision FAQs.

Incentive News Update (INU)

The INU is:

-   a quarterly newsletter for practices. It provides information and
    updates on the Incentive Programs and other relevant programs
-   available through PIP and WIP – Practice Stream pages on the
    agency’s website. The Resources page has a link

Practices registered to get communications online through Health
Professional Online Services get the INU through their ‘My Organisation’
mailbox

From February 2022, the INU is only available online. The last quarter
the INU practices got the INU by mail with the PIP payment advice was
November 2021

The Resources page contains:

-   practice changes that do not need a form
-   a glossary of terms and abbreviations and links to definitions
-   guidelines
-   forms, and
-   contact details

Related links

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Allocation (PaNDA)

Call transfers for Medicare and PBS telephony

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare telephony

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Quality Call Standards

Call and screen recording – information and access

Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Online Services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
