
Non-Directive Pregnancy Support Counselling (PSC) - medical practitioners 012-18110918

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition of a medical
practitioner as appropriately trained in non-directive pregnancy support
counselling (PSC).

Non-Directive PSC

This is a form of counselling based on the understanding that, in many
situations, people can resolve their own problems without being provided
with a solution by the counsellor.

The service involves the counsellor undertaking a safe, confidential
process that helps the patient explore concerns they have about a
pregnancy. This includes providing unbiased, evidence-based information
about all options and services available to the patient, where
requested.

The service can address all pregnancy related issues for which
non-directive counselling is appropriate.

Eligibility for Recognition

Non-directive PSC services can be provided by a medical practitioner who
is eligible to claim General Practitioner (GP) items in the Medicare
Benefits Schedule (MBS). Specialists and/or consultant physicians are
not eligible for non-directive PSC recognition unless they have dual
access to GP items. The medical practitioner must be registered with
Services Australia as having completed non-directive PSC training
through the relevant accrediting body.

Non-directive PSC training for GPs is available online from the
following organisations:

-    The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP)
-    The Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM)

Recognition as a medical practitioner trained in non-directive PSC for
Medicare purposes allows the medical practitioner to access relevant
non-directive PSC items in the MBS.

Continued access to non-directive PSC MBS items requires the medical
practitioner to continue to meet the eligibility requirements as
detailed in the Health Insurance (General Medical Services Table)
Regulations 2021 and Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical
Services – Other Medical Practitioner) Determination 2018.

The Resources page contains a link to the MBS. The References page
contains a link to the legislation.

Application for Recognition

Medical practitioners certified as appropriately trained in
non-directive PSC by the RACGP or the ACRRM do not need to submit an
application. The RACGP or ACRRM advise the agency that their training
has been completed.

The Resources page contains links for the RACGP and ACRRM websites.

Legislation Recognising Non-Directive PSC

Recognition of a medical practitioner as trained in non-directive PSC is
made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate) under the
Health Insurance (General Medical Services Table) Regulations 2021 and
Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services – Other Medical
Practitioner) Determination 2018 made under subsection 3C (1) of the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

Recognition is recorded on the medical practitioner’s stem on the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The References page contains a link to the legislation.

Removal of Recognition

A medical practitioner may request in writing to have their Medicare
recognition for non-directive PSC removed. The agency will also remove a
medical practitioner's recognition of training in non-directive PSC if
notified by the RACGP or ACRRM that the medical practitioner no longer
meets Medicare eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a medical practitioner wishes to dispute the removal of their
recognition in non-directive PSC:

-   If notification of completion of PSC was received from the RACGP,
    the medical practitioner should be directed to contact the RACGP
-   If notification of PSC was received from ACRRM, the medical
    practitioner should be directed to contact ACRRM

The Resources page contains links for the RACGP and ACRRM.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has the responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding that our agency will protect this from unauthorised
access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain
confident that our agency will protect their information and comply with
the privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the agency's Privacy and Secrecy
page.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, letter template,
privacy links and external websites.

Related Links

Health Professional Online Services

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
