
Recognition or removal of general practitioners (GP) 012-42020090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition and removal of
a medical practitioner as a general practitioner (GP).

Recognition of general practice

Recognition of general practice as a discipline in its own right was
introduced in 1989. This was to acknowledge that training and ongoing
education, specific to general practice, are important elements of
maintaining high quality standards in general practice.

Changes to the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) introduced a new
definition of ‘general practitioner’ on 16 June 2021. This means that a
medical practitioner’s GP status for Medicare purposes is now
automatically recognised, or removed, based on their medical
registration. These changes to a medical practitioner’s GP status will
be identified by, and predominately actioned by, the processing of the
daily Ahpra data feed.

Access to Medicare

Recognition for Medicare purposes allows the GP to access relevant items
(including Group A1 attendance items) in the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS).

Continued access to Medicare benefits also requires GPs to continue to
satisfy continuing registration requirements as detailed in legislation
and regulation.

Eligibility for recognition as a general practitioner

A medical practitioner must be either:

registered by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(Ahpra) as a Specialist in the specialty of ‘General practice’, which
includes Fellows of the:

-   Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP), or
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACCRM)

on the Vocational Register (VR) at midnight on 15 June 2021 and maintain
ongoing General registration with Ahpra

Recognition as a GP must not be back-dated to before the date of effect.
Enquiries about backdating recognition for GPs must be escalated to a
Programme Support Officer (PSO).

Changes to eligibility for recognition as a GP from 16 June 2021

Changes to legislation

As of 16 June 2021:

-   forms for recognition, or removal, as a GP are no longer processed
    by Services Australia
-   medical practitioners are no longer able to be re-included on the
    Vocational Register
-   medical practitioners who are Specialists in the specialty of
    ‘General practice’ will be automatically recognised as a GP for
    Medicare purposes

Transition period prior to the change

A transition period occurred, between 16 June 2020 and 15 June 2021, to
ensure that medical practitioners had time to either:

-   Register with Ahpra as a Specialist in ‘General practice’, or
-   Be re-included on the Vocational Register

For questions about these changes, see the link on the Resources page to
the Department of Health and Aged Care website. This contains more
information about the change in legislation.

Dual recognition

A referral from a GP to a specialist or consultant physician is valid
for 12 months, unless noted otherwise. If a patient needs continuing
care, GPs can write a referral beyond 12 months or for an indefinite
period.

Referrals from specialists (in a specialty other than general practice)
and consultant physicians are valid for 3 months unless the patient is
an admitted (in hospital) patient. Referrals for admitted patients are
valid for 3 months or the duration of admission, whichever is longer.

The purpose of dual recognition in the Provider Directory System (PDS)
is to allow a specialist, or consultant physician, who is also
registered as a GP for Medicare purposes, to provide referrals for their
patients for greater than the standard 3 month period, when acting in
their capacity as a GP.

Once dual recognition (165 specialty code) is recorded on the medical
practitioner’s stem, referrals written by a specialist/consultant
physician acting in their capacity as a GP will be valid for a 12 month
period.

For further information, see Dual recognition of medical practitioners
for Medicare.

Changes to MBS item fee arrangements for non-VR GPs

As part of the Stronger Rural Health Strategy announced in the 2018-19
Budget, the Government reformed MBS item fee arrangements for
non-Vocationally Registered medical practitioners working in general
practice (non-VR GPs) recognised to provide Non-directive Pregnancy
Support Counselling (PSC), Mental Health Skills Training (MHST) and
Focussed Psychological Strategies (FPS) services.

The new fee structure and access arrangements affects all non-VR GPs
(other than those participating on approved training programs).

There are no changes to the MBS fees payable to general practitioners
(GP) or to registrars training on the Australian General Practice
Training Program, Remote Vocational Training Scheme and Australian
College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) Independent Pathway.

The Government introduced the new fee structure on 1 July 2018, it
applies to all services performed on and after this date.

A new MBS item group established differential (tiered) rebates for GP
items for non-VR GPs that integrate an incentive for doctors to become
fully qualified as Fellows and to work where they are needed most.

New MBS items were introduced under Group A7 - Acupuncture and
non-Specialist Practitioner items. These items replicate the General
Practice items under Schedule A of the MBS and set the relevant item fee
at 80% of the equivalent VR item.

Where a medical practitioner registered in PDS is a non-VR GP they are
unable to access the A1 category items in the MBS for VR items from 1
July 2018. To ensure appropriate access for this group of medical
practitioners, new specialty codes were introduced to provide access to
Group A7 items.

Non-VR medical practitioners access a lower rebate for PSC, MHST and FPS
with the specialty codes 662 (PSC-RACGP), 663 (PSC-ACRRM), 664 (MHST)
and 665 (FPS).

Medical practitioners who are recognised as a GP for Medicare purposes
can access the usual higher rebate for PSC, MHST and FPS with the
specialty codes 647, 649 and 650.

Where a medical practitioner changes their VR Status, the specialty
codes above need to be added or closed/opened as the VR status changes.

Requests for confirmation of a medical practitioner’s status on the Vocational Register

Medical practitioners may request confirmation of their registration
status on the Vocational Register by submitting a signed request.

A request for confirmation a medical practitioner is on the Vocational
Register is not used to confirm the medical practitioner’s level of
access to Medicare benefits. The request is to confirm if the medical
practitioner is on the Vocational Register.

The medical practitioner will have a current 130 specialty code on their
stem if they are on the Vocational Register.

Escalating GP specialist recognition enquiries

Staff may get enquiries from practitioners, asking about recognition as
a specialist in general practice, via:

-   phone, or
-   the Application for an initial Medicare provider number for a
    medical practitioner form (HW019) that shows the medical
    practitioner is working as a general practitioner

See Table 6 for the process to be followed.

The Resources page contains inbound telephony scripting to assist
Service Officers with enquiries from medical practitioners and their
staff about GP Specialist recognition.

Continuing Professional Development (CPD) enquiries

Refer enquiries about CPD requirements to the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

The Resources page contains links to the Ahpra website.

The Resources page contains contact details, links to specialty codes,
scripts, FAQs, letter templates, external websites and the Services
Australia website.

Related links

Section 19AB and medical practitioners in Medicare

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Health Professional Online Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
