
Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess claims for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) provides funding to eligible
DVA health card holders (the veteran community) that covers medical,
hospital and allied services provided to entitled persons.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Treatment Accounts System (TAS)

TAS is used to pay all treatment accounts submitted to VAP.

Manual claims can be submitted on specifically designed DVA batch
headers and service vouchers or on invoices and accounts supplied by
service providers using their own letterhead. Providers can also submit
electronic claims for processing without the need to send any paperwork
to Services Australia.

To process claims, the information which identifies the provider
establishes what services have been provided to which patient.

All claims are system assessed to ensure the patient is eligible to
receive the services provided and the provider has the correct
qualifications to perform them. This system assessment is referred to as
background assessing and occurs without Service Officer intervention on
the day a claim is data entered.

At the completion of background assessing, claims may be paid
automatically, while claims containing errors are sent to PEND where
they must be selected by a Service Officer and all errors resolved prior
to payment.

The Resources page contains information about manual data entry keying
conventions, and the field descriptions and claim types to use when
registering a claim.

Eligibility to receive DVA services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold:

-   DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
    holders
    DVA funds most services necessary to meet a clinical need
-   DVA White Card holders
    DVA only funds treatment related to the card holder's accepted
    disabilities, and treatment may require Prior Financial
    Authorisation before it is started.

Verify the DVA health card holder's eligibility before paying or
rejecting Allied Health services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG
message.

DVA health card holders should check that their service provider accepts
the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting treatment.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Service providers may be required to seek prior financial authorisation
(also known as Prior Approval or PARS) from DVA before providing certain
services. The fee schedules contain information on which items require
prior financial authorisation.

To request prior financial authorisation from DVA, providers must
contact DVA before administering these services to be able to claim for
payment by completing the DVA Prior Financial Approval Request Form. The
Resources page contains links to the DVA website and the form.

Claim lodgement information

DVA claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources page contains a link
to DVA program information for health professionals on the Services
Australia Website.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they
can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from
Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Providers can submit electronic claims for processing without the need
to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel. This channel
allows health care providers to submit electronic claims via the
internet, without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the
Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim forms and vouchers

DVA service providers are required to lodge Claim for Treatment Services
(D1217) and Health Practitioner Service Voucher (D1221) forms. These
fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers
can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can
provide the same level of information as required by the DVA forms.
Note: allied health professionals still require a D1217 form. Service
providers should post completed forms to Services Australia for
processing as per the instructions on the form.

The D1217 form must be:

-   signed by the provider, or
-   their authorised third party,
-   and properly completed with the correct location or group link
    address.

The Resources page contains more information on pay group links in the
Enquiry and search controls and functions information.

The DVA Service Voucher (for example: D1221) must be signed by the
Veteran, or if the Veteran is unable to sign, a member of their family,
or someone else who attends the appointment with them, may sign on their
behalf. The responsible person signing on behalf of the Veteran does not
need to provide an explanation. Otherwise the Service Provider must note
that they are unable to sign.

Note: provider details supplied on the Claim header must match those
recorded on the provider file or Group link details. A PO Box for the
same location as the recorded address is also sufficient. Claims with
details that do not match need to be returned to the provider.

Faxed vouchers

Service Officers only accept fax copies of vouchers or duplicates if
services have previously been paid or rejected.

Faxed claims may be processed if the service detailed on the veteran's
history can be viewed to determine if an adjustment is required or if
the provider has lost/destroyed original copies and provided a written
explanation why copies are being sent in.

Service Officers must not offer VAP fax numbers to providers when
Services Australia has not previously received the original paperwork
for processing.

Emailed claims

For any emails received from AMBMACS@dva.gov.au or
Medicare.Australia.Queries.ACT@dva.gov.au, Service Officers are to key
and assess claims as per current procedures

For any other emails with claims attached that are from another DVA
email address which is not AMBMACS@dva.gov.au /
Medicare.Australia.Queries.ACT@dva.gov.au, or from providers, practices,
or personal email addresses:

-   print the claim details, and
-   return to the provider with a letter, requesting original claim
    documentation
    Note: Service Officers are not to process these claims on Mainframe.
    These are emails with claims only. Adjustments can only be accepted
    by fax or post

All other emails which are not claim related or payable by DVA only are
to be forwarded to the VAP Policy Section - Tier 3 as per current
processes.

The Veteran’s processing email address is not to be supplied to
providers under any circumstances

Providers querying why their emailed claim has been returned, staff to
inform for manual claiming original documentation is required to process
a claim – sending claims via email is not an approved claiming channel.
Providers who wish to submit claims online can register for DVA
Webclaim. The link to the Webclaim is available on the Resources page

Claim enquiries

Online claims - common errors

Claims submitted incorrectly are pended and then processed by a VAP
Service Officer.

Online claiming requirements include:

-   item of the same type, such as RVG and pathology, must be presented
    together on the voucher
-   radiology items cannot be presented on the same voucher as other
    item types (for example, non-diagnostic imaging items such as
    consultations must be presented on a separate voucher)
-   RVG items should be submitted with the service type code S
-   RVG items with a service type code T will cause the claim to be
    pended unnecessarily
-   Location Specific Provider Number (LSPN) must be submitted in the
    LSPN: field for the claim to be paid
-   Assistant item 51300/51303 cannot be paid on the same claim of the
    surgical item, It must be submitted separately using the surgeon as
    a payee provider and the Assistant as a service provider.

Fields required for online claims

Text field: any information providers previously supplied in paper based
claiming that has not been allocated its own field can be included in
the general text field.

Assistant surgeons and anaesthetists: when rendering services in a
hospital, providers should include hospital name, locality and list of
associated procedure items in the Text field. Claims may be rejected for
not providing this information.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will help with
the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Kilometre allowance

Providers must state the full distance travelled on the claim voucher.
The first 10 kilometres of each claim are automatically deducted by the
system and payment is made on the remaining kilometres.

The message 4-CHECK KM is returned if a distance of more than 99kms is
claimed.

The Process page includes instructions on processing kilometre
allowance.

Services claimed through DVA and Medicare

Practitioners and allied health professionals are bound by policies
under which the Repatriation Commission may accept financial
responsibility for the cost of treatment for a person eligible under the
Veterans' Entitlement Act. The practitioner determines that a patient
may be eligible for benefits under either DVA or Medicare. The
practitioner or allied health professional may choose to bill either,
but cannot claim from both. Benefits would be payable from each source
when a patient has 2 distinct and separate attendances with the
practitioner for the treatment of separate conditions, one of which is
coverable by DVA.

The Commission will not accept financial responsibility for the cost of
services that have been paid for, wholly or partly, by Services
Australia as a Medicare benefit, or by a health insurance fund.

The References page contains a link to the DVA Treatment Principles
instrument.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia and external
websites, contact details, provider letters, the Introduction to Allied
Health processing user guide, Key Performance Indicators, manual data
entry keying conventions, and information about control lines and
functions for statistics.

Allied Telehealth services

Allied health services (except dental, optical and neuropsychology
services) can continue to be delivered to DVA clients under permanent
telehealth arrangements. Allied health services delivered via telehealth
should achieve the same or better outcome(s) or benefit as an in-person
service. Permanent telehealth arrangements will be reviewed 12 months
after implementation to ensure arrangements remain appropriate and
address any issues that may have arisen.

Permanent arrangements

Allied telehealth services are based on principles listed on the DVA
website, see Resources page under Permanent Telehealth information for
clients.

Treatment cycles and referral requirements for Allied Telehealth

Treatment cycle arrangements continue to apply for DVA clients accessing
allied health services delivered by telehealth.

DVA clients are reminded that referrals for allied health services can
only be provided by the client’s usual GP. This means a GP (or another
GP in the same practice) who:

-   has provided the majority of care to the DVA client over the
    previous twelve months, or
-   will provide the majority of care to the DVA client over the next
    twelve months.

Telehealth or online GP services, which have not provided regular
clinical care or at least one in-person service to the DVA client are
not able to issue valid referrals for DVA-funded allied health services.

Chronic Disease Management items

DVA clients living in Residential Aged Care Facilities (RACFs) may
access up to five allied health services and up to five additional
physical therapy services (physiotherapy, exercise physiology or
occupational therapy) under Medicare chronic disease management
arrangements.

As many item limits include other allied health services, providers are
encouraged to familiarise themselves with the notes and rules applying
to each item and ensure they adhere to them. See Resources page for
detailed information notes for Allied Health Providers and the
Department of Health and Aged Care website under Medicare Benefit
Schedule (MBS) online.

Extended eligibility for Allied and mental health treatment to Residential Care Recipients

These items are available from 10 December 2020 to 30 June 2022
(inclusive) for DVA clients living in RACFs. DVA clients living in RACFs
may access up to five allied health services and up to five additional
physical therapy services (physiotherapy, exercise physiology or
occupational therapy) under Medicare chronic disease management
arrangements. And may access up to 20 individual mental health services
per calendar year under these arrangements.

Refer providers to Allied Health fee schedules, see Resources page under
Dental and allied health fee schedules.

Contents

MT items for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Late Lodgements

Related links

Handle enquiries for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Medical services processing for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Payments for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Approval (PARS approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

QITI assessing information system

Process claims from Norfolk Island for Veterans' Affairs Processing
(VAP)

Goods and Services Tax (GST) processing

DVA Webclaim for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
