
Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to follow when creating a
Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service.

On this Page:

What is a CSP Officer

A CSP Officer is the registered individual responsible for maintaining
accuracy of the CSP Organisation.

Individuals who are registering as a CSP Officer for the HI Service and
have already provided Medicare with 100 points of identity, are not
required to do so again. An individual may be an existing Responsible
Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) and have a
Medicare Provider number or a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
certificate for other Medicare purposes.

See also:

-   Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
-   Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professionals

Requirements to register a CSP Organisation

To register a CSP Organisation, the CSP Officer must provide the
following to a Service Officer, unless they are a known customer:

-   Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service
-   a completed Application to Register a Contracted Service Provider or
    Application to add, replace or remove a Contracted Service Officer
    form
-   evidence they are authorised to act on behalf of the CSP
    Organisation

The CSP Officer must always be linked to a CSP Organisation.

If the individual is a known customer they must provide their existing
Medicare Provider number, RO number, and/or their PKI registration
number (RA number).

A CSP Officer cannot amend another CSP Officer’s details or records.

An existing RO or OMO can be registered as a CSP Officer and linked to a
CSP Organisation when appropriate documentation has been supplied.

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer details, the details of the
requestor are also recorded.

Related links

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professionals

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) Officer record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
