-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the administering of Medicare Benefit Schedule
(MBS) items 73839, 73840 and 73844 for monitoring of diabetes in
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.

Quality Assurance for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Medical Services Monitoring diabetes (QAAMS Program)

The QAAMS Program provides on-site point-of-care pathology testing to
assist in diabetes diagnosis and management for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.

Point-of-care testing (POCT) is a pathology test carried out in a
clinical setting at the time of a patient consultation. The test result
is used to make an immediate informed clinical decision.

The program is funded by the Commonwealth Government Department of
Health and Aged Care.

Location and practitioner eligibility

A practice or medical practitioner must be accredited by the QAAMS
Program before being recognised by Services Australia to access PoCT MBS
items.

Practice Accreditation

The QAAMS Program sends Services Australia the QAAMS Participant
Database. The database details practices that are accredited and
eligible to participate in QAAMS POCT. It is located on the Resources
page.

Medical practitioner accreditation

The QAAMS Program provides training in the use of point-of-care testing
for diabetes management for:

-   Aboriginal Health Workers, and
-   other health professionals

At the end of the training session, trainees undertake a competency
assessment. On completion a certificate of competency is issued and
valid for 2 years. Competency training must be renewed every 2 years.

Where a certificate of competency is received by Services Australia with
the request to access the QAAMS POCT MBS item numbers, recognition to
provide QAAMS POCT services is only reflected to the date the
certificate of competency is issued to at the requested location.

The Resources page contains an example of a certificate of competency as
issued by the QAAMS Program.

Access to Medicare benefits

A medical practitioner must apply in writing:

-   for access to QAAMS POCT items 73839, 73840 or 73844, and
-   provide confirmation the eligibility requirements of QAAMS
    accreditation are satisfied

As there is no application from, the medical practitioner can apply for
access to the 3 MBS item numbers via a signed letter.

Processing staff add the relevant specialty code to the requested
location only where it can be confirmed:

-   the location is listed in the QAAMS Participant Database, or
-   the medical practitioner provides a certificate of competency from
    QAAMS stating they are QAAMS POCT accredited

All other enquiries about requesting access to items 73839, 73840 or
73844 should be directed to the Medicare Provider Registration Team.

The specialty code for the QAAMS Program (diabetes test) is 601.

Payment of Medicare benefits

A Determination by the Minister of the Department of Health and Aged
Care allows for payment of Medicare benefits for testing to assist in
the diagnosis and management of diabetes in Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Communities.

To make sure quality of testing, the Indigenous health services that
perform the QAAMS POCT must participate in the QAAMS Program. The QAAMS
Program is administered on behalf of the:

-   Department of Health and Aged Care by the Flinders University
-   Flinders Health & Medical Research Institute
-   International Centre for Point-of-Care Testing, and
-   Royal College of Pathologists of Australia (RCPA) Quality Assurance
    Programs Pty Ltd. This external quality assurance program is
    specifically developed for point of care pathology testing

The medical practitioner claims the relevant QAAMS POCT MBS item
number(s). The testing may be performed by: a medical practitioner or a
health professional on behalf of a medical practitioner.

Item 73839

Pathology item 73839 (blood test) Quantitation of HbA1c (glycated
haemoglobin) performed for the diagnosis of diabetes in asymptomatic
patients at high risk. The test must be provided in an Indigenous health
service, which participates in a recognised external quality assurance
program (QAAMS). The patient is eligible for one test in a 12-month
period.

Item 73840

Pathology item 73840 (blood test) is a point-of-care pathology test for
the management of established diabetes. The test must be provided in an
Indigenous health service which participates in a recognised external
quality assurance program (QAAMS). The patient is eligible for a maximum
of 4 tests in a 12 month period.

Item 73844

Pathology item (73844) (urine test) is a point-of-care pathology test
for the management of established diabetes.

The test must be provided in an Indigenous health service which
participates in a recognised external quality assurance program (QAAMS).

The Resources page contains contact details for Medicare Provider
Registration, certificate of competency example, a link to the HW019
application form, and QAAMS Participant Database details.

Related links

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

Classifying (naming) work for Medicare in Kofax

Section 19AB and medical practitioners in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
