-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers related to
processing, endorsing and replying to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) written authority approval requests.

Written authority approval requests received by mail or HPOS

Written Authority approval requests include those received by mail or
uploaded via HPOS. Prescribers may choose the mail or HPOS secure form
upload channel when seeking authority to prescribe any PBS medicines.
Common reasons include:

-   the patient has sufficient medication, so the request is not urgent
-   the approved provider finds it more convenient to use the post or
    the HPOS secure form upload facility
-   the request is for an item which must be made in writing (mandatory)

Authority applications for mandatory written authority required items

Some medicines used to treat chronic conditions need written authority
approval from Services Australia (the agency) before they can be
PBS-subsidised. Due to the clinical use or other special features of
these medicines, applications for authority approval must be made in
writing.

The medicine will not be PBS-subsidised without authority approval.
Retrospective approval (often known as ‘owing’ a script) is not allowed.

For more information about which medicines must have written authority
approval, refer to:

-   Written Authority Required Drugs
-   Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program
-   Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   The References page contains links to legislation outlining the
    supply of pharmaceutical benefits and the specific Complex Authority
    Required (CAR) medications that are required to be in writing
-   Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) - Drugs of addiction - opioid medicines for greater than one
    month's supply. The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits outlines the
    maximum quantity and repeats allowed for of these medicines

Privacy when returning authority prescriptions by mail

The prescription will indicate if it is to be returned to the prescriber
or the patient.

Approved authority prescriptions (without any letters attached) are to
be returned in non-window faced envelopes. This is to prevent personal
information showing through the window.

Authority prescriptions with letters can be returned in window-faced
envelopes.

Privacy when providing Authority request results via HPOS

All written authority responses are sent as a reply to the prescribers'
original email within HPOS.

Open the attached file(s) from the original email to ensure the response
is to the correct patient and prescriber.

Rejection slip for Active Ingredient Prescribing (AIP)

Computer-generated prescriptions for PBS- subsidised authority items
sent to the agency for assessment need to comply with AIP legislation.

If a written authority prescription is not compliant with AIP, a
rejection slip for AIP needs to be sent to the prescriber with the
approved prescription. The Resources page contains a link to the
rejection slip.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   suggested text for email responses to Prescriber or Delegate
-   letters
-   contact details
-   Department of Health and Aged Care website
-   recording customer addresses
-   scanning and naming
-   rejection slip
-   secure printing information

Related Links

Alzheimer’s disease in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Dosage calculators and charts for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Handle 'too soon' Authority prescription

Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre - managing
emails from health professionals

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process for Authority required (STREAMLINED) item

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Processing Complex Authority Required Listings

Rapid Addressing for Medicare

Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
