
Section 100 in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-63030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the alternative Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) arrangements available under Section 100 of the National Health
Act 1953.

Section 100

In addition to the drugs and medicinal preparations available under
normal PBS arrangements listed in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical
Benefits (the PBS Schedule), a number of drugs are also available as
Pharmaceutical Benefits but are distributed under alternative
arrangements where these are considered more appropriate.

These alternative arrangements are provided for under Section 100 of the
National Health Act 1953.

See the References page for a link to the National Health Act 1953.

Programs under Section 100

Several programs exist for the provision of drugs as Pharmaceutical
Benefits under Section 100. They include:

-   Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program
-   Growth Hormone Program
-   Opiate Dependence Treatment Program managed by Department of Health
    and Aged Care via the State health and Territory health departments
-   Special Authority Program

Listing in PBS Schedule

Section 100 drugs are listed under each program in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits (the PBS Schedule).

The Resources page contains a link to the PBS Schedule.

CAR drugs and trastuzumab

The Complex Drugs Branch in Tasmania manages the Complex Authority
Required (CAR) drugs and trastuzumab (Herceptin®). These drugs include
both Section 85 and Section 100 drugs.

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care website and to the online version of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical
Benefits (PBS).

Contents

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Growth Hormone Program

Related links

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Authority required and Section
100 - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
