
Manage authorised employee record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the management of authorised employee records in
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service and the responsibilities of roles
associated with the upload of these records.

On this Page:

Authorised employee

An authorised employee is a member of a healthcare organisation
registered HI Service who needs access to healthcare identifiers as part
of their role, such as a practice receptionist, ward clerk, nurse or
practice manager.

Note: Responsible Officers (RO) and Organisation Maintenance Officers
(OMO) do not have access to healthcare identifiers. If an RO or OMO
needs access to healthcare identifiers as part of their role in their
organisation, they can register as one in the same way as practice staff
using the Authorised Employee Register.

Verifying the identity of an authorised employee

Authorised employees can request healthcare identifiers over the
telephone. For a Service Officer to verify the identity of the
authorised employee for this purpose, the organisation’s Organisation
Maintenance Officer (OMO) must have previously supplied their details
using the Authorised Employee Register, which includes secret questions
and answers. Once the details have been supplied, a Service Officer can
conduct a search to locate the authorised employee record.

Recording details of person making request

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program interface (EHP)
application via a Service Officer, details of the person making the
request are recorded. In addition to the Service Officer ID details, the
details of the inquirer must be recorded. For example, the name of the
individual and the identifier of the organisation of where they work.

Conducting searches for authorised employees

A search using demographic information will return a list of up to 50
possible matches.

Note: if more than 50 possible matches return, a message displays
requesting that the search criteria be refined.

If the Service Officer is unable to find a matching record to the search
criteria entered, a message is returned advising that the search
criteria be revised.

Search using a wildcard (asterisk symbol *) can be performed.

Once the authorised employee record is selected, a list of secret
questions and answers will display for each authorised employee which
can be used to verify their identity.

Once verified, the authorised employee can create, request or confirm
IHI details on behalf of the organisation for which they work. See also:
Handle call from provider or authorised employee about Individual
Healthcare Identifier (IHI).

Authorised Employee Register file template

Under the Healthcare Identifiers Act 2010, an organisation must keep
details of current and past employees for seven years after the employee
has ceased employment. The HI Service can store the information on
behalf of the organisation by use of the Authorised Employee Register.

It is not necessary for an organisation to supply details of their
authorised employees to Services Australia if their software captures
the required information; however, if the organisation’s authorised
employees will be contacting the HI Service Operator over the telephone,
it is the only way to have their identity verified before HI Service
information will be provided.

The registered Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) must use a
healthcare organisation 'Authorised Employee Register' file template and
submit it to the agency to enable the agency to store identity details
and secret questions and answers of any authorised employees of that
organisation.

Once these details are stored, a Service Officer can authenticate an
authorised employee by using challenge/response question and answer
techniques when an authorised employee makes personal contact with the
HI Service by phone.

The Process page contains a table explaining how to complete and submit
the file template.

OMO responsibilities

It is the Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO) responsibility to
ensure the Authorised Employee Register file template is current at all
times. Any authorised employee, whose details are not stored by the HI
Service, will not be able to have their identity verified and therefore
cannot be provided with HI Service information over the telephone from
HI Service support staff.

Each time an Authorised Employee Register file is submitted, it must
represent the full authorised employee list from the relevant
organisation. Each submitted spreadsheet will replace any previous
spreadsheet.

Only OMOs who have active management rights for a Healthcare
Organisation are permitted to complete the Authorised Employee Register
file template and submit it to the HI Service. This authorisation rule
is implemented by the Tier 3 Service Officer when they receive the file
template.

Tier 3 Service Officer responsibilities

The Tier 3 Service Officer must complete the following functions:

interrogate the eHealth Program interface (EHP) to ensure the
Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) has access rights to the
healthcare organisation

respond to the OMO via email to their Healthcare Provider Organisations
(HPO) inbox with either:

-   confirmation of acceptance of the completed file template
-   details of any reasons why the file template could not be stored

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
