
Accredited exercise physiologist - provider eligibility and registration 012-18061909

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for accredited exercise physiologists.

On this Page:

Accredited exercise physiologists (AEP)

AEPs are allied health professionals who design, deliver and evaluate
safe and effective exercise interventions for people with acute,
sub-acute or chronic medical conditions, injuries or disabilities.

Areas covered include:

-   cardiovascular
-   metabolic
-   neurological
-   musculoskeletal
-   cancers
-   kidney
-   respiratory/pulmonary
-   mental health
-   any other condition where evidence shows exercise improves a
    patient's clinical status

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to Exercise and Sports Science
Australia (ESSA). The Resources page has the contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must have:

certification from Exercise and Sports Science Australia (ESSA) as an
Accredited Exercise Physiologist that

-   states Approved with accreditation in Exercise Physiology, and
-   contains an ID Number

Accredited exercise physiologists who hold provisional accreditation are
eligible to be recognised by Services Australia. An example is available
on the Resources page.

Certification documents are required for initial provider applications,
requests to backdate the registration start date in the Provider
Directory System (PDS) and registration re-instatement only.

Evidence of accreditation in Exercise Physiology can be accepted in the
form of an ESSA tax invoice/receipt if:

-   an accredited exercise physiologist requests their initial provider
    number to be effective prior to the date of registration in PDS, or
-   they are requesting to reinstate their provider number as a result
    of no longer being recognised as an accredited exercise physiologist

An example is available on the Resources page.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers raise
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) for assistance. Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a
Programme Officer (PO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility
section in National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide and links to contact
details and external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Business structure and bank account details for health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
