
Community nursing services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the community nursing services
for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Community nursing

Definition

Community nursing is the provision of nursing services to an eligible
person in their own home to meet a clinical or personal care need.
Community nursing services are delivered by a mix of registered nurses,
enrolled nurses and nursing support staff, depending on the care needs
of the individual person.

Treatment type:

-   DN

Entitlement:

-   Gold card: All services
-   White card: For specific conditions only

Items:

-   Item prefix: NL, NT, NP, NS, NA, NO, NC, NA
-   Prior approval type: DN
-   Item prefixes for items from the previous classification which were
    end-dated 31 March 2015: NB, NY, NZ
-   Item prefixes for items from the previous classification which was
    end-dated 30 April 2021: ND

The Resources page contains a list of the community nursing business
rules.

Community nursing processing - 28 day reckoner

The community nursing 28 day ready reckoner can be used to determine the
date 28 days from today or any date entered into the spreadsheet.
Printing the ready reckoner will produce a reference table starting with
the date entered into the spreadsheet.

The Resources page contains a link to the 28 day reckoner.

Auto rejection of items claimed before end of care period

All community nursing items with the exceptions of NA01 and NO63 will
auto reject with reason code 759 if claimed before the end of the 28 day
care period.

Providers should ensure that claims are submitted at the end of the care
period, and must use the first day of this period as the date of
service.

Adjustments to exceptional case (NO) items

Do not process any adjustments for community nursing exceptional case
(NO) items unless the Exceptional Case Unit (ECU) has amended the PARs
record. Where the ECU has amended a PARS record process the claim
according to the amendment.

If unable to determine if the PARS record has been amended or no
amendment has occurred, refer the claim to the Programme Support Officer
(PSO) who will contact ECU for confirmation or request an adjustment as
required.

Refer providers requesting adjustments for community nursing NO items to
the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Exceptional Case Unit (ECU).

Minimum data set

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) requires contracted community
nursing providers to submit data on all community nursing services
delivered to eligible patients in a 28 day claim period. This
information is called the minimum data set (MDS) and is used by DVA to
monitor the provision of community nursing services.

Providers who claim manually must post the MDS data to DVA, providers
who claim online can submit the data electronically.

If MDS disks or spreadsheets are received by Services Australia they are
to be forwarded directly to the Community Nursing Section. The Resources
page contains a link to the Contact - Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) page.

The Resources page contains:

-   pend return error messages and descriptions
-   list of the community nursing business rules
-   a link to the 28 day reckoner, and
-   links to information for Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
    community nursing providers

Related links

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
