
Dietitian services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about dietitian services for
Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP). It covers the assessment and
processing of claims for services provided to eligible Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) health card holders.

Government intent

DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the veteran
community) that covers dietitian services provided to entitled persons
by registered dietitians. Dietitians are health care providers who
provide patient counselling and education in aspects of nutrition and
practical assistance and guidance in home food management and the
preparation of modified diet foods. Dietitian services must be claimed
in accordance with the patient’s assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Eligibility to receive DVA dietitian services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
dietitian services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most dietitian services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds dietitian services related to the card holder's accepted
disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

Patient Eligibility for VAP contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA
health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting dietitian
services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their dietitian service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA dietitian services

Only a dietitian contracted with DVA as a participating DVA provider who
is registered with Services Australia (they have a Medicare provider
number) at the time of the service is eligible to provide services to
eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to Notes for dietitians on the DVA
website. This contains detailed eligibility requirements and information
on dietitian services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for dietitian services

The DVA Dietitians Schedule of Fees contains a range of consultation
items available to eligible DVA health card holders for professional
attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms (called domiciliary
visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged care service or
institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range DT01-DT99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Dietitian service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain Dietitian services. The
fee schedules contain information on which items require prior financial
authorisation.

To request financial approval, providers must contact DVA before
administering services to be able to claim payment by completing a
Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The Resources page has
a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA dietitian services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient
-   Subsequent consultations are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of
    a condition
-   Services rendered away from the provider’s rooms attract a loading
    in addition to the normal time-based fee. Only one loading per visit
    is permitted and it is expected that the provider will perform the
    evaluation of assessments in their rooms
-   Treatment in residential aged care services which requires a greater
    level of care and treatment in public hospitals requires prior
    approval (as indicated in the Schedule of Fees)
-   Treatment for white card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Extended consultations are used for treatment of a complex or
    difficult clinical situation, or of an acute condition when a
    chronic condition needs ongoing treatment
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    Notes for dietitians

The Resources page contains a links to the Dietitians Schedule of Fees
and Notes for dietitians on the DVA website.

Claim lodgement information

DVA dietitian services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources
page contains a link to the Uman Service Website for information on
claim choices for health professionals.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they
can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from
Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Dietitian service providers can submit electronic claims for processing
without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

Dietitian service providers are required to lodge a Claim for Treatment
Services (D1217) and Health Practitioner Service Voucher (D1221) forms.
These fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service
providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if
they can provide the same level of information as required by the DVA
forms. Service providers should post completed forms to Services
Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

Common enquiry - loading fee

Providers may enquire about how to claim when they have seen a veteran
at their home and the service item has a loading fee.

The item can be claimed at the regular visit item and the system will
automatically pay for loading on top of the schedule fee. There is no
requirement to charge an extra item or fee.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP dietitian services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will
help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website and
contact details for VAP, links to the Department of Veterans’ Affairs
(DVA) website for information about dietitian services, how to claim,
Notes for dietitians, the Dietitians Schedule of Fees and the prior
approval form.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
