
System access and functionality issues for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17190000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about system access and functionality
issues for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

VAP and DVA access control

Access to the Services Australia Treatment Accounts System (TAS) is
allocated according to the position held by a staff member. Staff access
to TAS is managed through the Customer Information Control System (CICS)
using the Resource Access Control Facility (RACF). Critical systems
access is also controlled with Secure Checks.

Note:

-   Normally only one CICS group is required for each staff member
-   There is no requirement for additional Secure Checks or DB2 table
    access
-   Group Drive access can be applied at the manager’s discretion
-   Additional access beyond the groups and descriptions defined in the
    tables below must be approved by VAP Policy on a case by case basis

Default group

Staff should be allocated the default Resource Access Control Facility
(RACF) group appropriate for their location. See the Resources page for
details of default groups.

DVA hospital contract access (VAMM)

A Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) staff member's ability to update
hospital contracts in VAMM is restricted by the source office code used
by the staff member. If a DVA user is logged onto a Victorian source
office code (for example, CVPC), update of hospital contacts is
restricted to facilities in Victoria. Only a user logged onto a Services
Australia Canberra source office code (for example, MVPC), can update
hospital contracts for facilities in other states

Staff terminations, transfers and leave

People Services are responsible for advising the IT Service Desk when a
staff member ceases employment with Services Australia.

When a staff member is transferred from Veterans' Affairs Processing
(VAP), the Operations Manager must advise the VAP Helpdesk of the staff
movement.

Notification of staff on extended leave from VAP should also be sent to
the VAP Helpdesk.

Staff access monitoring

Every second month the VAP Helpdesk requests a 'VAP and Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Staff Access and Inactive Users' report from the
IT Security Helpdesk. VAP and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
staff that have not used their access for three months are sent a
request for confirmation of access requirements. Each staff member is
listed once only unless special exemption has been approved by VAP
Policy for additional access.

A single Customer Information Control System (CICS) group relevant to
the staff position (as defined in the tables on the Resources page) must
be applied to each staff member.

A request for clarification of access requirements must be sent to the
manager of any staff member with inappropriate access.

General system functionality issues

Information about general or common system functionality issues, what
they mean, and how to resolve them can be found on the Resources page.

Allied Health system functionality issues

Nursing Home Visit Counts

When Nursing Home services match to PARS records, the visit counts are
incorrectly retained every time the claim is reassessed. Every time the
claim is reassessed, the voucher count will increase.

Data Entry Item Prefix Defaulting

When a provider has two specialty codes, the system cannot determine
which prefix to default, even if one of the specialty codes is end
dated. When defaulting cannot occur, Service Officers should key the
item prefix manually.

Medical system functionality issues

8-MIX HIST without history displayed on VAPC

When the '8-MIX HIST' message is displayed and no history is shown at
the bottom of the pend screen, Service Officers do not need to check
history and can continue processing the claim by pressing [F9]. If
assessment is required, the relevant Medicare history will display at
the bottom of the screen.

Diagnostic imaging multiple services rule (DIMSR)

When more than one diagnostic imaging multiple service rule applies, the
items must be in the same claim. When the associated items are on
history, only one of the diagnostic imaging multiple service rules will
apply. There is no requirement to adjust the payment or to seek recovery
of an overpayment in this circumstance.

Sleep Apnoea items 12210-12250 and PARS messages

Sleep apnoea items with Referral Type 4 will return a prior approval
matching message, however, the normal fastpath procedures will not
action the PAR message. Service Officers should apply PI 3E when the
service is payable.

Hospital system functionality issues

Accommodation day counts incorrect on history

When a hospital accommodation claim is paid, the day count is not sent
to history. Each service line on VHOI containing a day count is
recalculated. As a consequence, each line of accommodation on the VPSI
statement and VHOI will have one less day than applicable with the
exception of the line where the patient is discharged. When reason code
294 (Payment declined - No Acute Care 3B certificate present) is present
on patient history, the 'NO' field will always show one day only,
regardless of the length of stay.

False 1-ACC ITEM to S1 on M3-5 Procedure

An existing system fault was identified that causes the system to
request Surgical 1 accommodation when a Medical 3, 4 or 5 ICD code or
procedure is performed. The fault exists only in Re-admitted or
Continuation Hospital claims. This problem has only been identified once
and has not been able to be replicated.

Outlier Day Cross Contract

A system fault was identified during the system change to allow
accommodation claims to cross a new contract period. Outlier days should
pay the rate that applies on the Date of Service claimed, however, when
on a single service line the system will actually apply the outlier rate
that applied at the FromDate. When outlier days are claimed from one
contract to the next, all outlier days in the new contract period should
be keyed on a new line of accommodation.

QC Checking system functionality issues

Subsequent Referral Date of Service defaulting

When a subsequent consultation is claimed, the system may default the
Date of Referral to the date of service for the item claimed. QC
Checkers should not mark the referral details as an error where the date
of referral is the same date as the date of service

The Resources page contains contact information and further details of
access groups for VAP staff, Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) staff
and Team Coaches and Programme Support Officer (PSO).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
