
Application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) 012-10070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines practice eligibility and applying for the PIP
IHI.

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP IHI supports general practices and Indigenous health services to
provide better health care to Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
patients, including best practice management of chronic disease and
mental disorders.

Applying for the IHI

Practices can apply for the IHI using:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), or
-   the PIP IHI practice application (IP026) form

Do not accept applications submitted via letter.

For more details about eligibility requirements for the IHI guidelines.

Types of payments

There are 3 types of PIP IHI payments:

One-off practice sign-on payment to register for the PIP IHI

Annual patient registration payments for each eligible Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander patient

Tiered outcome payments:

-   Tier 1, for providing chronic disease management
-   Tier 2, for providing the majority of eligible MBS Services to the
    patient

The Resources page links to the IHI guidelines for more details.

Payment changes from 1 January 2023

From 1 January 2023 patient registration payments will reduce each
calendar year until 31 December 2024, when they will cease. From 1
January 2025, patient registration will be lifetime.

There will be a corresponding increase in Tier 2 outcomes payments as
the registration payments decrease.

The Resources page links to the IHI guidelines for more details.

Practice withdrawal

Practices can withdraw from the IHI through:

-   HPOS, or
-   written correspondence via letter or email

The request must include the:

-   practice ID
-   practice name
-   full practice address
-   consent to withdraw from the IHI, and
-   signature of 1 registered owner or authorised contact person

Practices can reapply at any time.

Practices reapplying for the IHI within 12 months of their withdrawal
are not eligible for the sign-on payment.

The Resources page contains links to the incentive guidelines, Chronic
Disease Management information from the Department of Health and Aged
Care. Links to Practice Incentives Program Standard letters templates
and PIP contacts are included.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Health Professional Online Services

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
