
Capsule endoscopy recognition for Medicare 012-42020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on capsule endoscopy recognition for
Medicare.

Capsule endoscopy

Capsule endoscopy is a procedure primarily used to view the small bowel.
The procedure uses a tiny wireless camera to take pictures of the
digestive tract. A capsule endoscopy camera sits inside a vitamin-size
capsule the patient swallows. As the capsule travels through the
digestive tract, the camera takes thousands of pictures transmitted to a
recorder worn on a belt around the waist. The small bowel cannot be
viewed by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and colonoscopy.

The Conjoint Committee for the Recognition of Training in
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (CCRTGE) is a national body comprising
representatives from the:

-   Gastroenterological Society of Australia (GESA)
-   Royal Australasian College of Physicians (RACP), and
-   Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (RACS)

The role of the committee is to set the minimum standards for training
in gastrointestinal endoscopy. Procedures currently assessed by the
Committee are:

-   capsule endoscopy
-   gastroscopy (adult and/or paediatric)
-   colonoscopy (adult and/or paediatric)
-   endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), and
-   endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)

Services Australia only recognises certification of training in capsule
endoscopy from CCRTGE.

Medicare eligibility and recognition

To be eligible to claim Medicare rebates for capsule endoscopy items,
the specialist or consultant physician must be:

-   recognised by the agency as a specialist or consultant physician
-   certified by CCRTGE as having completed training in capsule
    endoscopy, and
-   registered with the Medical Board of Australia and satisfy any other
    legislative provisions that apply at the date of service

Specialty code 611

Capsule endoscopy recognition is recorded in the Provider Directory
System (PDS) with a 611 specialty code at stem level only.

Recording recognised training

Medical practitioners must apply to the agency in writing and provide
evidence. This evidence can be a certificate or a letter from CCRTGE
stating the medical practitioner has attended recognised training in the
field of capsule endoscopy and should include the preferred start date
of capsule endoscopy recognition. The date of capsule endoscopy
recognition for Medicare purposes for a specialist or consultant
physician cannot be earlier than:

-   the date the CCRTGE recognises their training, and
-   the date of recognition as a specialist or consultant physician for
    Medicare purposes

If evidence is not supplied the service officer can search the
Recognised Practitioners register on the CCRTGE website for the
specialist/consultant physician’s name. See Resources for a link to the
Register.

Recognition of capsule endoscopy enables eligible medical practitioner's
access to the relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).
See Resources for a link to MBS Online.

Enquiries

Where the medical practitioner is not a recognised specialist or
consultant physician for Medicare purposes, Service Officers are to
advise the medical practitioner they are not eligible to apply for
capsule endoscopy recognition.

Telephone Enquiries

Where a telephone enquiry is received, advise the caller written
requests and CCRTGE letter or certificate confirming capsule endoscopy
recognition are to be sent to Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2.

Training recognition

Direct enquiries about training recognition to the CCRTGE.

The Resources page contains a link to the CCRTGE website.

Registering recognition

Direct enquiries about registering capsule endoscopy recognition to
Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration, links to external websites, and an example
certificate.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

Recognition as a specialist or consultant physician for Medicare

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

https://ourblueprint.internal.dept.local/content/health-professionals/012-42020030m.gif

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
