
Podiatry services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020150

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) podiatry services programme for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers podiatry services provided to entitled
persons by registered podiatrists. Podiatry services involve the
treatment and prevention of foot disorders. It includes the treatment
of:

-   ingrown toenails
-   corns
-   calluses

and identifying faulty foot structure and prescribing specific forms of
special footwear. Podiatry does not include the services of a manicurist
or pedicurist.

Podiatry services must be claimed in accordance with the patient’s
assessed clinical need.

The Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

On this Page:

Eligibility to receive podiatry services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
podiatry services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most podiatry services necessary to meet a clinical need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds podiatry services related to the card holder's accepted
disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is commenced.

The Process page contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA health
card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting podiatry services
when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their podiatry service
provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting
treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA podiatry services

Only a podiatrist contracted with DVA as a participating DVA provider
that is registered with Services Australia (they have a Medicare
provider number) at the time of the service is eligible to provide
services to eligible DVA health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health
Providers - Podiatrists’ on the DVA website. This contains detailed
eligibility requirements and also information for podiatry services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for podiatry services

The DVA Podiatrists Schedule of Fees contains a range of consultation
items available to eligible DVA health card holders for both
professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care service or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range F004-F998.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for medical grade footwear

The DVA Schedule of Fees for Medical Grade Footwear (MGF) contains a
range of items available to eligible DVA health card holders to provide
MGF and related services, including modification and repairs that are of
a high standard and clinically appropriate for assessed footwear needs.
MGF may be prescribed when readily available everyday footwear cannot be
used or modified, or is not recommended due to clinical reasons.

MGF is footwear clinically prescribed to accommodate and/or correct
abnormal foot and/or ankle structure or significant deformity. MGF is
either:

-   ready-made footwear that is listed in the DVA Schedule of Fees for
    MGF, or
-   custom made footwear that meets DVA’s technical specifications,
    manufactured by a person or organisation contracted to DVA, and has
    been approved by DVA for supply (see also Prior financial
    authorisation requirements)

DVA will not pay for MGF if the provision is for:

-   sports type shoes
-   inappropriate styles e.g. slippers, slip-on style shoes, open heeled
    sandals/shoes, or
-   the sole purpose of accommodating orthoses. You should be able to
    fit orthoses in appropriate off-the-shelf footwear

Items in this fee schedule are in the range F605-F681. This fee schedule
also includes Postage item F997.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Podiatry service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain podiatry services. The
fee schedules contain information on which items require prior financial
authorisation.

Footwear repairs and assessments

If a veteran has a current or expired approval from DVA for medical
grade footwear, repair and assessment items can be paid using PI 42,
regardless of the age of the shoes.

To request financial approval, podiatry service providers must contact
DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing a Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The
Resources page has a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA podiatry services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

Up to two initial consultations can be claimed in a 12 month referral
period. Each initial consultation must be for a new episode of care or a
new and unrelated condition

An initial consultation is claimed when the entitled person is seen for
the first time

A new episode of care refers to a period of more than 3 months since the
entitled person last received treatment for the same condition

Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an initial
consultation for the same patient

Subsequent consultations are to be claimed for ongoing treatment of a
condition

Two subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day, unless
provided in hospital

Treatment by residential aged care services and public hospitals which
have a greater level of care require prior approval. The Resources page
contains a link to the DVA Podiatry Services Fee Schedule. See also
Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for VAP

Claims for items covered under the Rehabilitation Appliances Program
(RAP) are to be returned to the provider, as these items are claimed
through Rehabilitation Appliances Program Treatment Operation Review
(RAPTOR). The Resources page contains a link to the Notes for Allied
Health Providers

Treatment for white card holders must be related to an accepted
disability

Items F004 (initial podiatry consultation) and F008 (initial footwear
assessment) both cover an assessment and a consultation. Only 1 initial
consultation and 1 initial footwear assessment item can be claimed per
referral. An initial consultation and an initial footwear assessment
item cannot be claimed on the same day.

Podiatrists are to continue using item F998 for regular postage claims

-   If a provider has claimed postage with any medical grade footwear or
    podiatry item and Services Australia is not paying the item, the
    postage item is still payable. Do not reject a postage item because
    the medical grade footwear or podiatry item is being rejected
    Note: a veteran’s signature is not required for payment of postage
    items

Travel associated with footwear items in the F600 range is not payable

Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
‘Notes for Dental and Allied Health Providers’ available on the
Department of Veterans' Affairs website.

Restrictions on orthomechanical items (F201-F386)

The following specific restrictions apply to the provision of
Orthomechanical items (items F201-F386) from the DVA Podiatrists
Schedule of Fees.

-   DVA expects each Orthomechanical item claimed is either customised
    or custom-built for the patient. Standard, unmodified orthoses
    should not be claimed as orthomechanical items, these should be
    provided using either the appropriate consumables item (F986 or
    F987) or through DVA’s Rehabilitation Appliances Program (RAP)
-   Only one pair of orthoses should be provided at any one time. DVA
    expects entitled persons to transfer the orthoses between their
    various shoes as necessary
-   Only 1 each of F222 or F266, or 2 each of F221 or F265 can be
    provided within a 365-day period. Additional provision of these
    devices requires prior financial authorisation from DVA
-   Fees for complete orthoses items (F201-F222 and F265-F268) cover the
    complete initial device including plain covers, posts, dispensing
    and follow up consultations (casting is claimed separately under
    F304)
-   Casting or 3D scanning/digitisation for the production of custom
    made orthoses are to be claimed separately under relevant item
    numbers F303 and F304
-   If an orthoses covered with a soft tissue supplement (F383 and F384)
    is clinically required and provided, the fee for this may be claimed
    in addition to the orthoses item
-   Repairs or modifications made to orthoses within the first three
    months are included in the initial supply price
-   Item numbers for the assessment and provision of orthoses should
    only be claimed on the date the actual service occurs or when the
    item is supplied (not in advance)

Claim lodgement information

DVA podiatry services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources page
contains a link to the Services Australia website for information about
claim choices for health professionals.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Podiatry service providers should be sure
that they can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request
from the agency or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

Online claiming

Podiatry service providers can submit electronic claims for processing
without the need to send any paperwork to the agency.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

DVA Webclaim is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that
allows health care providers to submit electronic claims via the
internet, without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the
Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA Podiatry providers are required to lodge ‘Health Practitioner
Service Voucher’ and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These
fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers
can use their own invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can
provide the same level of information as required by the DVA forms.
After completion, service providers should post the forms to the agency
for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions from podiatry
service providers.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP podiatry services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will
help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
