
Paperless Prescribing and Claiming Trial 012-60030060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the paperless claiming model.

On this Page:

The paperless prescribing and claiming trial model

The National Health Act 1953 and the National Health (Pharmaceutical
Benefits) Regulation 2017 outline the requirements in relation to
prescribing pharmaceutical benefits. In particular, section 40 of the
Regulations provides that a prescription for a pharmaceutical benefit is
only ‘duly written’ in certain specified circumstances.

The electronic prescribing, dispensing and paperless claiming model is a
fully electronic process from prescribing on an electronic medication
chart to dispensing and claiming with Services Australia. The
Commonwealth has made special arrangements in accordance with section
100 of the Act providing, that an electronic or paper medication chart
will be deemed to be a duly written prescription for pharmaceutical
benefits supplied to in-patients of the hospital by the approved
supplier. Under the special arrangements, PBS prescribers and approved
suppliers must also comply with some additional requirements and
conditions in respect of prescriptions made using electronic or paper
medication charts.

Under this model:

-   the medical practitioner’s communication on the medication chart is
    considered the prescription
-   the pharmacist dispenses from the medication chart and only sends an
    electronic claim to Services Australia via Pharmaceutical Benefits
    Scheme (PBS) online
-   no paper prescription is provided for claiming

Note: this trial commenced in 1998 and continues to date.

Paperless claiming conditions

Conditions apply to the paperless claiming model. They are:

-   Repeat prescriptions cannot be provided to patients
-   Section 49 (previously regulation 24) will not apply, see
    Legislation
-   There will be no deferred supply
-   Medical practitioner must obtain prior authority approval and write
    authority prescriptions on the appropriate authority form

Note: authority prescriptions cannot be obtained under this model. The
medical practitioner must write the authority on the appropriate
authority form and obtain prior approval from Services Australia by
phone or in writing.

The Resources page contains a list of hospitals and associated
pharmacies approved to use the paperless claiming model.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
