
Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) registration for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO) 012-41040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Location Specific Practice
Numbers (LSPN).

Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology procedures help to diagnose,
treat and monitor an extensive range of illnesses and conditions.
Diagnostic imaging services include ultrasound, computed tomography,
nuclear medicine, radiography (x-ray), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
and positron emission tomography (PET). DI and RO services are provided
with specialised equipment and the professional input of a radiologist
(or other medical specialist) to interpret the generated images.

Eligibility and registration

Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN)

Practices intending to provide Medicare eligible diagnostic imaging and
radiation oncology services must apply to and be registered with
Services Australia. As part of their registration, each practice is
allocated an LSPN to be used for claiming Medicare benefits. Diagnostic
Imaging practices must also be accredited in order for Medicare benefits
to be payable.

Registration

An LSPN is required for each practice. Services Australia processes
registration forms, allocates and administers LSPNs.

Accreditation

Once a DI practice has an LSPN, they are required to apply for
accreditation as specified by the Diagnostic Imaging Accreditation
Scheme (DIAS). Accreditation must be attained and recorded for each
modality before Medicare benefits are payable.

Accreditation can be attained from the approved accrediting bodies
below:

-   HDAA Australia Pty Ltd (HDAA)
-   National Association of Testing Authorities Australia (NATA)
-   Quality Innovation Performance (QIP)

Radiation oncology is not subject to DIAS, so is an exception to
accreditation requirements. Practices are still required to list
radiation oncology equipment with Medicare.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Health and Aged
Care for further details about LSPNs and the DIAS.

Diagnostic Imaging Services Table

The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) together with the Diagnostic
Imaging Service Table (DIST) (a tabular list of Medicare-subsidised
diagnostic imaging services) provides up-to-date details about the
current arrangements for the payment of Medicare benefits under the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

The MBS is an up-to-date record of Medicare subsidised items and the
conditions of their use including:

-   Medicare Benefit Schedule fee (the $ fee set by government). Note:
    diagnostic imaging providers are entitled to set their own fees.
    Therefore the actual fee charged may be different to the Schedule
    fee
-   Medicare benefit (the $ amount patients can expect to get back from
    Medicare)
-   description of the service
-   provider requirements
-   request and referral requirements

Medicare diagnostic imaging item categories (modalities):

-   Ultrasound – Group 11
-   Computed Tomography (CT) – Group 12
-   Diagnostic radiology (including x-ray) – Group 13
-   Nuclear Medicine (including PET) – Group 14
-   MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) – Group 15
-   Management of bulk-billed services – Group 16

An LSPN is required to receive Medicare benefits for diagnostic imaging
services. For more details about LSPN error codes on claims, see the
Resources tab.

General Medical Services Table

The MBS together with the General Medical Services Table (GMST) (a
tabular list of various Medicare-subsidised medical services) provides
up-to-date details about the current arrangements for the payment of
Medicare Benefits under the Health Insurance Act 1973.

The General Medical Services Table lists all the radiation oncology
services that are Medicare-subsidised.

An LSPN is required to receive Medicare benefits for Radiation Oncology
services.

For more details about LSPN error codes on claims, see the Resources
tab.

LSPN for the purposes of Medicare

A Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) is a unique identifier
allocated by Services Australia for a:

-   diagnostic imaging and/or radiation oncology premises, or
-   base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment

LSPNs are used to record:

the location diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology services are
performed (or equipment is ordinarily located in the case of a base for
mobile equipment)

the types of equipment based at the premises

the age of the equipment

the accreditation status of the practice

for practices with MRI equipment:

-   if the equipment is eligible for Medicare benefits, and
-   which providers are listed to provide MRI services at the practice

all other information as required under the Health Insurance Act 1973

LSPN records on Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Users who have their HPOS account linked to their LSPN record are able
to view, amend and renew their registration online.

For more details, see LSPN and system (PDS and HPOS).

Legislation

The Health Insurance Act 1973 requires practices and bases for mobile
equipment to be registered with Services Australia to maintain
eligibility for Medicare benefits.

The legislation provides a mechanism to collect details about the
rendering of diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology services and
assists the Australian Government and the diagnostic imaging industry
to:

-   monitor the services provided
-   assess compliance for benefits by ensuring that where applicable,
    the equipment used meets the eligibility requirements for a
    particular Medicare claim
-   develop future programs to maintain and improve patient access to
    high quality services

The References page contains links to legislation.

Legislative requirements for LSPN

Primary details

Sections 23DZV and 23DZZU of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act)
requires proprietors of practices to advise Services Australia in
writing of any change to primary information within 28 days of the
change. They must complete a Application to register or amend a
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) to
provide the details of the change.

Primary information is:

practice business details, including:

-   proprietor
-   business name
-   Australian Business Number (ABN), and
-   Australian Company Number (ACN)

the premises or base for mobile equipment address

the types of DI or RO equipment ordinarily located at the premises or
base

details of legal agreements to use equipment within the premises

Annual renewal process

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act requires practices to respond to
requests for information made by Services Australia. Annual reminder
letters are automatically sent to practices each year, which requires
them to:

-   confirm all details on the LSPN register are correct and up to date,
    or
-   submit a HW061 form so the register is up to date

Practices can renew their registration in HPOS if no changes are
required.

Once the required information is received, the practice's registration
is renewed for an additional 12 months.

Suspension for failing to respond

Failure to respond to this request by the date specified in the notice
(which is the registration End Date in PDS), results in:

-   Medicare benefits not being payable until a response is received
-   a Work Item being created in PaNDA which prompts an APS5 delegate to
    consider suspension of registration in line with sections 23DZX or
    23DZZW of the Act

Suspensions are actioned by the Provider Services Support team. A letter
is automatically sent to the practice advising of the suspension, and
that the practice's registration is cancelled if it remains unresponsive
for a further 3 months after the registration End Date.

A response within this 3 month period results in the practice's
registration being renewed for an additional 12 months from the End
Date.

Cancellations for failing to respond

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act allows Services Australia to cancel
the practice's registration if:

-   a practice fails to respond within 3 months after its registration
    End Date, and
-   the above requirements have been met

A Work Item is created in PaNDA for the LSPN record to be referred to an
EL1 delegate.

Suspensions are actioned by an EL1 in the Provider Services Support team
or the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging Team. A letter is sent to the
practice advising:

-   the practice's registration has been cancelled
-   the proprietor will not be entitled to request registration of the
    practice for 12 months from the decision date

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Act allows a proprietor to write to ask
for permission to register the practice within 12 months of a decision
to cancel. All requests must be made to the Pathology and Diagnostic
Imaging Team as instructed in the cancellation letter.

The References page contains a link to the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Practices that must be registered and allocated an LSPN

Practices

A diagnostic imaging and/or radiation oncology premises is a building or
part of a building where diagnostic imaging procedures and/or radiation
oncology services are carried out under a single business name

A base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment is:

-   the premises where DI and/or RO equipment is ordinarily located when
    not in use, and
-   DI and/or RO services are not carried out at the premises, or
-   are frequently carried out off the premises under a single business
    name

Each practice must have its own LSPN

Where different business entities operate from the same premises, they
must be registered separately

For example, a medical centre has suites that are leased to 2 private
medical practices. Both practices have diagnostic imaging equipment in
their suites, have different owners and operate independently of each
other. Even though these practices operate from the same premises, each
practice must have its own LSPN.

Radiation oncology practices

Radiation oncology practices are included under the LSPN Registration
arrangements to:

-   streamline the practice registration process under the one system
    and
-   standardise the details collected across public and private
    radiation oncology practices

Note:

-   only practices that provide radiation oncology services by or under
    the supervision of specialist radiation oncologists must be
    registered
-   practices that perform superficial or orthovoltage radiation
    oncology services, for example dermatologists, ophthalmologists and
    general practitioners, and who have no other diagnostic imaging or
    radiation oncology equipment as part of their practice, are exempt
    from registration

Medicare claiming and LSPN

To be eligible for Medicare benefits, individual providers must include
on patient accounts/receipts or bulk billing claims, including
electronic claims, and the LSPN of the practice.

This applies for claims where the date of service is on or after 1 July
2003. If this information is not provided from this date, the service
will be ineligible for a Medicare benefit until the information is
supplied to Services Australia.

Services Australia checks claim forms for:

-   an LSPN, and
-   that the LSPN has equipment and accreditation recorded which is
    eligible for the item(s) claimed

See Claims for Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare for
more details.

Equipment details to be provided

Basic details about the equipment and who has a financial interest in
the equipment are collected under the relevant modality classification:

-   Ultrasound
-   Computed tomography (details of gantry only)
-   Nuclear medicine
-   Diagnostic radiology (includes x-ray with image intensifier -
    recorded as fluoroscopy, mammography, orthopantomography and
    angiography)
-   Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Full and Partial Medicare- eligible
    must be recorded on the LSPN register
-   Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) - Ineligible for Medicare is
    optional for recording on the LSPN register for the purposes of
    Medicare benefits, but is required for some Veterans’ Affairs
    payments
-   Radiation oncology equipment

When supplying the equipment details, the practice must supply the
serial number of the equipment being listed and the age of the equipment
(date of manufacture or date first installed in Australia). If the
serial number is unavailable, an accountable asset or other number is
required and must also be displayed on the equipment.

Note: Services Australia cannot record the equipment if these numbers
and dates are not supplied. The processing of the application will be
delayed until these details are provided.

Capital sensitivity

The capital sensitivity measure’s purpose is to encourage practices to
regularly upgrade, and replace their equipment to ensure patients have
access to higher quality equipment.

This means that any diagnostic imaging services are no longer payable
for services provided using equipment that has exceeded its:

-   effective life age, or
-   maximum extended life age

Except for those who have a current approved exemption.

This is in place for almost all diagnostic imaging equipment providing
services (excluding Positron Emission Tomography (PET) services) under
Medicare.

Prior to 1 May 2020, almost all services listed in the Diagnostic
Imaging Services Table, excluding PET services, had 2 different schedule
fees - schedule '(K)' items (100% of the MBS fee) and schedule '(NK)'
items (approximately 50% of the MBS fee) for diagnostic imaging services
provided on aged equipment impacted by capital sensitivity.

From 1 May 2020, NK items were removed from the Diagnostic Imaging
Service Table (DIST). This means that any equipment that has exceeded
its effective life age or maximum extended life age are no longer
payable except for those who had a current approved exemption on the
date of service.

There were 2 exemption categories in place until 30 April 2022:

practices located in outer regional, remote and very remote areas were
automatically exempt from the capital sensitivity provisions, and

practices located in inner regional areas that are also classified as
Rural Zone 4 or 5 under the Rural Regional and Remote Area (RRMA)
classification system of 1991. The regulations provided that an
exemption may be granted, on application, where the equipment:

-   was operated on a rare and sporadic basis, and
-   provided crucial patient access to diagnostic imaging services

Practices could apply for the above exemptions via Department of Health
and Aged Care. The Resources page has a link to their website.

An additional exceptional circumstances exemption (ECE) was added in
conjunction with the 1 May 2020 changes to NK items:

-   where the exemption was requested before the end of the equipment’s
    life age
-   the practice was unable to replace the equipment before its life age
    due to unforeseen circumstances

The Department of Health and Aged Care administers ECE applications,
which are entered into PDS by Services Australia, National Office.

Calculating the effective life age of equipment

The date from which the age of equipment is worked out is:

-   the date that the equipment was first installed in Australia; or
-   if the equipment was imported as used equipment — the date of
    manufacture of the oldest component

A table to assist with calculating the effective life age and maximum
extended life age can be found on the Resources page

Upgrades

DI equipment has been upgraded if:

-   an additional reasonable investment has been made within the new
    effective life age for the diagnostic imaging equipment that
    improves the overall performance of the imaging system so that it is
    equivalent to new diagnostic imaging equipment supplied in Australia
    at the time of the improvement, or
-   the diagnostic imaging equipment is currently accredited under The
    Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Radiologists'
    Mammography Quality Assurance Program

For full details about the rules for claiming the schedule '(K)' and
schedule '(NK)' items, the exemptions, and the definition of equipment
upgrade, providers should access the Department of Health and Aged
Care's website. See the Resources page for a link.

Privacy provisions and the LSPN register

The Health Insurance Act 1973 allows Services Australia to publish an
extract of the LSPN Register on the Services Australia website and
requires the agency to make available, on request, an extract of the
Register to a person for the purpose of determining whether Medicare
benefits are likely to be payable. This does not include the LSPN
provider register for the purposes of the Act.

The LSPN register includes the following publicly available details:

-   LSPN
-   Practice Name
-   Address
-   Suburb
-   Start Date
-   End Date

From 19 June 2022, the following accreditation details are also
available:

-   Modality
-   Status
-   End date
-   Accreditor's name

For all other information related to an LSPN, an enquirer must be able
to pass the relevant security check before information is provided to
them.

See Performing practice staff security check for the Diagnostic
Imaging/Location Specific Practice Number (LPSN) register for security
check procedures.

The Resources page contains:

-   an attachment for investigating LSPN errors for claims
-   a table for calculating age of equipment
-   a link to the HW061 form
-   a link to contact details for Medicare Provider Registration, and
-   links to the Services Australia and Department of Health and Aged
    Care websites

Contents

Register for a Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare

Amend Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) register for Medicare

Claims for Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare

Performing practice staff security check for the Diagnostic Imaging
/Location Specific Practice Number (LPSN) register

LSPN and systems (Provider Directory System and Health Professional
Online Services)

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services - Medicare eligibility for
equipment and providers

Related links

Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre - managing
emails from health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
