
Handle 'Act for' call in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03020040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the 'Act for' function in
the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service, in the eHealth Program (EHP)
system.

On this Page:

'Act for' an eHealth Program (EHP) individual

An eHealth Program (EHP) individual, for the purposes of this procedure
are defined as:

-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

'Act for' function

A Service Officer may receive a request to perform a function on behalf
of a representative of an individual or organisation. This 'Act for'
function must be used whenever a Service Officer is performing a
function requested by a representative.

Example: an OMO calls to update organisation details. The 'Act for'
function advises the Service Officer the privileges an individual has
over a particular organisation.

The OMO details are then written to the system log as the requestor of
the update.

The Service Officer must perform a search to retrieve the EHP
individual's record. At this point the inquirer has not been verified;
therefore inquiry type, given name, family name and reason must be
entered in the Inquirer Details section.

The 'Act for' function does not restrict access to a record; it simply
informs the Service Officer, based on the information contained in the
system, what privileges the EHP individual has for the record that they
are requesting to access.

Note: this is either:

-   NO privileges
-   Read Only privileges
-   Search privileges
-   Amend privileges

The Service Officer must not proceed with a request if a caller has NO
privileges to the record requested. This is another form of security
check.

An information banner displays detailing what privileges the requestor
has for the record being accessed.

Related links

Handle calls for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
