
Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions 012-42070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Section 19 Ministerial
Directions.

On this Page:

Section 19(2)

Section 19(2) of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) prohibits the
payment of Medicare benefits where other government funding is provided
for that service.

The Act states unless the Minister otherwise directs, a Medicare benefit
is not payable for a professional service rendered by, or on behalf of,
or under an arrangement with:

-   the Commonwealth
-   a State
-   a local governing body
-   an authority established by a law of the Commonwealth, a law of the
    State or a law of an internal Territory

Section 19(5)

Section 19(5) of the Act states unless the Minister otherwise directs a
Medicare benefit is not payable in respect of a health screening service
that is to say, a professional service that is a medical examination or
test that is not reasonably required for the management of the medical
condition of the patient.

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Ministerial Direction

A Section 19(2) and 19(5) Direction is where the Minister for the
Department of Health and Aged Care (Health) (or their delegate) uses
discretionary powers to allow health professionals to claim Medicare
benefits from locations where they would not normally be eligible to
claim under Section 19(2) and 19(5) the Act. The Direction provides a
schedule of approved clinics and organisations where the health
professional is eligible to attract Medicare benefits

This could relate to:

-   Health professionals who are working at specified locations, and/or
-   Providing specified service types at specified locations

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions are issued for specific periods and
reviewed by Health prior to their expiry date. The Schedule attached to
the Direction is updated at each review (for example, health services
are removed from or added to the previous Schedule).

There are 3 types of Directions under section 19(2):

Indigenous Direction issued by the Indigenous Health Division within the
Department of Health and Aged Care. The purpose of these Directions is
to deliver comprehensive, culturally appropriate primary health care
services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. This is in
urban, regional, rural and remote locations across Australia

South Australia Health Direction – issued by the Assistant Secretary,
MBS Policy and Specialist Services Branch within the Department of
Health and Aged Care. This directs that Medicare benefits shall be
payable in respect of professional services:

-   provided by, or
-   on behalf of, or
-   under arrangement with South Australia Health for the specified
    organisations on the Direction

COAG Direction – issued as part of Council of Australian Governments’
(COAG) Improving Access to Primary Care in Rural and Remote Areas
Initiative. The purpose of this Direction is to enable eligible sites to
claim against the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) for:

-   non-admitted,
-   non-referred professional services (including nursing, midwifery,
    allied and dental services) provided in emergency departments, and
-   outpatient clinic settings

The Initiative recognises that many patients in small rural and remote
towns have limited access to primary health care services. In response
to a lack of private practices, many rural and remote public hospitals
have employed medical officers to make traditional General Practitioner
services available

The Resources page contains the South Australia Health 19(2) Directions
and a list of current 19(2) and 19(5) Indigenous Directions.

All eligible sites for the purpose of claiming under the COAG Section
19(2) Exemption Initiative are listed on the Department of Health and
Aged Care website. The link is on the Resources page.

Purpose of Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

The principles of section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions include (but are
not limited to):

-   All Australians should have equitable access to appropriate and
    quality health care throughout their lifetime. This is regardless of
    their place of residence within Australia
-   Australians in rural and remote communities face particular
    challenges when it comes to accessing appropriate health care. It is
    the responsibility of all Australian governments to seek to address
    these challenges
-   The health and medical workforce is a finite and valuable resource.
    Its members’ involvement and support is crucial to the success of
    the initiative

Eligibility to access Medicare benefits

Health professionals providing services at a location included in a
section 19(2) or 19(5) Direction cannot claim Medicare benefits if they
do not firstly satisfy the professional eligibility requirements of the
Act.

19(2) and 19(5) Identifier flag

Facilities covered under Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions are flagged:

-   in the Provider Directory System (PDS) with Aboriginal Torres Strait
    Islander Health Service (ATSIHS), and/or
-   Aboriginal Medical Service (AMS) flags in the Location Type field on
    a provider's location record

Locations listed on:

-   an Indigenous Direction are flagged with ATSIHS and AMS
-   the South Australia Health Direction are flagged with AMS
-   a COAG Direction are flagged with AMS

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers escalate
complex enquiries to a Programme Support Officer (PSO) or to a Programme
Officer (PO) via their team leader who will liaise with Provider
Eligibility in National Office for assistance if required.

The Resources page contains links to exemptions and contact details.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
