
Nurse practitioner and midwife access to Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (the PBS Schedule) 012-61060000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about nurse practitioner and midwife
access to Pharmaceutical Benefits Schedule (PBS).

On this Page:

Nurse practitioner and midwives access to the PBS

Eligibility

Nurse practitioners and midwives need to apply for a PBS prescriber
number to prescribe PBS subsidised medicines. To be eligible to apply,
nurse practitioners and midwives must meet specific criteria.

Authorised nurse practitioners and midwives are eligible to write PBS
prescriptions only if they have applied for and been allocated a
prescriber number.

Note: enquiries regarding nurse practitioner or midwife eligibility for
prescriber numbers should be transferred to the Provider Registration
Section. See Medicare Provider Registration for contact information.

Applying for access to prescribe PBS medicines

Eligible nurse practitioners or midwives must complete the Application
for a Medicare provider number and / or a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
prescriber number for a nurse practitioner or a midwife form for a
provider and/or prescriber number. This form can be downloaded from the
Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains a link to the nurse practitioners and
midwives page on the Services Australia website.

Note: authorised nurse practitioners or midwives who work solely within
participating public hospitals may only apply for a prescriber number
however they still must complete the application form but only the
relevant part.

Use of personalised PBS prescription pads

The Resources page contains details of the circumstances in which nurse
practitioners and midwives can use PBS prescription pads to prescribe
PBS medicines, according to the type of practice they are working from.

Use of PBS stationery in public hospitals

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives prescribing in a public
capacity in participating public hospitals should always use hospital
stationery provided by the hospital or their State and Territory Health
department.

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives working in public
hospitals participating in the pharmaceutical reforms can prescribe PBS
items to non-admitted patients (out patients) and admitted patients on
discharge.

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives working in public
hospitals participating in the pharmaceutical reforms but conducting
outreach for the State Health Department can request for PBS
prescription pads through Services Australia to prescribe PBS medicines.

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives working in private
practice in public hospitals participating in the pharmaceutical reforms
can use PBS prescription pads requested through Services Australia to
prescribe PBS medicines.

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives not entitled to use PBS
stationery in public hospitals

Authorised nurse practitioners and/or midwives working in public
hospitals not participating in the pharmaceutical reforms are not
entitled to prescribe under the PBS and can only access personalised
prescription pads if the authorised nurse practitioner and/or midwife is
attending patients in a private or community setting and has approval to
access PBS stationery.

Ordering prescription pads

To order PBS prescription pads, authorised nurse practitioners and
midwives can either:

-   Call the PBS General Information Line to request an order form for
    personalised prescription pads. The Resources page contains a link
    to Health professionals contact information
-   Download the order form from the Services Australia website

For more information, refer to PBS Stationery Online Ordering System
(PSOOS).

'Office use only' prescriptions

Prescribers with an 'office use only' address must have specific
location details to enable delivery of personalised prescription
stationery. These prescribers should be referred to the National
Prescription Pad line. See Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
stationery for contact information.

Items nurse practitioners and midwives can prescribe

Identifying items in the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits

Authorised nurse practitioners and midwives can prescribe a limited list
of PBS medicines. These items are identified in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits by an annotation under the PBS item code. These
annotations are:

-   'NP' - for items that can be prescribed by nurse practitioners
-   'MW' - for items that can be prescribed by midwives

Nurse practitioners and midwives can prescribe:

-   Unrestricted
-   Restricted
-   Authority required
-   Streamlined authority
-   Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS)

Nurse practitioner PBS prescribing conditions

PBS prescribing is limited by:

-   The nurse practitioner's scope of practice.
-   State or territory prescribing rights.

PBS prescribing is contingent on the nurse practitioner:

-   Being authorised.
-   Having collaborative arrangements (CA) in place (as required by
    amendments to the National Health Act 1953). Services Australia is
    not required to sight evidence of CA

Certain medicines have additional conditions for prescribing by nurse
practitioners, as recommended by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory
Committee (PBAC). These medicines are identified by the codes:

-   'CTO' for continuing therapy only.
-   'SCM' for prescribing within a shared care model.

Midwives PBS prescribing conditions

PBS prescribing is limited by:

-   the midwife's scope of practice
-   State or territory prescribing rights

PBS prescribing is contingent on the midwife:

-   being authorised
-   having collaborative arrangements in place (as required by
    amendments to the National Health Act 1953). Services Australia is
    not required to sight evidence of CA

Note: Continuing Therapy Only and Shared Care Model do not apply to
authorised midwives.

Continuing Therapy Only and Shared Care Model

As recommended by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC),
certain medicines have additional conditions for prescribing by nurse
practitioners.

These medicines are identified by the codes 'CTO' for continuing therapy
only or 'SCM' for prescribing within a shared care model, as outlined
below:

Continuing Therapy Only (CTO) model

Where the patient's treatment and prescribing of a medicine has been
initiated by a medical practitioner, but prescribing is continued by a
nurse practitioner. (This is similar to existing arrangements between
specialists and medical practitioners for prescribing certain
medicines).

Shared Care Model (SCM)

Where care is shared between a nurse practitioner and medical
practitioner in a formalised arrangement with an agreed plan to manage
the patient, in a patient centred model of care. The details surrounding
shared care arrangements will depend on the practitioners involved,
patient needs and the healthcare context.

Continuing Therapy Only and Shared Care Model do not apply to authorised
midwives.

There is no requirement for nurse prescribers to indicate on a
prescription that they are prescribing under a Shared Care Model (SCM)
or Continuing Therapy Only (CTO) for items contained in those
categories.

Nurse practitioners and midwives writing PBS prescriptions

Legislative requirements and regulations

A PBS prescription is only valid when it is written by a medical
practitioner, a dentist, an optometrist, a midwife or a nurse
practitioner. The PBS prescription must be for the treatment of the
person named on the PBS prescriptions. Authorised nurse practitioners
and midwives are governed by the same legislative requirements and
regulations in relation to writing PBS prescriptions as other
prescribers. It is mandatory for nurse practitioners to record on all
prescriptions their:

-   prescriber number, name and address
-   patient’s name, address and entitlement status and whether the
    prescription is under the PBS or RPBS
-   identify the pharmaceutical benefit by detailing the item, dose,
    form, strength, quantity and instructions for use
-   indicate where brand substitution is not permitted
-   must be signed and dated, forward or back dating is not permitted

The Resources page contains a link to the nurse practitioners and
midwives page on the Services Australia website.

Note: all enquiries relating to legislation or regulations associated
with writing PBS subsidised prescriptions must be escalated to a
Pharmaceutical Adviser.

Authority required PBS items

Authorised nurse practitioners and midwives can obtain authority
approval for a PBS prescription in the same way as other prescribers,
see Applying for an authority.

Service Officer procedures for approving authority applications remain
the same, see Authority approval processing for Pharmaceuticals Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

Note: all enquiries relating to legislation or regulations associated
with writing PBS subsidised prescriptions must be escalated to a
Pharmaceutical Adviser.

Section 49 (previously regulation 24) applying to nurse practitioners
and midwives

Section 49 (previously regulation 24) applies for nurse practitioner and
midwife prescribing. A nurse practitioner or midwife can direct that
original and repeat supplies of pharmaceutical benefits be supplied at
the one time, if certain conditions are satisfied. These conditions are
in line with the section 49 (previously regulation 24) conditions of
other prescribers.

Note: all enquiries relating to legislation or regulations associated
with writing PBS subsidised prescriptions must be escalated to a
Pharmaceutical Adviser.

For more information, refer to Section 49 (previously regulation 24) and
section 51 (previously regulation 25) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS).

Pharmacists supplying PBS prescriptions written by nurse practitioners and midwives

Legislative requirements and regulations

Pharmacists can dispense PBS prescriptions written by eligible nurse
practitioners and midwives from 1 November 2010. These prescriptions can
be claimed as per the pharmacist's normal process for prescriptions
written by other prescribers.

Nurse practitioners and midwives are governed by the same legislative
requirements and regulations in relation to writing PBS prescriptions as
other prescribers.

Note: all enquiries relating to legislation or regulations associated
with writing PBS subsidised prescriptions must be escalated to a
Pharmaceutical Adviser.

Service Officers are to follow normal procedures for pharmacist claim
enquiries.

For more information, refer to Call enquiries in Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS).

Nurse practitioner and midwife prescription pads

Authorised nurse practitioners and midwives can order PBS prescription
pads. The different types of prescription pads can be identified as
follows:

Personalised PBS prescription pads

-   To assist pharmacists identify prescriber type, indicators are
    printed after the prescriber number for personalised prescription
    pads:
-   'NP' - for nurse practitioner
-   'MW' - for midwife

Non-personalised computer prescriptions

-   Nurse practitioners and midwives can indicate their prescriber type
    by ticking the appropriate box on the computer prescription form.
    Their prescribing software can also check this indicator
-   Note: there is no legal requirement for nurse practitioners or
    midwives to tick the 'prescriber type' box. These prescriptions will
    not be rejected by Services Australia. If the pharmacist needs this
    information, the prescriber should be contacted.

Reason codes

PBS online claiming for nurse practitioners and midwives

Two reason codes are included in Online Claiming for PBS, as part of the
nurse practitioner and midwife initiative. These are system rejections.

-   Reason code R606 will display message 'Prescriber is not authorised
    to prescribe this item'. A pharmacy will receive this reason code
    when the prescriber is not authorised to prescribe this item.
-   Reason code R607 will display message 'Prescriber is not authorised
    to prescribe this item at date of prescribing'. A pharmacy will
    receive this reason code when the prescriber is not authorised to
    prescribe the item at the date of prescribing.

For more information, refer to Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
reason codes for online claiming for PBS pharmacies.

Mainframe

A Prescriber type code is next to the Prescriber ID field on the
mainframe. The code changes depending on the prescriber number entered.

-   Code M - Prescriber is doctor or medical practitioner
-   Code B - Prescriber is both doctor and dentist
-   Code D - Prescriber is dentist
-   Code O - Prescriber is optometrist
-   Code N - nurse practitioner
-   Code W - midwife

Note: the mainframe will alert you if the prescriber cannot access an
item by highlighting the Prescriber type code in red, and adding the
message 'Prescriber does not have access to this item' to the screen.

Item selection

As authorised nurse practitioners and midwives prescribe items listed in
the same parts of the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits and use the
same item codes as medical practitioners, there are some items where
Service Officers will select a listing for a nurse practitioner or
midwife that may contain DOCT text.

Note: key in the prescriber number first, as the mainframe will then
only return items that can be prescribed by that prescriber type.

PBS Claims Processing system screens

The following changes have occurred to the New Claims Processing system
screen as of 1 November 2010:

Query Prescription screen

-   'Nurse practitioner' and 'Midwife' are added to the Prescriber type
    search criteria

Prescription Details screen

A Prescriber type field is next to the Prescriber number. The Prescriber
type changes depending on the prescriber number submitted by the
pharmacy:

-   M - Doctor or medical practitioner
-   B - Practitioner is both doctor and dentist
-   D - Dentist
-   O - Optometrist
-   N - Nurse practitioner
-   W - Midwife

Note: there are no procedural changes to PBS prescription processing.

National Drug Register Database (NDRD)

A Prescriber Type field is included on the NDRD to identify the items
that nurse practitioners and midwives can prescribe.

The following abbreviations are used in the Prescriber Type field:

-   Abbreviation DOCT - doctor or medical practitioner
-   Abbreviation DRDE - practitioner is both doctor and dentist
-   Abbreviation DENT - dentist
-   Abbreviation OPTM - optometrist
-   Abbreviation NP - nurse practitioner
-   Abbreviation MW - midwife

Note: any additional information relating to the item is included on the
NDRD, for example situations where a request for an increase quantity or
repeat requires escalation to a Pharmaceutical Adviser.

Process nurse practitioner and midwife applications

Nurse practitioners and eligible midwives are able to access services
that are funded through the MBS and prescribe certain medications
subsidised under the PBS.

This document provides the procedures to process initial nurse
practitioner and midwife applications for provider or prescriber
numbers.

Applications for Medicare provider numbers and PBS prescriber numbers

The 'Application for a Medicare provider number and/or PBS prescriber
number for a midwife or nurse practitioner' form has been introduced for
nurse practitioners and midwives to apply for a provider number and/or
prescriber number.

An application for a Medicare provider number and/or PBS prescriber
number for a midwife or nurse practitioner form on the Services
Australia website.

The Resources page contains a link to the nurse practitioners and
midwives page on the Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains a links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care website, the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia website and
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) Register of
Practitioners.

Related links

Prescriber number for health professionals in Medicare

Common Correspondence Tracking System in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
