
Retire eHealth Program (EHP) individual record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy and procedure on retiring eHealth
Program (EHP) individual records in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service. An EHP individual record is retired on notification that the
individual is deceased.

On this Page:

Definition of EHP individual

EHP individuals, for the purpose of this document, are defined as:

-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Contracted Service Provider Officer (CSP officer)

Requirements of notification of death

A Service Officer can retire an EHP individual record after they receive
notification that the Healthcare Provider Individual is deceased.

There are restrictions as to who can notify the HI Service of a deceased
EHP individual. If the deceased person is a:

Responsible Officer (RO), the HI Service can be notified by the new RO
for the seed organisation

Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO), the HI Service can be notified
by:

-   an RO of the seed organisation in the hierarchy to which the OMO
    belonged
-   an OMO above the deceased OMO in the organisation hierarchy

Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I), the HI Service can be notified
by:

-   a Data source (the Australian Health Practitioners Regulatory Agency
    (AHPRA))
-   an OMO from an organisation to which the Healthcare Provider is
    linked
-   a family member

Contracted Service Provider (CSP officer), the HI Service can be
notified by:

-   another CSP officer registered and authorised to act on behalf of
    the CSP organisation
-   a family member

Retiring an EHP individual record

EHP individual records are set to retired when the following are added
to the record:

-   date of death
-   date of death accuracy
-   source of death notification

Name details must be recorded for the person who notifies of the death.

On successfully retiring the record:

-   all links to provider organisations are end dated
-   access to the HI Service is removed using this individual's Public
    Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate
-   all Healthcare Provider Directory Service (HI HPD) entries for the
    Healthcare provider are removed and are not returned during a search
    of the HI HPD

Note: HPI-I records retired in error can be reinstated by a Service
Officer.

Where the EHP Individual is a Responsible Officer (RO), they can only be
retired when there is another RO linked to the organisation.

Organisations and Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisations can
have multiple Organisation Maintenance Officers (OMO) or CSP officers
linked to them. Where an organisation only has one OMO or CSP officer
linked, a new person must be appointed before the only OMO or CSP
officer is retired.

Automatic retiring of EHP individual records

The HI Service automatically retires a record when the date of birth
recorded indicates that the individual has reached the age of 130 years.

Note: the existing record must have a status of either active or
deactivated.

On successful retirement of the record:

-   all Healthcare Provider Directory Service (HI HPD) entries for the
    retired EHP individual record are removed and are not returned
    during a search for the HI HPD
-   all links to provider organisations are end dated
-   access to the HI Service is removed using this individual's Public
    Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate

Retire EHP individual record via data source

The notification of the death of an EHP individual maybe received via a
web service request.

An identifier must be provided for every request to amend an EHP
individual's record by a data source.

Where death details have already been recorded for an individual, death
notifications are not processed as part of the amendment request.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
