
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Late Lodgements 012-17070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assignment of DVA claims in
Medicare Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP).

Late lodgement of a DVA claim for treatment services

The following policy provides guidelines for an application to be
submitted in order to extend the 2 year lodgement period.

The Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986 and Military Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 2004, state that a DVA claim must be lodged with the
DVA within 2 years from the date of service.

An application to extend the 2 year lodgement period is known as a late
lodgement.

Where the provider is incapacitated or deceased, then the person who
holds their legal authority, such as their power of attorney or
executor, can apply for late lodgement.

There is no requirement for a Late Lodgement application if the claim
requests an adjustment to a previously paid claim. Late Lodgement
applications are only required for claims that are being submitted for
the first time. An adjustment with a date of service (DOS) greater than
2 years is not considered a late lodgement claim. Over 2 year old
adjustments should not be rejected but should be actioned as per normal
adjustment process.

The decision of the DVA or their delegate is final.

Note: Late Lodgement policy does not apply to claims that are submitted
late as a result of Compliance activity.

Acceptable late lodgement

Some examples of acceptable reasons:

-   Hospitalisation, or serious long term medical condition, and
    extensive period of recovery (however it would not be acceptable if
    the provider was still practising during this period)
-   Evidence to demonstrate that if a longer period is not allowed,
    there will be impact on the ongoing viability of the practice, such
    as certified copies of bank statements or tax returns
-   A natural disaster, such as flood or fire
-   A compliance audit on the provider carried out by DVA that has
    resulted in the provider needing to resubmit claims

Upon advice from DVA, allowances for further investigation must be made
where the Veteran/s associated with the claim has evidence of known
mental health conditions. A claim and application may be escalated to
the DVA delegation if:

-   there is any reference in the Application for Late Lodgement or
    accompanying documentation which indicates that the provider has
    transferred or has the intention to transfer the burden of payment
    onto the DVA client. This includes advising the client to seek
    reimbursement from DVA, another Commonwealth or state
    department/agency or instructing them to perform any other private
    payment arrangement for the relevant services, and/or
-   there is reference to the DVA client’s mental health state or mental
    health condition in the Application for Late Lodgement or
    accompanying documentation

The claim and application should be forwarded to the VAP Policy Section
Tier 3 for further consideration.

The agency will not approve late lodgement applications due to
administrative errors. Some examples of administrative errors are:

-   poor book keeping
-   inadequate staffing/resources/training
-   an issue with software, system or computer malfunctions

The References page provides links to the legislation.

Mandatory documents for an application for late lodgement

To apply for late lodgement of a DVA claim for treatment services,
providers must submit the following mandatory documents:

-   An application for late lodgement of a DVA claim for treatment
    services form, signed by the Provider. Note: to obtain this form,
    providers must contact the Veterans' Affairs Processing National
    enquiries line
-   Correctly completed original treatment services voucher, certified
    by the patient
-   Evidence to demonstrate the circumstances preventing lodgement
    within the 2 years, or
-   Evidence to demonstrate that if a longer period is not allowed,
    there will be impact on the ongoing viability of the practice, such
    as certified copies of bank statements or tax returns

Late lodgement applications are sent to the VAP Late Lodgement Delegate
via the postal address listed on the Application for Late Lodgement of
DVA Claims (D9207) form. The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Applications for late lodgement will not be accepted electronically and
are only required for claims submitted for the first time outside the 2
year period, not adjustments.

Escalation process of late lodgement of a DVA claim for treatment services

All late lodgement of a DVA claim for treatment services applications
are assessed by the Medicare Provider Branch.

The escalation process can occur in 1 of the following ways:

the delegate (TL6) considers to extend the 2 year lodgement period or
reject the late lodgement request if there is insufficient evidence, or

where the decision cannot be determined or the provider has provided
evidence that:

-   demonstrates a serious personal issue or natural disaster which
    prevented the claim from being lodged within the 2 year period from
    the date of service, or
-   if a longer period is not allowed it will impact the ongoing
    viability of the practice, then

the delegate (TL6) is to refer the late lodgement request to VAP Policy
Section Tier 3 for a decision

The provider will receive a letter advising if their application is not
successful.

The decision made by the delegate is final.

Access culled history/treatment data request

The Australian National Audit Office requires VAP to retain certain
documents for specific periods of time.

Approximately 2 years of claimed treatment history is maintained within
the VAP system. Services for treatments claimed for up to 5 years old
are sent to a data storage area as culled history/treatment data
request. Service history over 5 years old is held by the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Items that have a time dependency are retained on service history for
that time.

Retention periods

The Resources page contains information about treatment types and the
period records must be retained.

Provider requests for treatment data requests (TDR)

When statements 2 years and older cannot be generated by VAP, a
provider/practice must submit a written and signed request to DVA
enabling production of a TDR of claiming history.

The Resources page contains information on retention periods, links to
forms, contact details and letters.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
