
Eye Programs in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18032900

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This document outlines the PBS for patients with subfoveal choroidal
neovascularisation (CNV), diabetic macular oedema (DMO) and retinal vein
occlusion (RVO). It details subsidised Aflibercept, Brolucizumab and
Ranibizumab for patients with CNV.

CNV and listing dates

Subfoveal choroidal neovascularisation (CNV) is a major cause of vision
loss. It can be due to a number of conditions including age-related
macular degeneration (AMD), pathologic myopia and other rare causes.

Listing dates:

-   ranibizumab - 1 August 2007 (AMD only)
-   aflibercept - 1 December 2012
-   brolucizumab – 01 October 2021 (AMD only)

DMO and listing dates

Diabetic macular oedema (DMO) is an accumulation of fluid in the eye due
to leaking blood vessels. Diabetic retinopathy causes vessel damage.

Listing dates:

-   ranibizumab - 1 July 2015
-   aflibercept - 1 October 2015
-   dexamethasone implant - 1 November 2016

RVO and listing dates

A retinal vein occlusion (RVO) is a blockage of one of the veins in the
retina. There is central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) and branched
retinal vein occlusion (BRVO).

Listing dates:

-   ranibizumab - 1 July 2015
-   aflibercept - 1 October 2015
-   dexamethasone implant - 1 November 2018

See Written Authority Required Drugs for more information.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the option relevant to the condition
treated.

The Resources page contains links to application forms, calculation
sheets, contact details, item codes, restriction, and the PBS and the
Services Australia websites.

Related links

Written Authority Required Drugs

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
