
Process for Authority required (STREAMLINED) item 012-63020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the process for Authority required
(STREAMLINED) items.

On this Page:

Authority processing

Authority required

-   These items require approval from Services Australia or the
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) via online PBS Authorities
    (PBS items only), by telephone or in writing

Authority required (STREAMLINED)

-   The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (PBS) lists a streamlined
    authority code which applies to each restriction criterion for an
    Authority required (STREAMLINED) item
-   Approved prescribers must ensure their patient meets the restriction
    criteria for the item and must indicate this by putting the
    corresponding streamlined authority code on the prescription
-   A prescription is only valid for dispensing when a valid authority
    prescription form is used and includes the streamlined authority
    code - the code should be recorded where the Authority approval
    number usually appears
    Note: only 1 item can be written per authority prescription
    (exception: approved public hospital script pads)

Note: for increased quantities and/or repeats above those specified in
the Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits, the item will be treated as an
Authority required item.

There are no Authority Required (Streamlined) items in the Repatriation
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits.

Streamlined authority codes

Streamlined authority codes are available in the Schedule of
Pharmaceutical Benefits via the PBS website.

Information for prescribers

Authority required (STREAMLINED) items for the listed quantity and/or
repeats do not require approval from Services Australia or Department of
Veterans' Affairs.

Increased quantities and/or repeats for an Authority required
(STREAMLINED) item

If a prescriber requires increased quantities and/or repeats, they must
contact Services Australia for approval. The approval can be requested
either via:

-   Online PBS Authorities (self-serve)
-   Telephone, or
-   HPOS form upload/postal (written authority requests)

Information for Pharmacists

Approved suppliers must enter the streamlined authority code when
claiming PBS Authority required (STREAMLINED) items (for the listed
quantity and/or repeats).

All claims with an incorrect or missing streamlined authority code or
authority approval number will be rejected.

Prescriptions for increased quantities and/or repeats must have a
Services Australia or Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) issued
authority approval number or stamp. In these circumstances, the
streamlined authority code cannot be used. Prescribers must obtain
approval for increased quantities and/or repeats either via self-service
through Online PBS Authorities by telephone or in writing to Services
Australia or DVA.

Request for the release of a streamlined authority code

If a prescriber contacts Services Australia requesting a streamlined
authority code for a particular item, Service Officers may provide the
code after reminding the prescriber to ensure their patient meets the
PBS criteria.

Request for the approval of a streamlined authority item with increased
quantities and repeats.

Service Officers may approve streamlined items sent as written
applications or applied for as phone approvals if the prescriber is
requesting increased quantities and/or repeats.

The Process page describes the procedure to follow for requests for
items where the quantity and repeats would be a streamlined approval.

Related links

Authority required items in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing written authority approval requests

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
