
Optical services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020110

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) optical services programme for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers optical services provided to entitled
persons by ophthalmologists, optometrists, orthoptists and visual aid
dispensers.

Optical services include clinical testing of the eyes for defective
vision, the diagnosis and treatment of disease (medical and non-medical)
and the prescribing and supply of suitable spectacles, contact lenses or
devices for low vision (such as magnifiers, telescopic aids and other
accessories for use with low vision aids). Optical services and optical
appliances claimed must be in accordance with the patient’s assessed
clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Eligibility to receive DVA optical services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
optical services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold:

-   DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
    holders
    DVA funds most optical services necessary to meet a clinical need
-   DVA White Card holders
    DVA funds optical services related to the card holder's accepted
    disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
    authorisation before it is started
-   RBPC and PCC are not eligible to receive optical benefits from DVA.
    Do not proceed with any further checking

The Process page contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA health
card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting optical services
when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their optical service provider
accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting treatment.

DVA optical services entitlement

DVA Health card holders may receive 1 initial and 1 subsequent optical
consultation:

-   every year, if the card holder is over 65 years
-   every 3 years if the card holder is under 65 years

In any 2 year period, if an eligible card holder has a clinical
necessity, they are entitled to:

-   1 pair of reading and 1 pair of distance spectacles, or 1 pair of
    spectacles with either bifocal, trifocal or progressive power
    lenses, or
-   One 6 month supply of disposable contact lenses per eye once every 6
    months; or 1 pair of non-disposable contact lenses once every 12
    months. Refer to the DVA schedule of visual aids for more
    information on contact lens supply.

If a DVA health card holder experiences a significant change in vision,
develops a new condition or if there is a significant prescription
change, they may receive services or replacement lenses before the 2
year period ends.

Checking eligibility for optical consultation items 10900-10944

New optical consultation items and changes to item descriptions came
into effect on 1 January 2015 and 1 September 2015.

Initial consultation item 10900 ended on 31 December 2014.

As optical items are generally payable once in either 2 or 3 years,
where this document explains how to check a patient's history or claim
for a previous service, item 10900 should be included in this check for
claims with a date of service until 31 December 2017.

Accessing DVA optical services

Eligible DVA health card holders can make an appointment directly with
an optical service provider who participates in DVA arrangements without
a referral. However, card holders who require the services of an
ophthalmologist (eye specialist) will require a referral from a general
practitioner.

Once a DVA health card holder has an optical prescription, they may take
it to any optical dispenser who has agreed to supply under DVA
arrangements. It is not necessary to have the spectacles or other visual
aids dispensed by the optical service provider who issued the
prescription.

Eligibility to provide DVA optical services

There are 4 broad categories of DVA service providers eligible to
provide optical services to members of the veteran community:

-   Ophthalmologists are medical doctors who have completed additional
    training and are licenced to practice medicine and perform eye
    surgery
-   Optometrists are primary health care specialists trained to examine
    eyes to detect defects in vision, signs of injury, ocular disease or
    abnormality and problems with general health
-   Orthoptists specialise in the assessment, diagnosis and non-surgical
    management of eye disorders
-   Visual aid dispensers are contracted by DVA to stock and supply
    spectacle lenses and frames, contact lenses and other accessories to
    support low vision

Only an ophthalmologist, optometrist or orthoptist registered with
Services Australia (they have a Medicare provider number) at the time of
the service is eligible to provide services to eligible DVA health card
holders. Visual aid dispensers must be contracted with DVA as a
participating DVA provider.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to ‘Notes for Allied Health
Providers - Optometrists, Orthoptists and Optical Dispensers’ on the DVA
website. This contains detailed eligibility requirements and also
information for optical dispensing and pharmaceutical services.

Medicare Benefits Schedule (item numbers) for ophthalmologists

There is no specific DVA fee schedule for services provided by an
ophthalmologist to DVA health card holders. Ophthalmologists can claim
from a range of specialist items available in the Medical Benefits
Schedule.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for optometrists

The DVA Optometrist Fees for Consultations Fee Schedule contains a range
of consultation items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
both professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range 10905-10948.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for orthoptists

The DVA Orthoptist Fee Schedule contains a range of consultation items
available to eligible health card holders for professional attendances
in rooms, or at a place other than rooms (domiciliary visits) such as a
patient's home, residential aged care facility or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are pre-fixed with OR and range from OR10-34.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for visual aid dispensers

The DVA Pricing Schedule for Visual Aids contains a list of visual aid
items (glasses, contact lenses, etc.) available to eligible health card
holders and claimable by optical specialists and optical dispensers:

Items in this fee schedule are pre-fixed with OP and range from
OP01-OP99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Optical service providers may be required to seek prior financial
authorisation from DVA before providing certain optical services. The
fee schedules contain information on which items require prior financial
authorisation.

To request financial approval, optical service providers must contact
DVA before administering services to be able to claim payment by
completing an Optical Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request Form.
The Resources page has a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA optical services and supplies business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

-   Domiciliary loading can only be paid in conjunction with a
    consultation item
-   Item 10910 is payable once in 36 months if no item from range
    10905-10915 has been claimed (for card holders under 65 years)
-   Item 10911 is payable once in 12 months if no item from range
    10905-10915 has been claimed (for card holders over 65 years)
-   When a card holder visits a new provider within the previous 36
    months if the card holder is under 65 years, or within the past 12
    months if 65 years or over, the service provider is entitled to
    claim a second initial consultation item 10907
-   Limit of 1 pair of distance and 1 pair of reading spectacles; or 1
    pair of bifocals, trifocals, or progressive power lenses applies in
    a 24 month period
-   Prior financial authorisation is not required for replacement of
    spectacles within 24 months due to loss or breakage. However, a note
    or Statutory Declaration signed by the DVA health card holder must
    be submitted with a manual claim. For online claims and DVA
    Webclaims, a note/Statutory Declaration is not required by Services
    Australia. However, the service provider is required to keep the
    note/Statutory Declaration for their own records (for audit
    purposes) and advise via the claim text field that the spectacles
    are lost or broken
-   If a card holder has a new pair of lenses within 24 months due to
    changes in refraction, the service provider must tick the
    significant refraction change box on the service voucher if claiming
    manually or the optical script code if claiming via online/Webclaim
-   Eligibility must be established for White Card holders before the
    start of treatment
-   DVA health card holders who have accepted disabilities of
    conjunctivitis, pterygium or blepharitis are restricted to treatment
    for war caused injuries or diseases. They are not entitled to
    corrective lenses for those conditions. However, they are entitled
    to Plano sunglasses, tints, and clip-on sunglasses when prescribed
    by an ophthalmologist or optometrist
-   TAS will check for the provision of contact lenses and contact lens
    consultations within the last 3 years before paying contact lens
    consumables
-   Schedule 3 items (low vision aids) are paid as claimed up to the
    amounts listed in TAS, without referring to a prior financial
    approval record
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    'Notes for Optometrists, Orthoptists and Optical Dispensers'
    available on the DVA website. The Resources page has a link.

Claim lodgement information

DVA optical services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources page
contains a link to claim choices for health professionals on the
Services Australia Website.

Online claiming

Optical service providers can submit electronic claims for processing
without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Optical service providers should be sure that they can, from
other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services
Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA optical providers are required to lodge ‘Optometric/Optical Voucher’
and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These fillable forms
can be printed from the DVA website. Service providers can use their own
invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can provide the same level
of information as required by the DVA forms. After completion, service
providers should post the forms to Services Australia for processing as
per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Optical consultation eligibility - using IVR facility

Optical service providers can undertake a 'date of service' check by
calling the VAP Interactive Voice Recognition (IVR) facility. This
service will advise the caller if the DVA health card holder is eligible
for a comprehensive optical consultation. For contact details, see
Health professionals contact information (on the website, scroll to
listing for Optometrists).

The Process page outlines how VAP Service Officers respond to a service
provider’s enquiry about a DVA health card holder’s eligibility for
optical consultation items 10905-10915.

Note:

-   Service Officers should not advise a provider when the last service
    was provided
-   If the DVA health card holder is not eligible, Service Officers
    cannot advise the date the DVA health card holder will become
    eligible

Determining eligibility

The Process page outlines the steps to follow when the system returns a
message to check a DVA health card holder’s eligibility before paying or
rejecting optical services.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP optical services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will
help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to external websites for information
related to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) optical services,
information about resolving pend return messages, a link to the Services
Australia Website, and links to contact details and the eligibility
query form.

Related links

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

White card eligibility code

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
