
Medical practitioners registered on Medical Rural Bonded Scholarship Scheme or Bonded Medical Places 012-42080020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assessment and processing
of applications received from medical practitioners registered on the
Medical Rural Bonded Scholarship (MRBS) Scheme and Bonded Medical Places
(BMP) Scheme.

On this Page:

MRBS and BMP Schemes

Scaling applies to MRBS and BMP Scheme participants when they commence
their return of service period.

After 2010, all new MRBS and BMP Scheme participants will have scaling
applied. Existing participants will have the opportunity to opt in to
scaling.

The Department of Health and Aged Care will advise the Services
Australia when an MRBS or BMP Scheme participant becomes eligible under
this initiative and is to be included for scaling.

Application of scaling

From 1 January 2010, all MRBS and BMP Scheme participants were
considered eligible for scaling where:

-   Fellowship was attained
-   a return of service period commenced
-   the total value claiming activity based on a schedule fee threshold
    was met for that month
-   services were provided in an eligible Australian Standard
    Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) 2-5 category

Schedule fee threshold

The claiming activity is based on date of service and the schedule fee
of eligible Medicare services. The result determines whether the MRBS or
BMP Scheme participant has met the value of the schedule fee threshold
for the month.

A schedule fee threshold total of $5,000 must be met each month. The
scaling discount is then applied based on the Australian Standard
Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area (ASGC-RA) with the highest
claiming activity, using all locations where the participant has
provided eligible services.

Eligible services

The schedule fee of the following services will be counted toward the
total value of claims each month:

-   all Medicare Benefits Scheme (MBS) items, including assist at
    operation item numbers
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) MBS services

The following services will not be included:

-   rejected claims
-   bulk billing incentive items

Scaling calculations

Monthly scaling calculations for MRBS and BMP Scheme participants occur
on the last day of each month and include the previous three months. For
example, on 30 June 2011 the scaling calculation includes and calculates
all of June, May, April and March. This ensures that any late claims are
identified if submitted after the monthly scaling has been completed.

Biannual recalculations occur automatically in March and September and
include the previous two years of claiming history (once this data
exists).

Recalculations

A monthly recalculation is automatically run on the last day of each
month and includes recalculation of the previous three months. For
example, the scheduled run at the end of April calculates the month
March and recalculates the previous three months (February, January and
December). The purpose of recalculation is to identify any 'late claims'
that are submitted after the monthly scaling has been done. Where the
recalculation results in an amendment to an MRBS or BMP Scheme
participant's new 'discounted end date', the relevant information is
updated.

Biannual recalculations occur automatically in March and September. The
twice yearly recalculations calculate back up to two years (once this
data exists).

Scaling results

Scaling results are available to authorised Service Officers to assist
with enquiries.

Eligible MRBS or BMP Scheme participants are able to view their scaling
results via the Health Professional Online Services (HPOS). If the
eligible participant has a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate,
the following information is available:

scaling start date

return of service end date

total time credited

revised scaled end date (the obligation end date minus the total time
credited)

scaling outcomes listed by month:

-   Australian Standard Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area
    (ASGC-RA)
-   days credited
-   scaling rate applied

all locations that have been issued with a S19AB exemption

For more information refer to Health Professional Online Services.

Deferral Periods

The Department of Health and Aged Care advise Services Australia via
email of deferral periods for MRBS and BMP Scheme participants.

MRBS and BMP Scheme participants can defer their obligations:

-   for up to one year
-   more than once

Note: if a deferral period is unknown, Health will advise of a 12 month
default period.

Deferral periods can only be amended and deleted by the Provider
Eligibility and Accreditation Section, Canberra.

Completion of scaling

When the revised scaled end date is equal to the actual date, scaling is
automatically switched off.

The MRBS or BMP Scheme participant is then notified by Health that their
return of service obligation has been met.

Commence track and scale for BMP and MRBS Scheme participants

The Department of Health and Aged Care advise Services Australia of
information relating to Bonded BMP and MRBS Scheme participants. This
information is sent to a central mailbox within Medicare for actioning.

The Resources page contains a link to an example of the Completion of
Fellowship and Commencement of Return of Service Pro Forma and a link to
contact details for Medicare Provider Registration.

Related links

Provider registration Coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Track and scale of eligible medical practitioners

Health Professional Online Services

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
