
Orthotist services for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-19030658

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) orthotist services programme for Veterans’ Affairs
Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers orthotist services provided to entitled
persons by registered orthotists. Orthotists services include:

-   assessment of the patient, including diagnostic analysis
-   the prescription or supply of prefabricated, customised or custom
    orthotic devices, including via prescription sent to the DVA
    Rehabilitation Appliances Program (RAP)
-   the fitting, adjustment, manufacture and repair of an orthotic item

Orthotists services must be claimed in accordance with the patient’s
assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

On this Page:

Eligibility to receive DVA orthotist services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
orthotist services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold.

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

-   DVA funds clinically necessary orthotist treatment for any health
    condition

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds clinically necessary orthotist treatment services related to
the card holder's accepted disability, illness or injury only

Orthotists must check that a White Card holder’s need for an orthotic
item is related to a DVA accepted disability or injury

It is acceptable to pay initial consultations where White Card
eligibility is not indicated or does not match the client’s accepted
conditions

-   DVA has specified that initial Orthotist consultations only, White
    Card payment requirements will be automatic, rather than manual
-   When the DVA White Card will not cover the client’s referred
    condition, a provider may still claim the initial consultation for
    the first visit with the referred client only
-   If the client decides to receive an orthotic device, regardless of
    their ineligibility under their DVA White Card, the client will be
    responsible for paying any subsequent consultation fees and for the
    orthotic device. These costs cannot be passed onto DVA and the
    provider or client cannot claim this through Medicare

Orthotist services are for treatment to most parts of the body, from
head to foot.

Providers claiming subsequent consultations (UT02, UT04, UT06, UT08,
UT10, UT12) and supply of orthoses (UT13-UT39) do not need to specify
the condition being treated, as long as the DVA White Card holder’s
accepted disabilities match one of the following conditions:

-   Foot related injury or disability
-   Ankle related injury or disability
-   Leg related injury or disability
-   Knee related injury or disability
-   Hip related injury or disability
-   Spine related injury or disability
-   Back related injury or disability
-   Shoulder related injury or disability
-   Neck related injury or disability
-   Head related injury or disability
-   Arm related injury or disability
-   Elbow related injury or disability
-   Wrist related injury or disability
-   Hand related injury or disability
-   Diabetes related foot disease
-   Arthritis (including rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis)
-   Stroke
-   Polio
-   Spinal cord injury
-   Muscular dystrophy
-   Muscular atrophy
-   Multiple sclerosis
-   Pes planus
-   Pes cavus
-   Scoliosis
-   Spondylosis
-   Neuromuscular

Verify the DVA health card holder's eligibility before paying or
rejecting orthotist services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their orthotist accepts the
DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA orthotist services

Only an orthotist who is registered with DVA (they have a DVA provider
number) at the time of the service can provide services to eligible DVA
health card holders.

DVA service providers agree to provide services to DVA health card
holders through a payment arrangement, which means the card holder does
not pay for those services.

The Resources page contains a link to Notes for Orthotists on the DVA
website. This contains detailed eligibility requirements and information
on orthotist services.

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for orthotist services

The DVA Orthotists Schedule of Fees contains a range of consultation and
orthosis supply items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care service or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range UT01-UT41.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Orthotists may be required to seek prior financial authorisation from
DVA before providing certain orthotist services. The fee schedules
contain information on which items require prior financial
authorisation.

To request financial approval, providers must contact DVA before
administering services to be able to claim payment by completing a
Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The Resources page has
a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA orthotist services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims:

-   For each condition claimed as an initial consultation, an entitled
    person must first be assessed by their medical practitioner or
    specialist as requiring the treatment and have been issued a
    separate referral for each initial consultation
-   Subsequent consultations are only available after an initial
    consultation
-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient
-   Two subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day
-   Subsequent consultations can’t be claimed with customised (UT14,
    UT17, UT19, UT22, UT26, UT29, UT32 or UT39) or custom (UT15, UT20,
    UT23, UT24, UT27, UT30, UT33 or UT39) orthotist items as these items
    include subsequent item within the fee
-   Treatment in residential aged care services which requires a greater
    level of care and treatment in public hospitals requires prior
    approval (as indicated in the Schedule of Fees)
-   Treatment for white card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   There are limits on the number of orthoses that can be provided to
    an entitled person within 365 days
-   Custom orthoses require prior approval (as indicated in the Schedule
    of Fees)
-   There are limits to the number of repairs that can be provided in a
    12 month period
-   Repairs for normal wear and tear should not be claimed until 3
    months after supply of the orthotic, repairs for other than normal
    wear and tear should be notated with the reason for repair
-   Postage applies where items are sent directly to the veteran, not
    where and item is posted from a wholesaler to the orthotist
-   Orthotists cannot supply orthotic items under the Rehabilitation
    Appliances Program (RAP), instead they must use the Mobility and
    Functional Support (MFS) Direct Order Form D0992 located on the DVA
    website
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    Notes for Orthotists

The Resources page contains links to the Orthotists Schedule of Fees,
Notes for Allied Health Providers and Notes for Orthotists, prior
approval and MFS forms on the DVA website.

Claim lodgement information

DVA orthotic services claims can be lodged in 3 ways:

-   Online claiming
-   DVA Webclaim
-   Manual (paper based) claim

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder.

Service providers should be sure that they can, from other means of
record keeping, satisfy any request from Services Australia or DVA for
evidence of service and details of treatment.

Online claiming

Orthotists can submit electronic claims for processing without the need
to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

Orthotists are required to lodge:

-   Claim for Treatment Services (D1217), and
-   Health Practitioner Service Voucher (D1221) forms

These fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website.

Service providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting
accounts if they can provide the same level of information as required
by the DVA forms.

Service providers should post completed forms to Services Australia for
processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on how to claim and claim choices for health professionals.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains common enquiries from orthotists.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP orthotist services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will
help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and DVA
websites, contact details for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) and
common enquiries from orthotists.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
