
Provider numbers for health professionals in Medicare and the Provider Directory System (PDS) 012-42010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on provider numbers for health
professionals in Medicare. It also provides information about the
Provider Directory System (PDS) and describes the exceptional
circumstances for expediting provider number applications.

Definition of a provider number

A provider number is:

-   Allocated by Services Australia to a registered medical practitioner
    or non-medical health professional (dentist, optometrist, nurse
    practitioner or midwife) and identifies the person and their health
    profession at the practice location/s where the person practises
    their profession
-   Sometimes referred to as a provider/registration number for allied
    health professionals
-   Generated by the Provider Directory System (PDS) on processing of an
    application for a provider number and is allocated from a provider
    number stack held in the database tables
-   not automatically granted with access to Medicare benefits. The
    issuing of a provider number does not mean the medical practitioner,
    non-medical health professional or allied health professional is
    eligible to attract Medicare benefits for their professional
    services

The term 'provider number' is used throughout the Medicare Provider
Eligibility reference material as relating to the number issued by the
agency to identify the health professional in the Medicare PDS system.

A provider number may allow the health professional to either:

-   refer their patient to another health professional (usually a
    specialist or consultant physician) or to request diagnostic imaging
    or pathology services where their patient will be able to claim
    Medicare benefits at the referred rate, or
-   attract Medicare benefits for their services at particular practice
    locations or at all practice locations, or
-   both of the above

Medicare benefit eligibility is determined by the Health Insurance Act
1973 (the Act) and supporting Regulations and Determinations. The
References page contains a link to this Act.

To ensure accuracy of advice, refer all enquiries about a health
professional's eligibility to access Medicare benefits for their
services to Provider Registration staff in the state or territory where
the health professional intends to provide services. Only give advice
about a health professional's eligibility to the health professional or
a third party after a security check is completed.

Structure of a provider number

A provider number consists of:

-   6 numerals referred to as the provider stem, for example 123456
-   an alpha or numeric character that identifies the practice location,
    for example 1234561
-   an alpha check digit, for example 1234561A

Note: the 8 character provider number is calculated using an algorithm.
All 8 characters must be included in written correspondence to the
provider, including any leading zeros.

A provider number can be allocated where the health professional:

-   can access Medicare benefit rebates for their services (subject to
    any legislative restrictions or requirements)
-   can refer or request services for which their patient can claim a
    Medicare rebate
-   has relevant qualifications or eligibility as set out in the Act and
    supporting regulations or related program guidelines

Eligible health professionals are issued a provider number for providing
services included under the Medicare program.

The References page contains a link to the Act.

Provider number for each location

A health professional should have a provider number for every practice
location where they provide services. This policy is supported by the
Health Insurance Regulations 2018.

There are exceptions to this rule, such as:

-   Locum Tenens provisions, see MBS Online on the Resources page
-   Mobile services
-   Home visits and telehealth

These exceptions do not apply when the health professional is subject to
any restrictions on accessing Medicare benefits or are participants in
an Other Medical Practitioners Program (OMPS).

Provider location address

A practice address is recorded in PDS and is known as the provider
number or provider location address. The address in PDS is available to
authorised recipients, including:

-   private health funds
-   Department of Health and Aged Care
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs

Recording the correct practice address in PDS allows payment of Medicare
incentive items. The incentive payment is linked to the Rural, Remote,
and Metropolitan Area (RRMA) and the Modified Monash Model (MMM) 2019
geographical classification system for the location where the service is
performed.

For more information, see Provider location details for health
professionals in Medicare.

Legislation requires a claim for a Medicare benefit must include:

-   the name of the health professional and the address of the place of
    practice, or
-   the provider number of the health professional for the practice
    location

For more information, see Account and receipt documents for Medicare
claims processing.

Use of a home address as the provider number location address

Services Australia is unable to suppress a provider number address.
Therefore, health professionals should carefully consider using a home
address for a provider number, as the provider number location address
may be publicly available. For example:

-   viewable on pay doctor via claimant (PDVC) cheques. Note: health
    professionals can request a pay group link to direct payment of
    Medicare benefit cheques to a PO Box address. See Payment pay group
    link for Medicare benefit cheques for more information and the form
    required
-   requests for pathology services
-   available to private health funds for the purposes of their business

Information for health professionals about using a home address as a
practice location with the address being publicly available is included
in the Application for a Medicare provider number (HW019 and HW093).

Note: Provider addresses are no longer visible in a patient's myGov or
My Health Record claims history, effective February 2021.

Requests from health professionals to use an alternative provider
location addresses (such as a PO Box)

Due to the coronavirus (COVID-19), an increasing number of health
professionals are providing COVID-19 specific telehealth services
(currently included in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) until 30
June 2022 from their home address.

Services Australia is aware some health professionals have expressed
safety concerns following their move to home-based consultations.

Under the COVID-19 arrangements, health professionals can continue to
use their current practice location number and address while delivering
telehealth services from home. They do not need to apply for a new
provider number.

Services Australia may consider recording an alternative address (such
as PO Box), for a health professional where:

-   the home is the only practice location, and
-   the health professional is only providing telehealth services or
    mobile consultations

Note: Services Australia do not accept parcel lockers as an alternative
address. The PO Box must be registered to the health professional.

All health professionals requesting an alternative address must:

submit a signed request, and

include the below information:

-   current practice location arrangements. For example, the physical
    practice is closed due to COVID-19 and only providing telehealth
    services from the home location
-   reason for using an alternate address. For example, safety concerns
-   proposed alternative address. For example, a PO Box (this cannot be
    a parcel locker)
-   physical practice (home address). This is recorded in the Notes
    section of PDS

Note: the process for requesting a provider number for a new location,
including home addresses, remains the same.

Medical or non-medical practitioner requests to use alternative provider
location address

All requests from medical practitioners and non-medical health
professionals are escalated to Services Australia corporate office

-   See Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
    Medicare for information on provider registration enquiry
    escalations

The requests are assessed on a case-by-case basis to ensure legislative
requirements are met

The use of an alternative location address may affect eligibility with
other programs. For example:

-   Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
-   Prescription Shopping Programme (PSP)
-   Practice Incentives Program (PIP)
-   Workforce Incentive Program (WIP)
-   Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Allied health professional requests to use alternative location address

Service Delivery assess requests from allied health professionals. For
information on eligibility criteria and process, see Allied health and
non-medical professionals provider number applications and requests.

More than 31 locations

A new provider stem number is automatically created in PDS when a health
professional requires locations in excess of the 31 locations allowed
under each stem.

More than one health discipline

A health professional who has a provider number for:

-   one health profession (for example medical), and
-   has a qualification in a second (or more) health profession (for
    example dental) must be allocated a separate provider stem for each
    health profession they are registered under

The second stem is required to monitor:

-   registration status of the health professional in their respective
    health profession
-   appropriate access to Medicare benefits for each health profession

How to apply for a provider number

A health professional:

-   completes, signs, and dates an application for a provider number
    form for their health profession
-   attaches the documentation as indicated on the form
-   mails or faxes the documentation to the Provider Registration team
    to the postal address or fax number on the application form

Address and fax details are listed on the application form 'Returning
your form'.

From 8 December 2019, a new function in PDS creates Medicare shell
records. It uses a data feed directly from the Australian Health
Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Eligible medical interns can use the Digital Provider Number
Registration (DPNR) function in Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS) to complete their Medicare registration. Note: this only applies
to medical interns trained in Australia or New Zealand without
conditions or notations; see Processing provider number registrations
for Interns in Medicare. All other health professionals are required to
submit a manual application for their initial provider number.

For manually submitted applications where a Medicare shell record exists
in PDS Service Officers will use the shell record along with information
provided in the application form to complete the Medicare Provider
Number registration process. The current Medicare provider number
process will continue to apply where a Medicare shell record does not
exist.

The Resources page contains a link to archived provider number history
and to the Application for a provider number form.

Provider Directory System (PDS)

The Provider Directory System (PDS) is the Services Australia database
which records and stores information about health professionals
providing services for Medicare. Services Australia, the Department of
Health and Aged Care and other external stakeholders use PDS data for
various reasons, for example claims assessment, statistical reporting
and analysis, etc. The accuracy of this data is critical to these
functions.

Health professional details

Details held in PDS include:

-   personal
-   contact
-   professional registration
-   specialties
-   practice location/s
-   employment information (sometimes referred to as business structure
    information)
-   provider service rules (if applicable)
-   pay group links (PGL) (if applicable)
-   90 Day Pay Doctor via Cheque (PDVC) Scheme registration (if
    applicable)

Provider directory history screens

All changes made to a provider's information are recorded in the PDS and
can be viewed to determine any changes to a record made over a period of
time and to locate source documents.

Registration details include:

-   area of registration (national/state/territory)
-   registration number
-   effective dates
-   status
-   comments regarding limitations or conditions

Status of registration

The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) works with
15 national Health Practitioner Boards in implementing the National
Registration and Accreditation Scheme. The agency recognises 12 of those
professions and receives a daily data feed from Ahpra. The Resources
page contains details of the health professional's registration status.

Provider Service Rules (PSR)

A Provider Service Rule (PSR) is a code applied to a health
professional’s record in PDS. These are created by the Provider
Eligibility team in Services Australia corporate office. These are
applied at the time of processing a provider number application or by
Services Australia corporate office when required.

A PSR can be used for the following reasons:

a health professional is restricted from accessing Medicare benefits for
certain services following a determination by Professional Services
Review

to prevent access to Medicare benefits:

-   where the health professional is not eligible to provide Medicare
    for services in that location, but may require a provider number for
    other reasons, for example, to write referrals for diagnostic
    imaging or pathology tests, or refer a patient on to another health
    professional
-   for medical practitioners who are not eligible to provide Medicare
    services for a period of time at a particular location, (for
    example, there is a gap period between the cessation and
    commencement dates of a 19AB exemption)
-   where business structure requirements have not been met

PSRs are applied, where applicable, to:

-   restrict Medicare claiming by a single item or by a range of items
-   individual or all practice locations (location specific)

Multiple PSRs can be used at the same time.

PSRs hinder electronic claiming and should not be used unless there is a
genuine need.

Only PSR 618 can be removed over the phone. This applies where the 618
service rule was placed on the location when initially created as the
business structure and banking details were not supplied for allied
health, non-medical and standard medical providers only.

Note: service rule is not to be removed from nurse practitioners,
midwives, and medical practitioners subject to section 19AB.

Business Structure legislation effective 1 July 2018

Important changes resulting from the Health Legislation Amendment
(Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Act 2018 (the Act)
took effect 1 July 2018. The Act amends the Health Insurance Act 1973.

Shared Debt Recovery Scheme

The Act also introduced the Shared Debt Recovery Scheme (SDRS) on 1 July
2019. The Scheme enables the Commonwealth to hold both a practitioner
(primary debtor) and another party (secondary debtor) responsible for
repayment of compliance debts, arising as a result of incorrectly
claiming Medicare benefits, through the making of a shared debt
determination. The Scheme was introduced because Medicare billing is
often delegated to non-health professionals, administered through
centralised billing areas and can be influenced by organisational
processes and policies. In some instances this has led to incorrect
billing practices

Provider Registration application processing – exceptional circumstances

Services Australia assess Provider Registration applications in the date
order received unless exceptional circumstances apply. For these, the
agency can prioritise the application for quicker processing. This is
done to support customers in getting continued access to medical and
psychological services or if a practice/community is affected by a
disaster.

An exceptional circumstance applies if one or more of the following
affects an applicant:

the only health professional in a community or rural/remote practice
leaves, and an urgent replacement in one of the following professions is
required:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner
-   Aboriginal Health Worker
-   Medical Practitioner (including specialists and dual-skilled
    Medical/Dental Practitioners)
-   Mental Health Nurse
-   Midwife
-   Nurse Practitioner
-   Occupational Therapist (providing Focused Psychological Strategies
    services)
-   Psychologist
-   Social Worker

a disaster has occurred, and:

-   caused damage to a practice, and the affected health professional(s)
    need to relocate, or
-   the community needs urgent health care near the disaster

the practice is a Commonwealth-approved respiratory clinic

An exceptional circumstance does not apply when the processing time of
an application is longer than the expected agency processing timeframes.

Eligible health professionals can create their own provider number via
Health Professional Online Services (HPOS). The Resources page has a
link to HPOS information and how providers can apply for a prescriber
number.

The Process page explains what to do if health professional or third
party calls and asks for their application to be prioritised.

Enquiry Escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers escalate
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) who, if required, will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team
in Services Australia corporate office for assistance.

Disclosure of information/privacy incidents

Services Australia is responsible for maintaining records relating to
personal and business information. Customers provide information with
the understanding this will be protected from unauthorised access, use
or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain confident that
Services Australia will protect their information and comply with the
privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information is inappropriately
collected, lost, subject to unauthorised use/access/modification, and/or
disclosure. Privacy incidents may include cases where personal
information held is discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not
up-to-date, incomplete, irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents
should be reported immediately to the team leader.

The Resources page contains a table of provider types, links to external
and internal websites and contact details.

Enquiries

Refer all enquiries about eligibility to access Medicare to Medicare
Provider Registration.

Incomplete application for a provider number

An application is incomplete if the:

-   form is not filled out correctly
-   required supporting documentation is not provided

Note: incomplete applications are unable to be processed without the
required supporting documentation being supplied.

The supporting documentation required for a provider number application
depends on the health professional's circumstances. If all required
supporting documentation required to process an application has not been
submitted, the application is deemed incomplete.

Some examples of supporting documentation are:

a current registration certificate or an artefact such as an Australian
Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) website screen print,
confirming registration from Ahpra

-   if the provider has not included documentation confirming their
    Ahpra registration, check their registration in the Ahpra window or
    on the Ahpra website. This is required to create a new stem, not
    when an AUS line is already recorded on PDS
-   the Process page contains instructions for checking the registration
    in the Ahpra window and on the Ahpra website
-   print the screen showing the registration confirmation upload to the
    work item in PaNDA

current passport and visa documentation is required for the initial
application for a provider number if the medical practitioner was not
Australian born

-   current visa is required to be supplied where the visa recorded on
    PDS has expired

permanent residency or citizenship documentation

contract of employment

letter of support from the employer, including term and location of
employment and why a provider number is required

fellowship documents

approved program placement confirmation, sent directly to Services
Australia from the approving body

The Resources page contains a link to the Ahpra website.

Inconsistent Applications

An inconsistent application has enough information to be fully
processed, but the information provided is not consistent within the
application. For example, a letter of support has been supplied for
referring and requesting only but the provider has indicated access to
benefits on the form.

Even though they technically have the required information, it is
important that providers are not given access to Medicare benefits they
are not eligible for.

Backdating of provider numbers

Requests to backdate a provider number may be granted in certain
circumstances.

Prior to processing a request to backdate a provider number, the health
professional must:

-   have had current registration, and
-   relevant access to Medicare benefits at the time of the requested
    location start date

A request to backdate may be where:

-   a provider number application is received, requesting a new provider
    number location start date prior to the date of lodgement, or
-   a written request is received, requesting an existing provider
    number location start date be amended prior to existing start date

A written request can be:

-   an email, providing the email is received from the email address
    recorded on the stem in PDS
-   a letter signed by the health professional

If the health professional meets these requirements, the Service Officer
can start/backdate the location as per the application or written
request. Services Australia corporate office approval is not required.
There is no restriction on how far a provider number can be backdated if
the health professional meets these requirements.

Note: due to COVID-19 requests to backdate can be processed via the
phone, under the following conditions:

-   A security check has been performed successfully
-   A provider is eligible and is unrestricted from the requested start
    date (add note to stem)

If the health professional does not meet the above requirements, the
start date of the location should be:

-   the date the health professional held current registration, or
-   the date when the relevant access is required

The above process does not apply for locations with 3GA placements or
for medical practitioners subject to section 19AB of the Act. Follow
current processing requirements for these health professionals.

For assistance with backdating requests contact a Programme Support
Officer (PSO).

Provider name recorded in Provider Directory

A health professional must only be issued a provider number in the name
in which they are registered with the relevant registration board or
professional body.

Change of provider name

A change of provider name is not actioned unless:

-   evidence of the new name being used by the relevant registration
    body or professional association is provided
-   a link between the provider's previous name and new name is evident
    or confirmed by supporting documentation

The link between the provider's previous name and new name can be
confirmed, for example, when they have the same Medical, Allied Health
or Dental Board registration board number. When in doubt, a Programme
Officer (PO) can request confirmation of name change documentation, such
as a marriage certificate.

Provider name enquiries

In the first instance, enquiries about provider names should be directed
a Programme Support Officer (PSO). If further clarification is required,
the PSO can escalate to a Programme Officer (PO).

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details for Medicare Programme Support Officers (PSOs)
-   Medicare Provider Registration
-   useful external websites
-   fact sheet on archived provider number history and forms, and
-   examples of inconsistencies in provider number applications
-   MBS online

Related links

Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare

Processing provider number registrations for Interns in Medicare

3GA Placements post 1 January 2019

3GA placements pre 1 January 2019

Applications for a provider number for medical practitioners and
sections 19AA/19AB requirements

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

AHPRA Information window

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for health
professionals

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
