
Efficient Funding of Chemotherapy (EFC) changes in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-60010080

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the features of Efficient Funding of Chemotherapy
(EFC) changes in the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) including the
payment structure for chemotherapy compounding fees.

On this Page:

Key features of the initiative

The key objective of this initiative is to reduce PBS expenditure on
chemotherapy medicines that are:

-   used in treatment of cancer, and
-   administered via intravenous infusion or injection

From 1 December 2011, more cost-efficient prescribing and dispensing
practices were generated through:

-   requiring prescribers to write dose specific prescriptions using an
    appropriate unit of measure
-   paying approved suppliers only for the combination of vials that
    most cost efficiently makes up the required patient dose

Patients will generally pay no more than 1 PBS co-payment for the entire
duration of a Cycle of Treatment. That is, a patient co-payment will be
applied to an original prescription. No PBS co-payment will be applied
to repeat prescriptions.

The Chemotherapy Compounding Payment Scheme (CCPS)

Under the PBS Access and Sustainability Package (Sixth Community
Pharmacy Agreement), a revised payment structure for chemotherapy
compounding fees was introduced. This is in recognition of the
additional costs incurred by Therapeutic Goods Administration
(TGA)-licensed compounders in achieving TGA manufacturer licensing for a
compounding site. These arrangements are known as the Chemotherapy
Compounding Payment Scheme (CCPS).

The CCPS from 1 September 2016

From 1 September 2016, approved pharmacists and approved hospital
authorities (approved suppliers) will need to provide new information
when claiming infusible chemotherapy items through the PBS. New data
fields within the PBS online claiming system for EFC claims will
include:

-   a field to indicate the compounder of the infusion (compounder ID);
    and
-   a field for a serialised infusion identifier, which will be
    automatically generated by PBS dispensing software for each infusion
    (infusion ID)

The compounder and infusion ID data fields will provide the data on
chemotherapy compounding which is necessary for making payments to
TGA-licensed compounders on the basis of PBS transaction data. They will
also enable a better understanding of the scope of chemotherapy
compounding in Australia.

The CCPS for patients

The way patients access chemotherapy medicines in Australia after 1
September 2016 will remain unchanged. Fees for chemotherapy compounders
will continue to be provided to secure the provision of chemotherapy
medicines at no increased cost to patient.

The CCPS for approved suppliers

There will be no changes required to dispensing practices for PBS EFC
medicines. The 1 September 2016 changes relate only to claiming
processes, where approved suppliers will need to provide the compounder
ID (as provided by the compounder) and infusion ID (as automatically
generated by PBS dispensing software) when claiming infusible
chemotherapy items through the PBS.

In recognition that some approved suppliers will experience delays in
transitioning to updated versions of PBS dispensing software, the
inclusion of the compounder and infusion IDs in PBS EFC claims will not
be mandatory from 1 September 2016. It is intended that these data
fields will be mandatory from April 2017.

From 1 September 2016, PBS EFC claims lodged without a compounder ID
will result in the following message within the PBS online claiming
system:

-   'Chemo Compounder ID is required for infusible chemotherapy drugs.
    Claims missing this will be rejected from 1 April 2017.'

Consistent with this message, it is anticipated that from April 2017,
PBS EFC claims lodged without a compounder ID will be rejected.

The CCPS for compounders of chemotherapy medicines

Chemotherapy compounders (both TGA-licensed and non-licensed) will need
to apply to the Chemotherapy Compounding Payment Scheme (CCPS)
administration agency, currently Australian Healthcare Associates (AHA),
to obtain a compounder ID for each compounding site within their
organisation. Compounders will then need to provide approved suppliers
with the compounder ID for the relevant compounding site(s), for
approved suppliers to reference in claiming EFC items through the PBS.

The Resources page contains a link to Pricing of Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme medicine.

Related links

The Efficient Funding of Chemotherapy - Section 100 Arrangements
Supplement (EFC Schedule)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
