
Dental services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) dental services programme for Veterans’ Affairs Processing
(VAP).

DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the veteran
community) that covers the prevention and treatment of oral disease and
includes general dental services, the filling and crowning of teeth and
the construction of dentures.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

Eligibility to receive DVA dental services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
dental services based on the type of DVA health care card they hold:

-   DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
    holders - DVA funds most dental services necessary to meet a
    clinical need, but some services require prior financial approval
-   DVA White Card holders - DVA funds dental treatment related to the
    card holders accepted disabilities only and treatment may require
    financial approval before it is started. DVA health card holders
    with White Card eligibility code TMN are not automatically entitled
    to payment for dental treatment. The veteran community is entitled
    to receive cancer treatment whether or not this condition was war
    caused. A determination is required from DVA

The Process page contains the steps to follow when the system returns a
2-CHK-ELIG message.

An annual monetary limit applies to most DVA beneficiaries for items
listed in Schedule C of the DVA fee schedule for dentists and dental
specialists.

DVA health card holders should check that their dental provider accepts
the DVA Gold Card and White Card before starting treatment.

The Resources page provides a link to the DVA website for dental
services information, including eligibility and the annual monetary
limit.

Eligibility to provide DVA dental services

There are 3 broad categories of DVA service providers who are eligible
to provide dental services to members of the veteran community:

-   Dentists work as independent practitioners and may practice all
    parts of dentistry within their competency and training. They
    provide assessment, diagnosis, treatment, management and preventive
    services to patients of all ages
-   Dental specialists are dentists who have undertaken additional
    specialised training and education and completed at least 2 years
    general dental practice to be registered as a dental specialist
-   Dental prosthetists work as independent practitioners in the
    assessment, treatment, management and provision of removable
    dentures and flexible, removable mouthguards used for sporting
    activities. They must be registered or licensed with the relevant
    state or territory registration/licensing board to engage in the
    practise of dental prosthetics

DVA health card holders can also access the services of a dental
hygienist, dental therapist or oral health therapist if they are working
under the direction of a dentist of dental specialist.

Only a dentist, dental specialist or dental prosthetist who is
registered with Services Australia at the time of the service is
eligible to provide services to eligible DVA health card holders.
Providers must also agree to accept DVA treatment arrangements and fees
and meet all of the following criteria:

-   be registered with the Dental Board of Australia and comply with
    approved scope of practice registration standards
-   be covered by either their employer’s indemnity insurance or
    maintain their own insurance as mandated by the Dental Board of
    Australia
-   be qualified and competent to provide the service

The Resources page contains a link to more information on DVA dental
services for eligible providers.

DVA dental service fee schedules

For dentists and dental specialists

The DVA fee schedule contains10 categories of dental items available to
eligible DVA health card holders:

-   000-099 Examination and diagnostic services
-   100-199 Preventative services
-   200-299 Periodontic services
-   300-399 Oral surgery services
-   400-499 Endodontic services and GST buddy items
-   500-599 Restorative services (fillings)
-   600-699 Crown and bridge services
-   700-799 Prosthodontic services
-   800-899 Orthodontic services
-   900-999 General dental services

Items are prefixed to indicate who can claim for the item:

-   D items can be claimed by a general dental practitioner
-   S items can be claimed by a dental specialist

For dental prosthetists

The DVA fee schedule contains 2 categories of dental item number ranges
available to eligible DVA health card holders:

-   000-099 Consultation and diagnostic services
-   700-799 Prosthodontic services

All dental prosthetists items are prefixed with T for technician.

The Resources page contains a link to fee schedules on the DVA website.

Prior financial approval requirements

For dentists and dental specialists

All fees listed in the DVA fee schedule are divided into 3 schedules.
Different prior financial approval conditions apply to each schedule:

-   Schedule A services do not require prior financial approval for Gold
    or White Card holders, except where specified in the fees schedule
    (marked with an asterisk *) or if treatment is provided above the
    quantity and/or time limits described. No annual monetary limit
    applies, but some restrictions apply
-   Schedule B services require prior financial approval for all DVA
    health care card holders. No AML applies
-   Schedule C services are generally not subject to prior financial
    approval for Gold Card holders. An AML applies to most DVA health
    card holders for all Schedule C items but some card holders may also
    be exempt from the AML

If there is a clinically assessed need to provide dental services above
the time and/or quantity limits as listed in the fee schedule, dentists
and dental specialists will only be required to seek prior financial
approval for items marked with an asterisk (*).

For dental prosthetists

The DVA fee schedule indicates services that require prior financial
approval.

To request prior financial approval

Dental providers must contact DVA before administering these services to
be able to claim payment by completing either a Dental Request form or
written request on official letterhead, or by contacting DVA. For urgent
cases, phone contact should be made with the DVA Medical and Allied
Health section.

The Resources page contains a link to the DVA website for the fee
schedules and more information on DVA dental services and prior
financial approval requirements and contacts.

Limitations and restrictions

A complete list of business rules associated with DVA dental services
can be found in the explanatory ‘Notes for Allied Health Providers
Section 2(c) for Dentists, Dental Specialists and Dental Prosthetists’.
The Resources page contains a link to the Notes on the DVA website.

Claiming limitations

Providers should be aware of claiming limitations as specified in the
DVA fee schedules. If there is a clinically assessed need to provide
dental services above the time and/or quantity limits as listed in the
fee schedule, providers will only be required to seek prior financial
approval for items marked with an asterisk (*).

From 2012, the Treatment Accounts System (Mainframe assessing system)
does not enforce claiming limitations that exist on the majority of DVA
dental items. DVA will enforce limitation compliance through
post-payment monitoring. Service Officers should not advise providers
that the system does not enforce this limitation.

Annual monetary limit

An annual monetary limit applies to most DVA beneficiaries for all items
listed as Schedule C items in the fee schedule for dentists and dental
specialists.

Immediate dentures

When processing a claim for immediate dentures, check the patient’s
history for extraction services to determine if it is considered an
immediate denture.

The Resources page contains a link to the DVA website for the fee
schedule for the current annual monetary limit and the dental fee
schedule for extraction items.

Charting (teeth numbers)

Some DVA dental service items require a service provider to indicate
which individual teeth or quadrant of the mouth a service has been
applied to. The below industry standard abbreviations should be used to
indicate:

Denture abbreviations

-   Partial upper or partial maxillary: P/- or pu
-   Partial lower or partial mandibular: -/p or pl
-   Full upper or full maxillary: F/- or fu
-   Full lower or full mandibular: -/f or fl

Right quadrants

-   Right upper quadrant: tooth numbers 11-18
-   Right lower quadrant: tooth numbers 41-48
-   Right upper milk teeth: tooth numbers. 51-55
-   Right lower milk teeth: tooth numbers 81-85

Left quadrants

-   Left upper quadrant: tooth numbers 21-28
-   Left lower quadrant: tooth numbers 31-38
-   Left upper milk teeth: tooth numbers 61-65
-   Left lower milk teeth: tooth numbers 71-75

The Resources page contains a link to the standard dental chart used in
Veterans' Affairs Processing.

Claim lodgement information

DVA dental services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The Resources page
contains a link to claim choices for health professionals on the
Services Australia website.

Online claiming

Dental service providers can submit electronic claims for processing
without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online.
However a copy of the voucher should be provided to the DVA health card
holder. Dental service providers should be sure that they can, from
other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from Services
Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of treatment.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

DVA dental providers are required to lodge ‘Dental Report and Voucher’
and ‘Claim for Treatment Services Voucher’ forms. These fillable forms
can be printed from the DVA website. Dental providers can use their own
invoice forms for submitting accounts if they can provide the same level
of information as required by the DVA forms. After completion, service
providers should post the forms to Services Australia for processing as
per the instructions on the form.

For a claim to be considered correctly submitted, the forms must contain
the information below:

-   If the patient is the holder of a DVA White Card, the name of the
    condition being treated, not the description of the treatment that
    was provided
-   The tooth numbers of the treated teeth
-   If treatment was provided in a hospital or residential aged care
    facility, the name of the institution

Common enquiries

Replacement dentures

If an eligible DVA health card holder has been assessed as requiring new
dentures or relines outside the limits specified by DVA (for example to
replace lost or broken dentures), providers are no longer required to
contact DVA for prior financial approval. However, clinical
justification is needed and DVA may seek evidence of this as part of
post payment compliance audits. The DVA health card holder is required
to complete a signed written Statutory Declaration stating the reason
for the replacement. This does not need to be sighted to process a
claim.

History for dentures is stored for 6 years. Check the DVA health card
holder's history to assess eligibility. When a claim for dentures has:

-   not been paid in the last 6 years, advise the provider that dentures
    have not been issued within the past 6 years and they can submit the
    claim
-   been paid in the last 6 years and they are lost or broken, advise
    the provider to obtain a Statutory Declaration from the veteran
    confirming lost or broken status and keep on file
-   been paid in the last 6 years and they are not lost or broken, the
    provider will need to provide clinical justification to DVA if
    requested

2-CHK ELIG return message

This is a common message returned by the system when processing claims
for DVA dental services.

The Process page contains the steps to follow to verify a DVA health
card holder's eligibility before paying or rejecting dental services,
including how to request a DVA determination for cancer related
conditions and assess dental treatment for White Card holders.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP dental services enquiries. VAP trained Service Officers will
help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate department for
resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to dental service information on the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) website, claiming choices for
health professionals on Services Australia website, dental chart,
contact details for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) and the
eligibility query form.

Related links

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Manual data entry for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
