
Process claims from Norfolk Island providers for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17060050

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about processing claims from Norfolk
Island providers for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Norfolk Island GST exempt

Norfolk Island is Goods and Services Tax (GST) exempt. Taxable items
claimed by health professionals for services provided to veterans on
Norfolk Island must be paid exclusive of GST.

Processing Norfolk Island claims prior to 1 July 2016

Prior to 1 July 2016, claims for services provided to veterans on
Norfolk Island must be submitted using one of the Norfolk Island
hospital numbers. Provider servicing rules have been placed on these
numbers. Norfolk Island claims that include taxable items are to be sent
to the VAP Helpdesk, where they are then forwarded to DVA. The taxable
items are paid, exclusive of GST, through the DVA DOLARs system, and
non-taxable items are sent back to VAP for processing.

As a result, providers will experience a delay in the processing of
their claims.

Norfolk Island Reform

Comprehensive reforms for Norfolk Island were announced by the
Australian government in March 2015. From 1 July 2016, most Commonwealth
laws will be extended to the island, which will affect taxation and the
provision of welfare services including Medicare. The Norfolk Island
Hospital will close when the reforms take effect and a Multi Service
Facility will take its place as the sole health care facility on the
island.

Processing Norfolk Island claims after 1 July 2016

After 1 July 2016, the Services Australia treatment account system will
automatically withhold GST on taxable items claimed by Norfolk Island
health professionals who provide services to veterans. Mainland health
professionals who provide services to veterans on Norfolk Island must
register a Norfolk Island practice address with Services Australia.

It will no longer be necessary to send Norfolk Island claims to the VAP
Helpdesk.

Related links

Medical services processing for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
