
Register for a Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare 012-41040010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Location Specific Practice
Number (LSPN) Register.

Purpose of the Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology (LSPN) registers

The Diagnostic Imaging Register and the Radiation Oncology Register (the
LSPN Register) allows Services Australia to comply with and administer
the legislative requirements of the Health Insurance Act 1973 by
providing a mechanism to record details about diagnostic imaging and
radiation oncology practices, their equipment and accreditation.

The register:

-   enables a record of diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology
    practice registrations and equipment located at that practice to be
    entered and maintained electronically
-   provides a mechanism for the allocation of a unique LSPN, and
-   allows monitoring of the required annual registration renewal of
    diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology practice registration

Registering a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice

To register, diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practices must
submit a correctly completed Application to register or amend a
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) to
Services Australia.

Note: this form and any supporting documentation can be uploaded and
submitted through Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), see Health
Professional Online Services. If the form is received via HPOS then
correspondence should be delivered via HPOS. Forms received via HPOS can
be identified as the naming convention will contain the 10 digit RA
number of the user, and the HPOS Reference Number field will contain a 9
digit reference number that can be used to search in HPOS to reply. For
example, Business name: 9987654321, and the HPOS Reference Number field:
123456789-1. For further instructions, see the Process page in Health
Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre – Managing emails from
health professionals.

The HW061 form:

can be completed by any person, however, the proprietor of the
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice or a responsible
executive officer/authorised representative (if a company, government
agency or public body) must sign the declaration.

-   Note: the proprietor can be an individual, or group of individuals
    where the practice is privately owned

requires information about the:

-   practice ownership
-   practice location and type, and
-   details of equipment used to perform services

The practice is advised in writing of its LSPN within 28 days of
Services Australia receiving a complete and accurate HW061.

The Resources page contains a link to the HW061 form.

Authorised representatives

-   For partnerships, companies, government agencies and public bodies,
    an authorised representative must be nominated. This person may be
    the responsible executive officer who signs the form but the 2 roles
    (responsible executive officer and authorised representative) are
    distinguished. In the Provider Directory System (PDS), the
    proprietor details are recorded on the Organisation tab and the
    authorised representative details are recorded on the Contact tab
    when recording LSPN information
-   For practices that are owned by an individual or partners (that is,
    not a company) the nomination of an authorised representative is
    optional. If an authorised representative is nominated the
    proprietor must sign the relevant form to add or change the
    representative or provide a written letter to Services Australia to
    this effect
-   There can be up to 2 authorised representatives per LSPN. The
    Primary Authorised Representative and Secondary Authorised
    Representative have equal authority to act on the proprietors
    behalf, including making changes to the LSPN record or requesting
    information

Number of registrations required

An Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation
oncology practice form (HW061) is required for each diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology practice at each specific location.

If more than 1 practice operating under a different business entity is
at the same location, a separate registration and LSPN is required.

Registrations required for practices

If a practice provides both diagnostic imaging and radiation oncology
services, only 1 Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology practice form (HW061) form is required.

Some practices (for example major hospitals) may have diagnostic imaging
or radiation oncology equipment located in more than one campus. A HW061
form for each campus must be completed so a separate LSPN can be issued.

If registering a hospital with a number of departments who undertake
diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology services on the one campus, a
hospital (which includes all buildings and levels located within the
grounds) can register either:

-   one LSPN only - the departments located on that campus use the same
    LSPN on patient contacts accounts and receipts. The address recorded
    must accurately reflect the complete location, or
-   each department separately - a completed HW061 form is required for
    every department so separate LSPNs can be allocated

Registration required for a base for mobile diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment

Each base for mobile equipment must complete a Application to register
or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form
(HW061). The distinction between a premises and a mobile base will
depend on where the majority of services are performed and the amount of
equipment used on site or as a mobile service.

Where equipment is used as a dedicated ‘mobile’ service, then a mobile
base registration is appropriate. However, if the mobile equipment is
used for services frequently performed off the premises, but on
occasions is also used at the premises (where other equipment is also
used), then the mobile equipment can be included in the registration for
the premises.

Each base for mobile equipment must complete an LSPN form. Upon
registration, all mobile units operating from this base utilise the same
LSPN. Another form must be completed with the address details of the
depot if the mobile equipment is stored in a different location, such as
a vehicle that is not garaged at the LSPN base.

The Resources page contains examples for mobile unit registration.

Providing LSPN details to a third party

Before providing LSPN details to a third party who is not the authorised
representative or proprietor of the practice see Performing practice
staff security check for the Diagnostic Imaging/Location Specific
Practice Number (LPSN) register.

New LSPN registrations as part of a relocation

A new LSPN is required when a practice or mobile site changes address.
In order to make sure there are no gaps between billing dates, practices
are responsible for closing their existing registration and applying for
a new LSPN.

Practices need to provide the below information on the Application to
register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice
form (HW061)::

-   a closure date at question 4 of the form for their existing LSPN
    and;
-   a start date at question 6 for the new premises

Note: if the practice has not provided the closure and start date on the
form, return the application form with the appropriate standard letter
template.

Sections 23DZW and 23DZZV of the Health Insurance Act 1973 requires the
practices to notify Services Australia of a relocation within 28 days.

Where the practice has notified Services Australia of these changes
prior to them taking effect, the date operational on the application
form should be used

Where the practice has notified Services Australia after they took
effect:

-   the date of lodgement should be used as the closure date, and
-   the next day is the operational start date

See the Process page for more information on processing a new LSPN
registration as part of a relocation.

The Resources page contains links to forms, contact details and examples
relating to the LSPN Register.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
