
Identify and resolve duplicate eHealth Program (EHP) individual record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03090080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify and resolve duplicate eHealth
Program (EHP) individual records in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service.

On this Page:

Definition of a duplicate record

A duplicate record occurs when two or more identifiers have been created
for the same individual which is different to a ‘replica’ record.

A replica can only be made where the HI Service has allocated the same
identifier to two or more individuals (due to a system malfunction). See
Identify and resolve replica Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Definition of EHP individuals

EHP individuals, for the purposes of this document, are defined as
either a:

-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)

Identify duplicate records for EHP individuals

Potential duplicate records can be identified by a:

-   Healthcare Provider Individual (HPI-I)
-   Responsible Officer (RO)
-   Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
-   Service Officer
-   Data Source

A weekly report is produced containing a list of all records flagged as
potential duplicates.

Manual flagging of potential duplicate records

If two or more records are found to be potential duplicates, a search
must be conducted on individual demographic information. If these
records are found, they must be flagged for later investigation and
resolution.

Records that have been investigated and found not to be a duplicate can
be re-flagged at a later time if it is again determined to be a
potential duplicate.

System check for potential duplicate records

When a record is being created or updated, the EHP system automatically
checks to see if a record - whether active, deactivated or retired -
with those details already exists.

Records are checked against all of the following fields to determine
potential duplicates:

A name set matches another in the potential duplicate record

An address set matches another in the potential duplicate records. An
address set includes all of the following:

-   address line
-   suburb/town/locality
-   state or international state/province
-   postcode or international postcode
-   country
-   sex
-   date of birth

If the creation of updating of an EHP individual record is via B2B or
HPOS, an error message is returned. Where an exact match is found, a new
HPI-I record is not created and the HI Service returns the matched HPI-I
number in a response message to the data source

If an HPI-I record is identified as a duplicate, the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service does not allow the record to be updated as part
of the automated duplicate matching process. The requestor can do the
following:

-   Amend any of the details that were matched so that the record is no
    longer a duplicate
-   Cancel (withdraw) the transaction

An HPI-I record that is being investigated can still be accessed and
updated when it has a potential duplicate flag.

Notification of duplicate records via data source

Multiple identifiers must be provided for every request made to notify
the HI Service that identifiers are duplicates of each other.

A successful duplicate identification results in all effected records
being flagged with a duplicate marker for further follow up.

Resolving a duplicate record for EHP individuals

A weekly report is produced to enable the resolution of any potential
duplicate records.

Records may be determined not to be a duplicate and have the duplicate
flag removed. These records can be re-flagged as potential duplicates if
necessary.

Background information when resolving a duplicate record for an EHP individual

The record which is determined to be the correct record to be retained
becomes the 'primary' record.

Any subsequent records which have been created and determined to be a
duplicate of the primary record are 'secondary' records.

The secondary records are merged with the primary record as part of the
duplicate resolution procedure.

Note: updates can be made where records are determined not to be
duplicate. Once resolved, no updates can be made on a secondary record.

The primary record retains an 'active' status. Any secondary records
resolved as a duplicate have a status of 'resolved duplicate', and have
the potential duplicate flag removed. Any resolved organisation links to
the closed secondary record are end dated.

Any resolved secondary records are removed from the Healthcare Provider
Directory Service, if any entry exists.

Any organisations that were linked to the secondary record (but not
linked to the primary record) must be manually re-linked as requested to
the 'primary' record.

As part of the duplicate resolution process, Service Officers must
notify the Healthcare provider that the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
certificate issued to the secondary record will have Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service permissions revoked.

Note: system logs are not merged for the primary record with any
resolved duplicate records. The primary record's system log should be
the only active system log for details to be recorded to.

For any audit investigations, a request must be made to obtain any
resolved duplicate system logs.

Related links

Roles in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Identify and resolve replica Healthcare Provider Identifier –
Organisation (HPI-O) record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
