
Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for network organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03110010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and the procedures to follow when
creating Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) records
for network organisations in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

Definition of network organisation

A network organisation is an organisation that is subordinate to a seed
organisation. Network organisations can be used to represent different
departments, sections or divisions within an organisation or separate
legal entities from the seed organisation.

A network organisation:

-   is not required to provide evidence that the organisation is a legal
    business entity. This information is assured by the Responsible
    Officer (RO) or the Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) who
    registers the network organisation. The RO or OMO must be linked at
    a higher level in the organisation hierarchy
-   must not stand alone, it must be either linked to a seed
    organisation or to another network organisation that is linked to a
    seed organisation. Note: the linked organisation must have an active
    status
-   can have none or many OMOs linked. Where there are no OMOs for the
    network organisation, OMOs linked to the parent organisation will
    have administrative access to the network organisation's records

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, the details of the Service Officer are recorded
in the system automatically although details of the person making the
request must be entered.

When creating a network organisation the following fields must be
completed in the inquirer details area of the search screen:

-   Inquirer Type - RO or OMO (the applicant)
-   Family Name - RO or OMO's family name
-   Given Name - RO or OMO's given name
-   Reason - Create new record

Create a network organisation by a Service Officer

A network organisation must be created by a Responsible Officer (RO) or
Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) who is already registered in the
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service and is linked at a higher level in
the organisation hierarchy.

To create a network organisation the RO or OMO must provide a completed
application form to a Service Officer. The Service Officer must perform
a search within the HI Service to ensure a HPI-O record does not already
exist with the same organisational details. When a record:

exists, a Service Officer can:

-   inform the requestor that an organisation already exists
-   amend details or reactivate the existing HPI-O record

does not exist, Service Officer can start the creation process

On creation of a network organisation, the HI Service:

-   creates a unique HPI-O number
-   generates a start date

A letter will be sent and addressed to the RO's preferred address of the
seed organisation at the top of the organisation hierarchy notifying of
the network creation.

Note:

-   the start date for the network organisation HPI-O record always
    defaults to the processing date. It cannot be future or back dated
-   when requested, the Service Officer must initiate the creation of a
    new Services Australia Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate
    or linking of an existing PKI certificate to enable access to the HI
    Service

Create a network organisation using practice software or HPOS

The request to create a network organisation via:

-   practice software, must be received from an Organisation Maintenance
    Officer (OMO)
-   Healthcare Professional Online Services (HPOS), must be performed by
    an OMO

The OMO of the organisation making the request must be linked at a
higher level in the organisation hierarchy than the network organisation
being registered.

Duplicate checking occurs and an error message is returned when there is
a match found to an existing organisation.

The Resources page contains contact details for Healthcare Identifiers
(HI) service, links to My Health Record glossary terms on the Australian
Digital Health Agency website, and the ABN Lookup on the Australian
Business Register Website.

Related links

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifier Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Amend Responsible Officer (RO) or Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO)
record in the Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) record in Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for
seed organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Authentication required to access digital health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
