
Address formatting in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about address formatting in the
Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service. Addresses can be entered in
different formats in the eHealth Program (EHP), unstructured and
structured. Registration letters are formatted in such a way that the
address block on the letter is standardised to upper case for the entire
address block.

On this Page:

Address indicator for structured and unstructured addresses

There are 2 types of addresses, ‘unstructured’ which uses the rapid
addressing tool and ‘structured’ when the address is not a routine
address that the rapid addressing tool will easily find.

An address can be entered in a structured or an unstructured format.
For:

-   unstructured format, leave the Unstructured Address Indicator box
    ticked and use the rapid addressing tool
-   structured format, untick the Unstructured Address Indicator tick
    box and the structured address fields will appear to fill in

Unstructured address format

When the unstructured address indicator is ticked, the rapid addressing
feature will be utilised by beginning to enter the address number and
street address in the Address Search field.

Note: in most cases the ‘unstructured address format’ or rapid
addressing will be used when processing an application.

Structured address format

Some addresses can be entered in a structured format, by unticking the
unstructured address indicator box.

A structured address is an address which has more or less information of
what a routine address would have and/or an address that couldn’t be
captured by rapid addressing. An example of a structured address can be
but is not limited to; Coopers Farm via Smith St in Tamworth NSW 2340.

A structured address can be created by the following fields selected or
keyed from the available drop down menus:

-   Postal Delivery Type
-   Postal Delivery Number
-   Suite/Unit Type
-   Suite/Unit Number
-   Floor/Level Type
-   Floor/Level Number
-   Street Number
-   Lot Number
-   Address Site Name
-   Street Name
-   Street Type
-   Street Suffix
-   Suburb/Town/Locality
-   State
-   Postcode

Capitalisation

The EHP allows certain address fields to be entered in free text, and
other fields are drop down selections, for example:

-   Street name – free text
-   Street type – drop down selection (capitalised)

The EHP system will reformat the entered text and capitalise text, for
example:

An address keyed as:

JohN SMITH

2 george STREET

Sydney New South Wales 2000

Will be standardised to:

JOHN SMITH

2 GEORGE ST

SYDNEY NSW 2000

Healthcare Provider Directory entries

Healthcare Provider Directory (HPD) entries are displayed in the Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) in the exact manner that the data is
entered into EHP. No standardised formatting occurs.

Using the above example, the HPOS HPD entry will show entry as keyed:

JohN SMITH

2 george STREET

Sydney New South Wales 2000

In all cases, when entering EHP data, capitalise all address fields to
ensure the externally visible text is standard.

The Process page contains the process to follow when creating
unstructured and structured addresses.

Related links

Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service - Health Professional

Administration for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
