
Public hospitals participating in pharmaceutical reforms 012-60030040

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about public hospital participation
in pharmaceutical reforms.

Overview of public hospital pharmaceutical reforms

Australian Health Care Agreements (AHCA) now known as National
Healthcare Agreement with Queensland, Victoria, South Australia,
Tasmania and Western Australia have been varied to accommodate
Pharmaceutical Policy Reform. The pharmaceutical reforms provide
eligible patients in participating public hospitals with access to
subsidised medicines under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

See also: Participating public hospitals approved to dispense
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) items.

Medical practitioners in approved public hospitals in Queensland,
Victoria, South Australia, Northern Territory, Tasmania and Western
Australia can prescribe PBS items to non-admitted patients (out
patients) and admitted patients on discharge. The medication can be
supplied from the approved public hospital pharmacy or from an approved
community pharmacy.

Approved public hospital pharmacies can lodge claims with the Services
Australia, and be reimbursed at a different rate to approved community
pharmacies for the supply of PBS medications. That is, approved public
hospitals are not paid mark-up, dispensing, dangerous drug or wastage
fees, purified water or a container fee for ready prepared items and
extemporaneously prepared items.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) beneficiaries are included in the
pharmaceutical reforms, and the same rules apply to Repatriation
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) benefits.

Hospital provider numbers

Public hospitals are issued with a unique hospital provider number. This
number comprises eight characters, with a preceding zero, six numbers
and a check digit. For example, 0123456Y.

The hospital provider number must be provided for each prescription and
shown on each public hospital prescription form. Where the hospital
provider number is not provided, the prescription is rejected with
reason code 204 'hospital number not supplied or invalid'.

See also: list of approved public hospitals showing hospital provider
numbers in Participating public hospitals approved to dispense
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) items.

CTS file format and hospital provider numbers for Stoma and ParaQuad

Note: from 1 April 2015, the Claims Transmission System (CTS) claiming
channel will no longer be available for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) claiming.
The CTS diskette claiming channel will remain in place to support the
Stoma Appliance Scheme (SAS) and the Section 100 Paraplegic and
Quadriplegic (ParaQuad) Programme.

The hospital provider number is transmitted to the Services Australia
via CTS. In CTS file format, the preceding zero is not captured (for
example 0123456Y will be captured as 123456Y).

The number of days of treatment, specified purpose and sex or title are
recorded in the CTS file format.

Note: public hospital prescriptions are processed in accordance with
current prescription processing procedures. If the approval type is
public hospital and the hospital id is invalid or omitted, the
prescription will be rejected with reason code 204.

Prescriber numbers and participating public hospitals

Prescriber numbers are not linked to a hospital.

A practitioner’s prescriber number is required for public hospital
prescriptions, and must appear on the prescription form. Hospital
practitioners (medical, dental, nurse practitioners and midwives) will
use their own unique prescriber number to issue prescriptions.

This statement is only applicable to states participating in the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) reforms.

Interns

Hospital interns who do not have their own unique prescriber number will
be issued with a prescriber number from Services Australia.

Community pharmacy

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) prescriptions prescribed by public
hospital medical practitioners, nurse practitioners and midwives can be
supplied by a community pharmacy. In this situation, the Services
Australia reimbursement is at the community pharmacy rate, which
includes the relevant mark-up and dispensing fees, etc.

Generic prescriber numbers (ACT hospitals)

Generic prescriber numbers are no longer issued. However, the following
generic prescriber numbers were granted approval under special
arrangements in 1993, and are still valid:

-   The Canberra Hospital, ACT - prescriber number 8006507
-   Calvary Public Hospital, ACT - prescriber number 8006275
-   Calvary Private Hospital, ACT - prescriber number 8009722

These generic prescriber numbers are valid for the approval of authority
prescriptions.

Valid prescription items supplied by approved public hospitals

RPBS items

Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS) prescriptions are
valid for supply by an approved public hospital.

Item categories

General, Concessional, Safety Net Entitled (Pensioner) and RPBS
prescriptions are claimable categories when supplied by an approved
public hospital.

Prescriber bag supplies

Prescriber bag supplies Order Form items are not payable when the item
is supplied by an approved public hospital. If claimed, the system
rejects the items with reason code 197 DBOF item not allowed - Public
hospital.

HSD

Restrictions apply to which pharmacies can dispense and claim Highly
Specialised Drugs (HSD).

Under the National Health Act 1953, approved suppliers include:

-   community pharmacies approved under Section 90
-   public and private hospitals approved under Section 94

Additionally, hospitals not approved under Section 94 can apply for
approval to prescribe and supply HSD under the National Health (Highly
specialised drugs program for hospitals) Special Arrangements Instrument
2010.

HSD items are approved as either a:

-   HSD public hospital item (HSD PUB)
-   HSD private hospital item (HSD PTE)
-   HSD Complex Authority Required (CAR) item

HSD CAR items are also listed with separate public and private hospital
item codes.

See the References page for links to relevant legislation.

Statement of account for public hospital approvals

A statement of account is generated for public hospital approvals.

The pharmacy statement of account is issued as a summarised, itemised or
exception statement. A recreated statement can also be generated if
required.

Payments to approved public hospital pharmacies

Services Australia reimbursement payments to approved public hospital
pharmacies are only made by direct deposit using Electronic Funds
Transfer (EFT).

Pricing arrangements for public hospital pharmacies

On 1 October 2019, Services Australia implemented changes to the pricing
arrangements for s94 participating public hospital authorities, and
private hospitals approved under Section 94 of the National Health Act
1953 to supply PBS medicines.

Note: these changes apply to prescriptions supplied on or after 1
October 2019. This includes repeat prescriptions supplied on or after 1
October 2019, regardless of when the original or earlier repeats were
processed.

Under the Seventh Community Pharmacy Agreement (7CPA) the restructure of
the wholesale mark-up is one part of the 7CPA package. Which provides
funding sustainability for Pharmaceutical wholesaler activities that
support timely and affordable access to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) medicines.

As of 1 January 2021, the wholesale mark-up is calculated using the new
3 tier structure (below) and included in the Commonwealth Price to
Pharmacy (CPP).

-   $0.41 for Approved Ex-Manufacturer Price (AEMP) < $5.50
-   7.52% for $5.50 < AEMP < $720
-   $54.14 for AEMP > $720

These mark-up changes only apply to prescriptions for PBS medicines
supplied under Section 85 of the National Health Act 1953, by an s94
public hospital. See Section 85 PBS medicines.

The Resources page contains the wholesale mark-up amounts.

Claims from public hospital pharmacies are not paid any dispensing or
mark-up fees.

See also:

Pricing for Section 94 (s94) private hospital authorities

Public hospitals and patient contributions

The standard patient contributions, or co-payments, apply to public
hospital prescribing Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medications.

See also: Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Safety Net processing and
enquiries.

Public hospitals and patient refunds

Services Australia can only pay refunds for PBS items supplied through
approved pharmacies. Refunds for hospital supplied items should be
referred to the relevant hospital or health department.

See also:

Repatriation Benefits card (RPBC) in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

Patient refunds for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) items

PBS Safety Net cards issued by approved public hospitals

Approved public hospitals can issue Safety Net cards (CN and SN
numbers).

A Safety Net fee is payable to approved public hospitals (hospital type
code Y) for issuing Safety Net cards. The hospital will be paid the same
Safety Net fee that is paid to a community pharmacy.

The Resources page has the wholesale mark-up amounts.

Related links

Participating public hospitals approved to dispense Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) items

PBS prescription stationery for approved suppliers

Participating public hospital Authority approval application

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
