
Eligibility for the 5 Year Overseas Trained Doctor (OTD) Scheme 012-42080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the 5 Year Overseas Trained
Doctor Scheme.

5 Year Overseas Trained Doctor (OTD) Scheme

The 5 Year Overseas Trained Doctors (OTD) Scheme was introduced to
address long-term rural medical workforce shortages and the retention of
suitably qualified and experienced OTDs working in general practice in
rural and remote Australia. The 5 Year OTD Scheme provides incentives
for OTDs to work in some of Australia’s smaller rural communities by
offering a reduction in the ten year moratorium on provider number
restrictions under section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the
Act) requirements. The References page contains a link to the Act.

By choosing to work in an eligible location and participate in the
scheme, an OTD can obtain an exemption that effectively reduces their 10
Year moratorium to 5 years (in some very remote locations, the
requirement may be as little as 3 years). Although the moratorium end
date remains the same, at the end of this period, and subject to meeting
scheme requirements, they will be eligible for an unrestricted Medicare
provider number.

HR Plus

The 5 Year OTD scheme is managed by HR Plus Tasmania. HR Plus manage
enrolments, transfers between eligible locations, withdrawals and
completions of the five-year OTD scheme. HR Plus are the intermediary
between the Rural Workforce Agencies, the applicant and the Department
of Health and Aged Care. HR Plus sends confirmation of:

-   enrolment
-   transfer
-   completion, or
-   withdrawal

To the Department of Health and Aged Care who issue a confirmation
letter of the enrolment, transfer, withdrawal or completion to HR Plus
for forwarding to the participant.

Applying to participate

To participate in the 5 Year OTD scheme, the OTD participant applies to
a Rural Workforce Agency in the state or territory they seek to work in.
If accepted under the eligibility criteria, the participant enters into
an agreement with the workforce agency.

On receipt of confirmation from HR Plus, the Department of Health and
Aged Care advises Services Australia of medical practitioners who are
participating in the 5 Year OTD Scheme. The provider number details of
these medical practitioners are flagged to prevent the scaling
calculations displaying. Only the start date must be added.

Scaling benefits

5 year OTD scheme participants are not eligible to receive scaling
benefits, as any scaling discounts are less than those offered by the
scheme. Participants in the 5 Year OTD scheme are already offered 5 or
more years as an incentive to participate and complete the scheme, and
they cannot receive a scaling discount as well as the 5 Year OTD
reduction in their ten-year moratorium period.

During the period where the provider is on the 5 year OTD Scheme,
scaling continues to be applied by the system, but the result is not
displayed and no notifications or the s19AB scaling class exemption will
be generated.

Exiting the scheme

If a medical practitioner exits the 5 Year OTD Scheme prior to
completion, advice is received from the Department of Health and Aged
Care, the relevant speciality code is closed and their participation is
end-dated. The OTD is then able to receive track and scale credits for
eligible locations. Track and scale credits will apply until enough
credit is received to be eligible for a Revised Scaled End Date, at
which time a Scaling Class Exemption for all locations is applied until
the OTD reaches the actual end of their ten-year moratorium.

Related links

Track and scale of eligible medical practitioners

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
