
Processing and recovery of overpayments for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the processing and recovery of
overpayments for VAP. Recovery of overpayments are processed in
ESSentials Software Application Program (SAP) Graphic User Interface
(GUI). SAP GUI provides an accurate record of the quantity of
overpayments processed for the VAP programme.

On this Page:

Overpayments in VAP

An overpayment in VAP occurs when:

-   health practitioners and facilities, that is, community nursing,
    nursing homes and hospitals etc. claim using incorrect details,
    including incorrect items, dates and/or locations
-   a claim has been processed incorrectly

Identifying an overpayment

VAP overpayments are identified in a number of ways including:

-   health practitioner or facility returning a personal cheque (and
    request letter) or electronic funds transfer (EFT) deposit
-   health practitioner or facility returning a Voluntary
    Acknowledgement Form
-   VAP Service Officers answering phone enquiries
-   post payment monitoring and/or a compliance audit from the
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
-   VAP completing quality control or processing

Voluntary Acknowledgment form

Where a health practitioner or facility identify they have been paid an
overpayment of Veterans' Affairs benefits Service Officers should
request they complete a Voluntary Acknowledgment Form (VAF).

They should be referred to DVA program information on the Services
Australia website to obtain the form.

They will email the completed form to the VAP Helpdesk or post it to DVA
Overpayments. Once received it will be reviewed and forwarded to the
appropriate area for recovery action.

The Resources page contains a links to the Voluntary Acknowledgment form
MO057

Service Standards

The Treatment Accounts Processing (TAP) Schedule is the services
agreement between Services Australia and the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA). The schedule outlines the efficiency standards that apply
to Services Australia's performance of the services. In the TAP schedule
the agency aims to:

-   action 90% of overpayments within 28 days of receipt
-   action 90% of Level 1 and Level 2 overpayments within 7 days of
    receipt
-   receipt 90% of all repaid funds received by either Electronic Funds
    Transfer (EFT) or cheque within 2 business days

Recovering an overpayment for VAP

The recovery of an overpayment is mandatory. VAP Service Officers
prepare the overpayment documentation manually and VAP Overpayments
Officers then process the recovery of the overpayment using ESSentials
Software Application Program (SAP) Graphic User Interface (GUI) in
consultation with the VAP Helpdesk. Delegate approval from the VAP
Helpdesk must be obtained to reverse an overpayment.

An overpayment can occur in a claim paid via Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT). If the EFT overpayment is identified as:

-   Paid yesterday, the Service Officer must request an extraction of
    the EFT payment and refer this to a Programme Support Officer. Note:
    due to payment scheduling run times, requests for extractions of EFT
    payments may not be successful but must be attempted before 11am
    Eastern Standard Time (EST) next day
-   Paid yesterday and it is after 11am Eastern Standard Time (EST) the
    next day, the EFT payment cannot be recalled. The Service Officer
    must commence recovery action

The procedure to recover VAP overpayments depends on the amount of the
overpayment.

Overpayments less than $100.00

Recovery of overpayments less than $100.00 is mandatory. When the health
practitioner or facility returns the funds they are receipted and
reported as an overpayment.

When a refund is not received within 30 days of the initial letter of
demand, delegate approval to reverse the overpayment is requested via
the VAP Helpdesk. When approved, the overpayment is reversed in SAP GUI.
No further action is required.

Overpayments more than $100.00

Recovery of overpayments more than $100.00 is mandatory. When the health
practitioner or facility returns the funds they are receipted and
reported as an overpayment.

When a refund is not received within 30 days of the initial letter of
demand, a reminder letter is sent to the health practitioner or
facility. When a refund is not received within 60 days of the initial
letter of demand, delegate approval to reverse the overpayment is
requested via the VAP Helpdesk. When approved the overpayment is
reversed in ESSentials Software Application Program (SAP) Graphic User
Interface (GUI). All health practitioner and facility correspondence and
supporting documentation must be scanned and emailed to the VAP
Helpdesk. The VAP Helpdesk will send the documentation to the Department
of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) within 2 working days.

Overpayments more than 30 or 60 days old are identified when overpayment
reports are run, see Overpayment report in ESSentials SAP GUI for
Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

Entity overpayment – bank account details incorrectly registered

If bank account details for a health practitioner or facility are
incorrectly registered on the system, an entity can receive payments
from Services Australia they are not entitled to. If this occurs,
eBusiness will request VAP raise an overpayment in ESSentials Software
Application Program (SAP) Graphic User Interface (GUI). All supporting
information about the overpayment is emailed by eBusiness.

The VAP Helpdesk will create a mock customer number when overpayment
processing is requested by eBusiness. This is added to the SAP DV number
for incorrect bank account refunds register by the VAP Policy Section
Tier 3. This information and all supporting documentation is e-mailed to
the VAP Overpayments Officers to action the recovery.

The Process page contains information about initiating the recovery of
an overpayment.

If overpayment has not been received within 60 days, the overpayment is
referred to the VAP Helpdesk to determine if the overpayment can be
referred to Debt Recovery Parramatta (DRP). Outstanding invoices are not
to be reversed off SAP GUI on advice from Treasury. All correspondence
and supporting documents must be scanned and sent to the VAP Helpdesk
within 2 working days to be forwarded DRP for further recovery action.

Disputed overpayments

When a health practitioner or facility disputes an overpayment,
information about the dispute including all documentation must be
forwarded to the VAP Helpdesk. The VAP Helpdesk refers the information
to the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) for a decision about
further action to be taken.

The Resources page contains e-mail templates for communicating with the
VAP Helpdesk.

Administration

Reporting

The VAP Helpdesk reports on recovered and outstanding overpayments to
the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA).

Retention of documents

Services Australia must:

-   dispose of overpayment records 7 years after action is complete
    (under record entry number 1220 of the Administrative Function
    Disposal Authority)
-   comply with all National Archives of Australia (NAA) requirements
    for disposal of records

Quality control on VAP recovery of overpayments

Quality control must be performed to ensure VAP overpayment policies and
procedures are followed correctly.

Quality control is undertaken by recovery staff members who have not
been involved in the recovery process.

The Process page contains the steps used in the quality control process.

The Resources page contains e-mail templates for communicating with VAP
Helpdesk, links to Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Processing
Quality Checking Procedures, information about how a health practitioner
and facility can repay an overpaid amount and areas of responsibilities
for recovery of VAP overpayments.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
