
Practice location amendments for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-18060500

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about adding and splitting an
additional practice branch location.

Main practice address

A practice must nominate a main practice address.

The main practice address should be the location that:

-   provides the most Medicare Benefits Services per annum, and
-   is provided in the practice details section of forms

The main practice address is the location that is associated with the
practice ID. All additional practice branches are then registered under
the main practice address.

Additional practice branch

A practice can apply to add an additional practice branch using:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)
-   the Practice Incentives application (IP001) form when a practice
    applies for the program(s)
-   the Practice Incentives Additional practice branch (IP025) any time
    after the main practice address is approved for the program(s)

The Resources page has a link to the forms.

Splitting of an additional branch location

This is when an additional branch location is removed from the main
practice address and applies for Practice Incentives in its own right as
the main practice location.

A practice must provide:

The Practice Incentives application (IP001) form, for the additional
practice branch that is splitting from the main practice address

A letter from the practice owner(s). This must include:

-   consent to split the additional practice branch from the main
    practice address, and
-   the signature of at least 1 registered owner

An accreditation certificate, for the additional practice branch that is
splitting from the main practice address

The above documents must be provided for each additional practice branch
that is splitting from the main practice address.

Close the additional practice branch and approve the new application on
the same processing day. This will make sure the practice’s entire
Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) reference period is
captured.

The SWPE is not transferable.

See also: Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Changing which location identifies as the main practice address

This is when a practice changes which location identifies as the main
practice address.

A practice must provide:

A letter from the practice owner(s). This must include:

-   confirmation of which location that is identifying as the main
    practice address, and
-   the signature of at least 1 registered owner

An accreditation certificate, for the additional practice branch that is
identifying as the main practice address

The new main practice address must be:

-   currently registered as an additional practice branch. if not, the
    practice must submit a Practice Incentives Additional practice
    branch (IP025) form
-   accredited at the time of the notification. An Additional practice
    branch cannot be ‘registered for accreditation’ and identify as the
    main practice address

The practice’s accreditation must be ongoing to maintain eligibility for
the PIP and WIP - Practice Stream.

For example: The accreditation for the existing main practice location
expires on 31 January. The accreditation for the new main practice
location must start on or before 1 February.

See also: Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

The Resources page contains some scenarios as well as links to letters,
forms and guidelines.

Related links

Practice application for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
