
eHealth Incentive for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-10050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes to help practices with self service
options for the PIP eHealth Incentive through Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS).

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP eHealth Incentive encourages practices to:

-   Keep up to date with digital health
-   Adopt new digital health technology, and
-   Improve administration processes and patient care

A practice must meet the 5 eligibility requirements in the eHealth
Incentive guidelines to get eHealth Incentive payments.

Apply for the eHealth Incentive

A practice must use Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) to apply
for the eHealth Incentive.

When there are system issues, the practice can contact the Incentives
Processing team to:

-   Help the caller access HPOS, and
-   Help the caller apply for the eHealth Incentive, see Table 2 Steps
    3-4 on the Process page

If system issues continue, ask the practice to submit a written request
using the:

-   PIP eHealth Incentive application (IP002) form

Escalate all written requests for the IP002 form to the Program Support
Officer (PSO) via the Incentives Escalation Database. Programme
Management will give the IP002 form to the practice. The Incentives
Processing team will process the form once submitted.

The IP002 form is only available in exceptional circumstances when the
practice is having system issues.

Updating participation details

Practices must use HPOS to update the below eHealth details:

-   opting-in
-   opting-out
-   updating their HPI-O
-   checking the quarterly Shared Health Summary (SHS) targets, and
-   withdrawing

When there are system issues, the practice may contact the Incentives
Processing team:

Help the caller access HPOS,

Help the caller:

-   opt in or opt out, see Table 3 Steps 3-5
-   update a HPI-O number, see Table 4 Steps 3-6
-   withdraw from the eHealth Incentive, see Table 5 Steps 4-5

If system issues continue, ask the practice to submit a written request
so a Service Officer can manage their participation details.

The practice can send the request on official company letterhead or via
email.

The request must include:

-   official company letterhead (letter only)
-   the practice ID
-   the practice name
-   the full practice address
-   consent to withdraw from the eHealth Incentive, and
-   a signature by at least 1 registered owner or authorised contact
    person

Escalate all written requests to update participation details to the
Program Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives Escalation Database.
Programme Management will update the participation details.

The Resources page contains links to guidelines and letters for the
eHealth Incentive. It also has information about eligibility
requirements and PIP contacts.

Related links

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Health Professional Online Services

Incentive Programs

Online Services for PIP and WIP – Practice Stream

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
