
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) services - Medicare eligibility for equipment and providers 012-19052457

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about MRI equipment and provider
eligibility for Medicare services and the recording in the Location
Specific Practice Number (LSPN) Register and the Provider Directory
System (PDS).

Access to MRI services for Medicare

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):

-   uses strong magnetic fields to generate images used to diagnose
    conditions such as cancer and strokes
-   is especially effective on soft tissue, and
-   does not use ionising radiation, unlike some other imaging equipment
    such as x-rays and computed tomography (CT) scans

MRI is an expensive and sophisticated technology and since its
introduction on the Medicare Benefits Schedule, MRI has been carefully
managed through requester, provider and item level restrictions. These
controls help support the provision of high quality, safe and
cost-effective health care for all Australians.

The majority of MRI services must be ordered by specialist medical
practitioners or consultant physicians in order to attract a benefit. A
restricted group of procedures can also be ordered by GPs and specialist
dentists.

Eligible MRI equipment for Medicare

To be eligible for Medicare benefits, an MRI service must be provided
within a diagnostic imaging practice, or the radiology department of a
hospital, that offers a comprehensive range of diagnostic imaging
procedures, has an eligible MRI equipment and MRI accreditation.

The Department of Health and Aged Care (Health) is responsible for the
granting of MRI licenses which give diagnostic imaging practices
eligibility to claim Medicare benefits. Agreements and eligibility may
differ from site to site. Services Australia must ensure that the MRI
license has been issued by Health to a diagnostic imaging practice
before adding an eligible MRI to the LSPN Register. Should Services
Australia receive a request to add or change the MRI details recorded at
a diagnostic imaging practice, the request will need to be confirmed
with Health.

If Services Australia receives advice from Health about MRI eligibility,
Services Australia must ensure that the relevant LSPN form has been
received before making changes to the LSPN register. The exception to
this requirement is where MRI eligibility is transferred for a temporary
period to another site. A LSPN form is only required to be completed for
temporary transfers if an MRI has not previously been recorded at the
temporary site and if MRI provider eligibility is required.

The Resources page contains a link to the Health's contact information.

Provider eligibility for MRI services

To provide services on eligible MRI equipment a specialist must have
ongoing participation in the Royal Australian College of Radiologists'
quality and accreditation program. Failure to do so will result in the
cancellation of Medicare eligibility to provide MRI services.

The proprietor or authorised representative of an LSPN site with an
eligible MRI advises Services Australia of the specialists that are to
provide MRI services. By completing these details on the relevant LSPN
form the proprietor or authorised representative is confirming that the
practitioners listed are specialists in diagnostic radiology, are
participants in the Royal Australasian College of Radiologists Quality
and Accreditation Program, and will provide MRI services on the eligible
MRI equipment located at the relevant LSPN.

Provider eligibility is effective from the date a complete LSPN form is
received by Services Australia or a future date if specified.

All requests for backdating eligibility to perform MRI services are to
be escalated to Provider Services Support via a Team Leader. Provider
Services Support forward to the Provider Eligibility and Accreditation
Section – Diagnostic Imaging and Pathology Team.

Regardless of the location, once an eligible MRI is replaced, the
original MRI scanner ceases to be eligible. If eligibility is
transferred to another location the practice is required to submit:

-   an LSPN amendment form to request the removal of the MRI machine,
    and
-   a second amendment form adding the MRI machine at the new location
    (LSPN). This form should include a list of providers providing MRI
    services at this location

The Resources page contains links to the Location Specific Practice
Number forms.

Linking an MRI provider to an LSPN Register on a PDS record

On receipt of a complete LSPN form from a proprietor or an authorised
representative, Service Officers must ensure:

-   active MRI equipment is located at the LSPN site
-   the provider names and numbers listed on the form are specialists in
    radiology with access to Medicare benefits, and
-   the address of the provider location matches the address of the LSPN
    site

If the provider is eligible link them to the LSPN. The system will
automatically add the MRI specialty code 118 to the Provider Stem and
Location

When an MRI provider is linked to the LSPN register, the system will
check whether the LSPN address exactly matches the provider location
address. If there is a match, the provider location address will be
locked and cannot be amended.

The provider location cannot be edited until the:

-   LSPN address is amended to be different to the provider location, or
-   provider link to the LSPN is end dated

The system is designed to automatically add the MRI specialty code (118)
to the Provider Stem and Location if the MRI provider has been linked to
the LSPN and the Provider Stem has a current 046 or 047 specification
code.

To prevent inappropriate claiming, whenever the specialty codes 046 or
047 are end dated, the specialty code 118 on the provider stem and
provider locations will need to be end dated at the same time.

If an MRI provider is unlinked or end dated from an LSPN then the system
will end date the 118 at the relevant provider location with the same
end date.

List of MRI providers

Practice staff that have access to the LSPN in HPOS will be able to
generate a list of MRI providers for that site.

For further information please refer to the Resources page for a link to
the HPOS user guide.

Transfer of MRI eligibility

The Department of Health and Aged Care is required to notify Services
Australia when a transfer of MRI eligibility has been granted from one
LSPN site to another or to MRI equipment at the same site. Health will
advise the MRI equipment details (make, model, serial number), if
eligibility is for partial or full access, and the eligibility start and
end dates. The MRI transfer details must be recorded on the equipment
register of the relevant LSPN/s and the MRI accreditation must be
current before Medicare benefits are payable. Irrespective of the
location, once MRI eligibility is transferred to another MRI the
original MRI ceases to be eligible.

Where the transfer of MRI eligibility is for a limited period Health
will provide the date and details for the return of eligibility to the
original site or equipment. Where ineligible MRI equipment exists at the
receiving site and this equipment is receiving Medicare eligibility for
a limited period, it is not necessary to end date this equipment. The
ineligible equipment is not assessed for Medicare purposes and the LSPN
register will allow the same serial number, make and model to be
recorded where the equipment codes are different (that is, MR1, MR3 and
MR4).

The same applies if equipment has partial eligibility and the site is
getting full eligibility. The equipment with partial eligibility will
retain this eligibility during and after the transfer has ceased (that
is, the MBS items claimable on the partially eligible MRI can be claimed
on the fully eligible MRI).

While an application form is not required to be completed for temporary
transfer of MRI eligibility, the practice at the new site must complete
a LSPN form to gain access to Medicare benefits for practitioners
providing MRI services using the eligible equipment.

Note: for a transfer of eligibility, the MRI start date at the new site
cannot overlap the end date at the previous site.

Ineligible MRI equipment and provider services payable by DVA

Ineligible MRI equipment is optional information for LSPN purposes as
Medicare benefits are not payable for services provided on this
equipment. Ineligible MRI equipment is not defined as ‘primary
information’ for purpose of LSPN registration under the Health Insurance
Regulations 2018. However, if details are provided by the practice, the
equipment is to be recorded on the LSPN register.

The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) pay claims for services on
ineligible MRI equipment for eligible DVA patients. However, DVA claims
do not check for an ineligible MRI at the LSPN. Providers who wish to
provide DVA services on ineligible MRI equipment should contact DVA to
notify them of their intention to claim. If the provider does not have a
speciality code 118 (MRI) at the location, DVA will assign their own
speciality code for the provider on the DVA system.

Cardiac MRI providers

From 1 May 2019, eligible providers will need to have specification code
655 added to their provider stem in PDS which will enable claiming for
the following MBS items:

-   63395
-   63396
-   63397
-   63398

A provider is eligible to claim the above items if the provider is:

-   a specialist in diagnostic radiology or a consultant physician; and
-   recognised by the Conjoint Committee for Certification in Cardiac
    MRI

The Department of Health and Aged Care will send Services Australia a
list of providers that have been certified by the Conjoint Committee for
Certification in Cardiac MRI. Services Australia will assess that the
provider is a recognised specialist in diagnostic radiology or a
consultant physician. The specification code 655 will be added on the
provider stem in PDS if all eligibility criteria is met.

Note: the Provider does not need to be linked to the LSPN to access the
above item numbers.

The Resources page contains MRI provider processing work flow, links to
forms, HPOS user guide and links to letters.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
