
Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for Medicare 012-42010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for allied health and non-medical
health professional registrations for Medicare.

Allied health professionals

Allied Health professionals are health professionals that are not part
of the medical, dental or nursing professions.

These are university qualified practitioners with specialised expertise
in preventing, diagnosing and treating a range of conditions and
illnesses.

Allied health practitioners often work within a multidisciplinary health
team to provide specialised support for different patient needs.

Medicare recognises the following allied health professionals:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioners
-   Aboriginal Health Workers
-   Accredited Practicing Dietitians
-   Audiologists
-   Chiropractors
-   Diabetes Educators
-   Exercise Physiologists
-   Orthoptists
-   Osteopaths
-   Physiotherapists
-   Podiatrists
-   Psychologists
-   Social Workers
-   Speech Pathologists

Non-medical health professionals

Non-medical health professionals are health professionals that are not
part of the medical or allied health professions.

These are university qualified practitioners with specialised expertise
in preventing, diagnosing and treating a range of conditions and
illnesses.

Non-medial health practitioners often work within a multidisciplinary
health team to provide specialised support for different patient needs.

Medicare recognises the following Non-medical health professionals:

-   Dental Practitioners
-   Mental Health Nurses
-   Midwives
-   Nurse Practitioners
-   Optometrists

Accreditation and recognition

The major division in the accreditation of allied health and non-medical
health professionals is between those professions that are accredited:

-   through the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Authority
    (Ahpra) under the National Registration and Accreditation Scheme
    (NRAS)
-   professions that are self-regulated under a professional
    association, and
-   professions that are regulated by achievement of a qualification
    only

Regardless of the scheme, each allied health and non-medical health
profession has a system in place to ensure that the practitioner:

-   is appropriately qualified
-   engages in ongoing professional development, and
-   adheres to professional standards

The Resources page has a link to Allied Health professional information
on the Services Services website.

Access to Medicare

Recognition as a health professional for Medicare purposes allows the
professional to access relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS).

Specific health professional eligibility and registration information is
available on individual allied health and non-medical health
professional pages.

For example, Osteopath - provider eligibility and registration or Social
Workers - provider eligibility and registration.

A full list of allied health and non-medical health professional pages
is available under Contents.

Specialty codes

-   Each health professional is assigned a speciality code when
    registered in Provider Directory system (PDS)

Prescriber number

-   Allows the health professional to prescribe medications
-   Not all allied health and non-medical health professionals are
    eligible for this. See the individual allied health or non-medical
    health professional page for more details

Request diagnostic imaging and pathology tests

-   Some professionals are eligible to request diagnostic imaging and
    pathology tests under Medicare
-   Where the request has been raised by a professional who is not
    eligible, the diagnostic imaging/pathology tests are not claimable
    under Medicare

Refer to Specialist or Consultant Physician

-   Most allied health professionals do not write patient referrals to
    Specialists or Consultant Physicians. See the individual allied
    health or non-medical health professional page for referral
    eligibility details
-   Additional information about referrals can also be found on the MBS
    Online website, see the Resources page for a link

90 day cheque scheme

-   Allows for the cancellation of a patient’s cheque when is not
    received, or it is not banked after 90 days
-   This scheme does not apply to allied health or non-medical health
    professional

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS) for further information.

Application for recognition

Allied health professionals and non-medical health professionals apply
to Services Australia for recognition as a specific type of health
professional.

Allied health professionals must complete one of the below forms:

-   Application for a Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number
    for allied health and non-medical health professionals (HW093)
-   Application for a Medicare provider number and/or prescriber number
    or a nurse practitioner or midwife (HW088)

Note: initial provider number applications must include current
accreditation documentation issued by the relevant authority.

Allied health professionals may apply for additional location provider
numbers using the appropriate form, or via Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS).

See Resources page for links forms.

Removal of registration

Allied health and non-medical health professionals may request to no
longer be recognised as a specific type of health professional. This
must be a written request to Services Australia.

Services Australia will also remove a specific type of health
professional recognition when notified by the relevant authority that
the health professional no longer meets Medicare eligibility
requirements.

Disputes regarding the removal of registration

If an allied health or non-medical health professional wishes to dispute
the removal of their recognition as specific type of health
professional, this request should be directed to contact the relevant
authority, for example Ahpra.

The Resources page contains contact information for relevant authorities
as well as links to relevant authority websites.

Application/removal enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition/removal
to the Provider Registration team.

Continuing professional development enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development requirements
to the relevant authority for that health professional.

The Resources page contains links to all Allied Health and Non-medical
health professional information.

Business structure information measure

The mandatory collection of employment status and business structure
information began on 10 September 2018.

It was introduced to improve recovery arrangements for Medicare debts
owed to the Commonwealth under the Health Legislation Amendment
(Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Bill 2018 (see
References page for a link to Health Insurance Act 1973).

Health professionals who intend to claim Medicare benefits are required
to provide employment status and business details when:

-   submitting a new provider number application
-   backdating an existing location start date
-   re-opening a previously closed provider number
-   opening a second provider number at an existing location (with a
    different ABN)

Direct all enquiries about this measure to the Department of Health and
Aged Care, see Resources page for a link.

Disclosure of information and privacy incidents

Services Australia has the responsibility to maintain records relating
to personal and business information. People provide this information
with the understanding it is protected from unauthorised access, use or
disclosure. It is important for customers to remain confident that
Services Australia will protect their information and comply with the
privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by Services Australia
is:

inappropriately collected

lost

subject to unauthorised

-   use
-   access
-   modification
-   disclosure

Privacy incidents may include cases where personal information held by
Services Australia is discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not
up-to-date, incomplete, irrelevant or misleading.

Report all privacy incidents to the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia Privacy and
Secrecy page.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms, websites,
and additional information.

Contents

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner - provider
eligibility and registration

Aboriginal Health Worker – provider eligibility and registration

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Audiologist - provider eligibility and registration

Chiropractor – provider eligibility and registration

Dental Practitioner – provider eligibility and registration

Diabetes educator - provider eligibility and registration

Dietitian - provider eligibility and registration

Exercise physiologist - provider eligibility and registration

Focussed psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health

Mental health nurse - provider eligibility and registration

Midwife – provider eligibility and registration

Nurse Practitioner – provider eligibility and registration

Occupational therapist - provider eligibility and registration

Optometrist – provider eligibility and registration

Orthoptist – provider eligibility and registration

Osteopath - provider eligibility and registration

Physiotherapist – provider eligibility and registration

Podiatrist – provider eligibility and registration

Prescriber number for health professionals in Medicare

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Psychologist – provider eligibility and registration

Social worker – provider eligibility and registration

Speech pathologist - provider eligibility and registration

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Business structure and bank account details for health professionals

Related links

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

Focussed psychological strategies (FPS) - Allied Health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
