
Exercise physiology services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020180

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) exercise physiology services programme for Veterans’
Affairs Processing (VAP).

Government intent

The DVA provides funding to eligible DVA health card holders (the
veteran community) that covers exercise physiology services provided to
entitled persons by registered exercise physiologists. Exercise
physiology service include the delivery of clinical exercise
interventions to manage chronic disease and the provision of post-acute
exercise rehabilitation for people recovering from major injury or
illness.

Exercise physiology services must be claimed in accordance with the
patient’s assessed clinical need.

Services Australia provides claim processing and payment services to
facilitate this programme.

On this Page:

Eligibility to receive DVA exercise physiology services

Members of the veteran community are eligible to receive DVA funded
exercise physiology services based on the type of DVA health care card
they hold:

DVA Gold Card and Totally Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Gold Card
holders

DVA funds most exercise physiology services necessary to meet a clinical
need.

DVA White Card holders

DVA funds exercise physiology services related to the card holder's
accepted disabilities only, and treatment may require prior financial
authorisation before it is started.

The Patient Eligibility for VAP page contains the steps to follow to
verify a DVA health card holder’s eligibility before paying or rejecting
exercise physiology services when the system returns 2-CHK-ELIG message.

DVA health card holders should check that their exercise physiology
service provider accepts the DVA Gold Card and White Card before
starting treatment.

Eligibility to provide DVA exercise physiology services

Exercise physiologists registered with Services Australia at the time of
the service are eligible to provide services to eligible DVA health card
holders.

Providers must also agree to accept DVA treatment arrangements and fees
and meet all of the following criteria:

-   is accredited by Exercise and Sports Science Australia
-   be covered by either their employer’s indemnity insurance or
    maintain their own insurance as mandated by the Exercise and Sports
    Science Australia
-   be qualified and competent to provide the service

DVA fee schedule (item numbers) for exercise physiology services

The DVA Exercise Physiologists Schedule of Fees contains a range of
consultation items available to eligible DVA health card holders for
professional attendances in rooms, or at a place other than rooms
(called domiciliary visits) such as patient’s home, residential aged
care service or institution.

Items in this fee schedule are in the range EP10-EP32 and EP99.

Prior financial authorisation requirements

Exercise physiology service providers may be required to seek prior
financial authorisation from DVA before providing certain exercise
physiology services. The fee schedules contain information on which
items require prior financial authorisation.

To request financial approval, providers must contact DVA before
administering services to be able to claim payment by completing a
Treatment Prior Financial Approval Request form. The Resources page has
a link to the form on the DVA website.

DVA exercise physiology services business rules

These business rules are issued by DVA and are used by VAP staff when
processing claims.

-   Subsequent consultations cannot be claimed on the same day as an
    initial consultation for the same patient. Only 1 subsequent
    consultation per entitled person can be provided each day
-   Group exercise physiology sessions can be claimed using item EP30
    and cannot be claimed on the same day as any other exercise
    physiology item for the same patient
-   Aquatic exercise physiology sessions can be claimed using item EP31
    or EP32. However, travel cannot be claimed. EP31 and EP32 cannot be
    claimed on the same day as any other exercise physiology item for
    the same patient. Only 1 aquatic exercise therapy consultation per
    patient can be provided each day
-   Treatment in high care residential aged care services and public
    hospitals requires prior approval
-   Treatment for White card holders must be related to an accepted
    disability
-   Providers are to comply with billing arrangements as outlined in the
    Notes for Exercise Physiologists. The Resources page contains a link
    to the Notes on the DVA website

DVA exercise physiologist GST obligations

Exercise Physiology services payable by DVA include Goods and Service
Tax (GST) if the business is likely to have an annual turnover of
$75,000 or more.

For exercise physiologists to continue to receive payments in full from
Services Australia they must comply with the requirements of the
Australian Taxation Office GST Legislation.

See also Goods and Services Tax (GST) processing.

Claim lodgement information

DVA exercise physiology services claims can be lodged in 3 ways. The
Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information on claim choices for health professionals.

Paper copies of forms do not need to be retained if claiming online or
via DVA Webclaim. However, a copy of the voucher should be provided to
the DVA health card holder. Service providers should be sure that they
can, from other means of record keeping, satisfy any request from
Services Australia or DVA for evidence of service and details of
treatment.

Online claiming

Exercise physiology service providers can submit electronic claims for
processing without the need to send any paperwork to Services Australia.

The DVA health card holder should be provided with a record of the
treatment provided.

DVA Webclaim

This is a real-time web based electronic claiming channel that allows
health care providers to submit electronic claims via the internet,
without the need to send any paperwork. It is accessed via the Health
Professionals Online Services (HPOS) portal.

Manual (paper based) claim

Exercise physiology service providers are required to lodge a Claim for
Treatment Services (D1217) and Health Practitioner Service Voucher
(D1221) forms. These fillable forms can be printed from the DVA website.
Service providers can use their own invoice forms for submitting
accounts if they can provide the same level of information as required
by the DVA forms. Service providers should post completed forms to
Services Australia for processing as per the instructions on the form.

The Resources page contains a link to how to claim information on the
DVA website.

Claim enquiries

The Resources page contains common enquiries from exercise physiology
service providers.

Enquiries escalation

The VAP National Enquiry Line (Tier 1) is used as the ‘front door’ for
all VAP exercise physiology services enquiries. VAP trained Service
Officers will help with the enquiry or escalate to the appropriate
department for resolution.

For contact details, see Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and DVA
websites, contact details for Veterans’ Affairs Processing (VAP) and
common enquiries from exercise physiology service providers.

Related links

Allied Health for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Claims for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Goods and Services Tax (GST) processing

Patient eligibility codes for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Prior Financial Authorisation (PARS Approval) for Veterans' Affairs
Processing (VAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
