
Focussed psychological strategies for medical practitioners 012-42020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition of additional
mental health training in focussed psychological strategies (FPS).
Focussed psychological strategies are specific mental health care
management strategies derived from evidence based psychological
therapies. These therapies integrate effective research evidence with
general practice expertise.

On this Page:

Focussed psychological strategies

Focussed psychological strategies are specific mental health care
management strategies, derived from evidence based psychological
therapies.

Recognition of a health professional’s additional skills and ongoing
training in FPS acknowledges that specialised skills and ongoing
training are important elements of maintaining high quality standards
within the provision of FPS for assessed mental disorders.

Who can provide these services (eligibility)?

A person is an allied mental health professional in relation to the
provision of a FPS health service if the person meets one of the
following requirements:

The person is a psychologist who is registered without limitation as a
person who may provide that kind of service under the applicable law in
force in that State or Territory in which the service is provided

The person is a member of the Australian Association of Social Workers
(AASW) and certified by AASW as meeting the standards for mental health
set out in the document published by AASW titled ‘Practice Standards for
Mental Health Social Workers’, as in force on 8 November 2008

The person is an occupational therapist who is registered as a person
who may provide that kind of service under the applicable law in force
in the State or Territory in which the service is provided; and is
accredited by Occupational Therapy Australia as:

-   Having a minimum of two years experience in mental health; and
-   Having undertaken to observe the standards set out in the document
    published by Occupational Therapy Australia ‘Australian Competency
    Standards for Occupational Therapists in Mental Health’ as in force
    on 1 November 2006

Eligibility for Recognition

In order for a health professional to be recognised as trained in FPS
for Medicare purposes, the health professional must satisfy the
requirements for higher level mental health training and skills as
determined by the General Practice Mental Health Standards Collaboration
(GPMHSC).

Health professionals practicing as specialists and consultant physicians
are not eligible for recognition.

Access to Medicare

Recognition as a medical health professional trained in FPS for Medicare
purposes allows the health professional to access relevant FPS items in
the MBS.

Continued access to relevant Medicare benefits as a medical health
professional trained in FPS will require the health professional to
continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the Health
Insurance (General Medical Services Table) Regulations 2018.

The Resources page contains a link to the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The References page contains a link to the regulation.

Application for Recognition

Health professionals who have met the higher level mental health
training and skills requirements as determined by the General Practice
Mental Health Standards Collaboration (GPMHSC) to provide FPS do not
need to submit an application to Services Australia directly. The GPMHSC
will inform Services Australia that the health professional meets the
training and skill requirements.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Legislation Recognising Focussed Psychological Strategies

Recognition of a health professional as meeting the training and skill
requirements for FPS is made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or their
delegate) under the Health Insurance (General Medical Services Table)
Regulations 2018 and Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical
Services Other Medical Practitioner) Determination 2018 made under the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

Recognition is recorded on the medical health professional’s stem on the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The References page contains a link to the regulation.

Removal of Recognition

A health professional may ask to no longer be recognised as trained and
skilled in FPS for Medicare purposes by making a written request to
Services Australia. Services Australia will also remove a medical health
professional’s recognition of training in FPS if notified by the GPMHSC
that the health professional no longer meets Medicare eligibility
requirements.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a health professional wishes to dispute the removal of their
recognition in FPS, they should be directed to contact the GPMHSC.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition should
be made to the Provider Registration team.

Direct enquires about processing a removal request should be made to
National Office Helpdesk.

Continuing Professional Development Enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development for FPS
should be made to the GPMHSC.

The Resources page contains contact information for the GPMHSC.

Disclosure of Information / Privacy Incidents

Services Australia has the responsibility to maintain records relating
to personal and business information. People provide this information
with the understanding that Services Australia will protect this from
unauthorised access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to
remain confident that Services Australia will protect their information
and comply with the privacy provisions of the various legislation it
administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by Services Australia
is inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by Services Australia is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia’s Privacy and
Secrecy page.

Related links

Better Access Initiative under Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
