
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) Program in Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) 012-18053100

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This document outlines details of PBS-subsidised nusinersen,
onasemnogene abeparvovec and risdiplam for patients with spinal muscular
atrophy (SMA).

SMA and listing dates

Spinal muscular atrophy is a rare neuromuscular disorder characterised
by loss of motor neurons and progressive muscle wasting, often leading
to early death.

Listing dates are:

-   nusinersen - public hospital patients - 1 June 2018
-   nusinersen – private hospital patients - 1 November 2018
-   risdiplam - 1 August 2021
-   onasemnogene abeparvovec – public hospital patients – 1 May 2022

For more information, see Written Authority Required Drugs.

Treatment specifics

Where the term ‘disease modifying therapy’ appears, it is referring to
nusinersen or risdiplam, and ‘gene therapy’ is referring to onasemnogene
abeparvovec.

Nusinersen is PBS-subsidised for both symptomatic SMA, and
pre-symptomatic SMA. There are 2 separate initial restrictions for each
indication, with different clinical criteria.

Risdiplam is currently only PBS-subsidised for symptomatic SMA.
Risdiplam is not required to be prescribed in consultation with a
recognised hospital. This is because unlike nusinersen, a medical
procedure is not required for a patient to receive risdiplam treatment,
as it is administered orally.

Onasemnogene abeparvovec is a PBS-subsidised gene therapy for both
symptomatic Type 1 SMA and pre-symptomatic SMA for patients less than 9
months of age. Treatment with onasemnogene abeparvovec is once only in a
lifetime.

Enquiries

Transfer enquiries about prescription arrangements to the PBS Complex
Drugs Programs team and choose the option relevant to the condition
treated.

Service Officers who receive a call about payments in relation to
nusinersen or onasemnogene abeparvovec are required to record the
caller's details and escalate via email to the Tier 3 PBS Help Desk for
investigation.

The Tier 3 PBS Help Desk will respond to pharmacies who contact the
agency with payment enquiries relating to nusinersen (Spinraza®) or
onasemnogene abeparvovec (Zolgensma®).

There are special arrangements in place for the claiming and payment of
the above mentioned 2 drugs due to:

-   the high Dispense Price for Maximum Quantity (DPMQ) for both drugs,
    and
-   database constraints in Services Australia PBS systems

The Resources page contains links to application forms, contact details,
item and restriction codes, Zolgensma payment arrangements, the PBS
schedule and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Contacting a Health Service Delivery Division Programme Support Officer
(PSO)

Manage work items in PaNDA

Online Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) Authorities System (OPA
System)

Process telephone Authority approval application

Processing written authority approval requests

Processing Written Authority Required Listings

Written Authority Required Drugs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
