
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage healthcare provider general
enquiries, issues and feedback about the Healthcare Identifiers (HI)
Service and the My Health Record system.

Incidents and urgent provider requests and enquiries

If a healthcare provider calls with an enquiry that needs immediate
action, or action within 24 hours because someone's life is at risk, see
Manage My Health Record incidents and urgent enquiries

Accessing the My Health Record National Provider Portal (NPP)

To access the My Health Record NPP a provider needs to:

be registered with the HI Service

be linked to an organisation that is registered in the My Health Record
system

-   this is an authorisation link which an Organisation Maintenance
    Officer (OMO) creates

have a PRODA account or a National Authentication Service for Health
(NASH) Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) individual account

-   they link this account to the providers record in the HI Service

Note: NASH PKI individual certificates will cease by June 2020. They can
still be used to access the NPP until they expire.

Issues accessing the My Health Record NPP

The most common reason why a provider cannot access the NPP is because
they are not linked to an organisation.

If a healthcare provider calls to say they are having access issues,
check the below details:

-   their PRODA account is linked to their Healthcare Provider
    Identifier – Individual (HPI-I). This is an eBusiness process
-   they are linked to the healthcare provider organisation they work
    for. This is a Provider HI Service Support process
-   the NPP system is working. This is a Provider HI Service and My
    Health Record Subject Matter (SME) process

The Resources page has a link to the My Health Record website. This has
details about what a provider needs to do to access the NPP.

See also:

-   Healthcare Identifiers (HI) service
-   My Health Record
-   Accessing the National Provider Portal (NPP) table on the Process
    page

Healthcare providers offering Assisted Registration

Healthcare providers can offer My Health Record registrations to
individuals using the Assisted Registrations tool (ART).

ART is not a Services Australia tool. If a healthcare provider contacts
Services Australia with questions about ART:

-   tell them to contact the Assisted Registration Tool team at the
    Australian Digital Health Agency, and
-   give them the relevant contact details

The Resources page contains links to the My Health Record website. This
has details about assisted registrations for healthcare providers. It
also has contact details for the My Health Record system.

Issues accessing or using the My Health Record system using their practice software

If a provider is having trouble accessing or using the My Health Record
system with their software, tell them to contact their software vendor
helpdesk first.

An example of a technical issue is when the provider gets an error
message when they are trying to upload a document.

Provider general enquiries

The Services Australia handles My Health Record registration enquiries.

For a see organisation, registration in the My Health Record system
occurs as part of an organisation registering in the HI Service.

For a networked organisation, registration in the My Health Record
system is done separately once the organisation is registered in the HI
Service.

For all other general My Health Record provider enquiries:

-   tell the caller to visit the My Health Record website, and
-   to select the For healthcare professionals button

See the Resources page for a link to this website.

Feedback

Providers may call to give feedback.

See Managing customer complaints and feedback.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, the My Health
Record website and Provider Digital Access (PRODA) website.

Related links

Create Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisation (HPI-O) record for
seed organisation in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

Handle call from Responsible Officer (RO), Organisation Maintenance
Officer (OMO) or Contracted Service Provider (CSP) on behalf of an
organisation

Link a healthcare provider to a healthcare organisation in the Provider
Participation Register (PPR)

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Manage My Health Record incidents and urgent enquiries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
