-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for recovering overpaid funds.

Recovery of overpayments

Overpayments funds are debts owed to the Commonwealth of Australia.

All overpayments must be recovered in accordance with the Public
Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013.

The Service Officer who identifies the overpayment will initiate the
recovery action and Program Management (Payments team) will confirm the
recovery amount.

A Recovery Officer in the Incentives Processing team finalises the
recoveries process by quality checking and collating the recovery
documents and sending them to the debt recovery team to recover the
debt.

The debt recovery team manage the remainder of the process.

Consider all incentive payments when calculating the total amount to
recover. This includes:

-   PIP
-   WIP - Practice Stream
-   GP ACAI

Recovery letters

Service Officers must send a separate letter for each program if the
overpaid funds are for a mix of PIP, WIP - Practice Stream and/or GP
ACAI payments, using the correct recovery letter template.

Do not consolidate recovery letters, even if the letters are for the
same debtor.

When completing a recovery letter, check PIP and WIP Online for a change
of ownership, and ensure the letter is addressed to the owner of the
practice at the point-in-time date that the overpayment occurred. The
previous practice owner must provide their forwarding address on the
Practice Incentives Change of practice ownership (IP010) form.

See the Practice Incentives letters list for a list of recovery letters.

See also Forms and letters for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Voluntary reimbursement

A voluntary reimbursement is when a debtor returns overpaid funds by
cheque without having been notified of an overpayment by Services
Australia.

A Recoveries Officer will initiate the recoveries process.

The Process page has the procedure.

Incentives payment requirements

Incentive payments are calculated using the information provided by the
practice and Medicare and Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) data at
the point-in-time date.

A practice must tell Services Australia about changes to practice
arrangements:

-   within 7 days of the change, or
-   at least 7 days before the point-in-time date

Delays in notifying Services Australia of changes to practice
arrangements or practice eligibility can result in an overpayment.

Services Australia is required by law to recover all ineligible
payments.

All overpaid funds need to be recovered if the practice fails to do
this.

See also Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Compliance

The Department of Health and Aged Care (Health) conducts audit and
compliance activity for the PIP and WIP - Practice Stream.

In 2021, Health undertook voluntary compliance activity and recovered
funds for:

-   PIP After Hours Incentive
-   Procedural GP Payment, and
-   WIP – Practice Stream

Before starting recovery action, the Recoveries Officer must email
Program Management to seek confirmation that the debt has not already
been pursued by Health.

The Process page has the procedure. More information is on the Resources
page.

Scenarios

Practice closure

A practice is not entitled to receive payments for the payment in which
the practice closes.

Establish the date of the closure to see if an overpayment was made.

For example, if the practice closes in January and notifies Services
Australia in June, the February and May payments must be recovered.

A practice will not be eligible to claim PIP Teaching Payments for
teaching sessions that were provided by the practice in the same payment
reference period that the practice is closed or withdrawn from the PIP.

Change of practice ownership

The previous owner/s are not entitled to receive payments after the date
of sale notified on the IP010 form.

Services Australia will make payments to the bank account details held
on record at the point-in-time date. If a delay in notifying Services
Australia of a change of ownership results in a payment dispute, the
matter must be resolved privately between the old and new owner.

If an internal administrative error results in a payment being made to
the old owner, escalate the issue to Program Management.

Practice eligibility for payment

A practice is not entitled to receive payments if it does not meet the
program or individual incentive eligibility criteria for the entire
payment quarter.

A practice is not entitled to receive payment for individual incentives
where the practice does not meet:

-   the eligibility criteria, or
-   the requirements of their nominated payment tier/level by the
    point-in-time date

Where practice circumstances have changed, the practice is obligated to
withdraw, opt-out or amend their nominated payment tier/level prior to
the point-in-time date to avoid overpayment.

Establish the date the eligibility criteria or payment requirements were
no longer met to see if an overpayment was made.

For example, if a procedural GP left a practice in June and the practice
receives a Procedural GP payment in August, the practice did not meet
the eligibility criteria and the practice has received an overpayment.
This is because the general practitioner (GP) ceased working at the
practice during the payment reference period, and the practice failed to
notify Services Australia prior to the point-in-time date.

Incorrect provider information

A practice can be overpaid or underpaid if a GP is registered
incorrectly. For example:

-   the incorrect provider number is registered
-   the practice has provided a provider number that relates to a
    different practice

For example, a practitioner is registered a practice A and practice B.
The provider uses the provider number for practice A while working at
practice B,

Establish the dates and the payment quarters the GP worked at the
practice to see if an overpayment was made and escalate to the Local
Peer Support (LPS). Program Management will confirm the recovery amount.

GP ACAI

General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) payments are
made to the bank account advised by the GP. It is up to the GP to ensure
correct banking details are recorded in Provider Directory System (PDS)
by the point-in-time date.

Services Australia will make payments to the bank account details held
on record at the point-in-time date. If a delay in notifying Services
Australia of a change of bank details results in a payment dispute, the
matter must be resolved privately.

If an internal administrative error is made when recording bank account
details, escalate to Program Management.

See also Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

The Resources page contains information for a checklist for recovery of
overpayment for Incentive Programs, handling calls, monthly reporting
and audit enquiries.

Related links

Payments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Forms and letters for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice closure or withdrawal in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) for Practice
Incentives Program (PIP)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
