
Transcatheter Mitral Valve repair (TMVr) - recognition and removal 012-21062817

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition and removal of
specialists or consultant physicians as eligible to provide
Transcatheter Mitral Valve repair (TMVr) for Medicare purposes.

Recognition of training in Transcatheter Mitral Valve repair (TMVr)

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in TMVr
acknowledges that training and ongoing education are important elements
of maintaining high quality standards within the provision of TMVr
services.

Access to Medicare

Recognition for Medicare purposes as a specialist or consultant
physician trained in TMVr allows the medical practitioner to access
relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Continued access to relevant MBS items requires the medical practitioner
to continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the
Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services – Transcatheter
Mitral Valve Repair) Determination 2021.

Eligibility for recognition

To be recognised as trained in TMVr for Medicare purposes, a specialist
or consultant physician must be accredited by the Cardiac Accreditation
Services Limited (CASL). This process was introduced 1 July 2021.

Application for Recognition

Specialists or consultant physicians accredited by CASL do not need to
complete an application for recognition for Medicare purposes. CASL
provides written confirmation to Services Australia directly regarding a
medical practitioner’s recognition of training in TMVr.

Recognition is recorded on the medical practitioner’s stem and provider
number in the Provider Directory System (PDS). The medical practitioner
must advise CASL which location they will perform TMVr from, as the
hospital must be accredited.

Legislation Recognising Transcatheter Mitral Valve repair (TMVr)

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in TMVr
service is made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate)
under the Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services –
Transcatheter Mitral Valve Repair) Determination 2021.

The References page contains links to the legislation and determination.

Removal of recognition

A medical practitioner may ask to no longer be recognised for Medicare
purposes as trained in TMVr by making a written request to the agency.
The agency will also remove a medical practitioner’s recognition of
training in TMVr if notified by CASL that the medical practitioner no
longer meets Medicare eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a specialist or consultant physician wants to dispute the removal of
their recognition in TMVr, advise them to contact the TMVr Accreditation
Committee.

See Resources for a link to the TMVr Accreditation Committee - Contact
internet page.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition/removal
to the Provider Registration team.

Continuing Professional Development Enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development to the TMVr
Accreditation Committee.

See Resources for a link to the TMVr Accreditation Committee - Contact
internet page.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has a responsibility to maintain records relating to personal
and business information. People provide this information with the
understanding that our agency will protect this from unauthorised
access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain
confident that our agency will protect their information and comply with
the privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the Privacy and Secrecy intranet
page.

The Resources page contains links to letters, contact details, intranet
and external websites, and document examples.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
