
Create Contracted Service Provider (CSP) organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to create Contracted Service Provider (CSP)
organisation record in Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service.

On this Page:

CSP organisations

A CSP organisation is an entity that provides information technology
(IT) services to an organisation. They either:

-   communicate health information
-   provide health information management services under a contract with
    a healthcare organisation

The CSP organisation is a legal entity that is registered with the HI
Service by the individual who will become the CSP officer of the CSP
organisation. A CSP organisation can access the suite of Healthcare
Identifiers Service functionality once they are registered and when 1 or
more active Healthcare Provider Identifier - Organisations (HPI-O) links
exist. The link must be requested by the Responsible Officer (RO) of the
HPI-O organisation that wants the CSP to act on their behalf. The CSP
can access the same suite of HI transactions and processes as a HPI-O
except for:

-   managing organisation structures or joining a network hierarchy
-   accessing or holding a standard Healthcare Provider Directory entry

Requirements for new CSP records

When a Service Officer creates a CSP record for a CSP organisation, the
following must be provided:

-   completed Application to Register a Contracted Service Provider form
-   documentary evidence that the CSP is a legal business entity
-   documentary evidence that the CSP officer is authorised to act on
    behalf of the CSP
-   evidence of identity for the CSP officer

A CSP organisation must:

-   have at least 1 and up to a maximum of 3 CSP Officers linked
-   have an Australian Business Number (ABN) or an Australian Company
    Number (ACN)
-   be created by a Service Officer

Linking a CSP organisation to an HPI-O

A CSP organisation cannot access the HI Service until linked to an
active organisation (HPI-O). CSP organisation records can be active,
deactivated or retired:

-   an active record is where a CSP organisation is registered and
    linked to at least 1 HPI-O record
-   a deactivated record is where a CSP organisation is registered but
    not linked to any HPI-O record
-   a retired record is where a CSP organisation is no longer registered
    with the HI Service

When a CSP organisation record is created it will automatically be set
to a status of deactivated. Until a HPI-O record has been linked to the
CSP organisation record, the CSP organisation record will remain
deactivated.

A public key infrastructure (PKI) location certificate for the CSP
organisation may be requested at the time of registration. The HI
Service permissions will not be activated until the CSP organisation
becomes active, that is, linked to a HPI-O. An organisation must either
be a HPI-O or a CSP organisation - the 1 entity cannot take 2 roles
within the HI Service. Note: a RA number is also known as a PKI
registration number.

Linking ROs and OMOs as CSP Officers to a CSP organisation

Existing RO and Organisation Maintenance Officer (OMO) in the HI Service
can be linked to a CSP organisation as a CSP Officer. Duplicate checking
will automatically occur in the system to ensure that a duplicate to an
existing record is not created.

A CSP Officer:

-   is the only individual who can apply to create a CSP organisation
-   must be registered first with an active record in the HI Service
    before they can create a CSP organisation

An existing RO or OMO can be registered as a CSP Officer and linked to a
CSP when appropriate documentation has been supplied.

A CSP officer for a CSP organisation must be registered in the HI
service before or at the time of creating that CSP organisation.

The HI Service creates a unique CSP identifier.

A manual letter is prepared and mailed to the CSP Officer as
confirmation of the CSP organisation registration.

Recording transaction requests

For every transaction request in the eHealth Program (EHP) application
via a Service Officer, details of the person making the request must be
entered. In addition to the Service Officer details, the details of the
requestor are also recorded.

Related links

Searching for records in the Healthcare Identifiers Service using the
eHealth Program (EHP)

Authentication required to access digital health

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
