
Mental health nurse - provider eligibility and registration 012-18062131

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for mental health nurses.

On this Page:

Mental health nurses

Mental health nursing is a specialised field of nursing which focuses on
working with people to meet their mental health recovery goals.

This qualification is issued to registered nurses who demonstrate they
meet specific criteria in relation to:

-   registration
-   education
-   experience, and
-   professional development

It is valid for 3 years.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about a registration to the Australian College of
Mental Health Nurses (ACMHN). The Resources page has the contact
details.

Non-directive pregnancy support counselling (PSC)

Mental health nurses can also undertake additional training in pregnancy
support counselling (PSC) with the Australian College of Mental Health
Nurses (ACMHN).

This endorsement is recorded on their Medicare Provider Directory System
(PDS) record.

The ACMHN advises Services Australia of mental health nurses who have
completed this training and been granted a certificate of completion. A
health professional may also submit their certificate of completion in
Perinatal Non-Directive Counselling Training: V2 to Services Australia
confirming their endorsement. Endorsement is then recorded on PDS.

This qualification does not have an end date.

Services Australia eligibility and registration

To be registered with Services Australia, an applicant must:

-   be recognised as a Credentialed Mental Health Nurse by the
    Australian College of Mental Health Nurses (ACMHN)
-   provide a copy of the ACMHN certification with the initial
    application for a provider number

Peak processing periods are December to April.

Non-directive Pregnancy Support Counselling (PSC) endorsement

In order for a mental health nurse to be recognised as trained in PSC:

-   The ACMHN advises Services Australia the details of who has
    completed the training
-   A health professional may also submit a copy of their certificate of
    course completion in Perinatal Non-Directive Counselling Training:
    V2 issued by the Australian Psychological Society
-   Registration is recorded on the Medicare provider stem in the
    Provider Directory System (PDS)
-   Further confirmation of completion (such as a certificate) is not
    required if PDS shows a current Australian (AUS) registration in the
    Registration section of the provider's record

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers escalate
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility and Accreditation
team in National Office for assistance if required.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, contact details and
links to external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
