
Aboriginal Health Worker - provider eligibility and registration 012-41020030

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility and registration requirements for
Aboriginal Health Workers.

On this Page:

Aboriginal Health Worker (AHW)

An AHW is an allied health professional who provides health services to
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

They are eligible for a Medicare provider number, unless they provide
services in the Northern Territory. In this case they are an Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Island Health Practitioner.

AHW's must be employed in:

-   Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs), or
-   the Government Health Sector, or
-   mainstream services such as general practices and other
    non-government organisations

They provide clinical and primary health care for individuals, families
and community groups.

They deal with patients, clients and visitors to hospitals and health
clinics and assist in arranging, coordinating and providing health care.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must have certification of either of the following from an
approved registered training organisation (RTO):

-   Certificate III (equivalent or higher) in Aboriginal and/or Torres
    Strait Islander Primary Health Care, or
-   Certificate III (equivalent or higher) in Aboriginal and Torres
    Strait Islander Health - before 1 July 2012

The Resources page has a current list of approved RTOs. Service Officers
can do an RTO search if a training organisation, not on this list,
submits a certificate. Service Officers can search using the RTO number
listed on the certificate to check if the organisation is currently
registered. The Resources page contains a link to the Organisation/RTO
search. Where the search confirms the certificate III in Aboriginal
and/or Torres Strait Islander Primary Health Care is from a current RTO
this certificate can be accepted and the application can be processed.

If certification is from an unapproved RTO, their qualification may
still be an equivalent or higher one. The AHW must provide:

-   qualification certificate, and
-   independent assessment by an approved RTO advising qualification is
    equivalent or higher

Where they provide independent assessment, the application is processed.
The details of the assessment advice are sent by a Programme Officer
(PO) to Provider Eligibility in National Office. They add the details to
the list of approved courses.

An AHW must supply evidence of qualification with an initial provider
number application.

If additional confirmation of independent assessment by an RTO is not
provided, the application should be returned as incomplete.

See also:

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Keeping details current

All health professionals are required to keep their details current with
Services Australia.

Change of name

Aboriginal Health Workers are not required to register with a
registration authority or professional body. They must notify Services
Australia of any name changes directly, and supply evidence using 1 of
the below documents:

-   Standard marriage certificate (ceremonial certificates are not
    accepted)
-   Deed poll
-   Change of name certificate
-   Current driver licence
-   Current passport

To revert to a maiden name, a copy of the full birth certificate is
required.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers escalate
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO) who will liaise with a PO who will escalate to Provider
Eligibility in National Office for assistance if required.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, useful contact
information, and links to external websites.

Related Links

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Practitioner - provider
eligibility and registration

Services provided by practice nurses and Aboriginal Health Workers for
Medicare assessing

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
