
Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) in private hospitals 012-63040020

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) can be
dispensed in private hospitals.

On this Page:

HSD in private hospitals

Prescriptions for HSDs can be dispensed by an approved private
hospital's pharmacy (s94) or by a community pharmacy (s90).

Note: there are additional options for items supplied under the Highly
Specialised Drugs Community Access programme. See the Resources page for
a diagram showing the new arrangements.

Services Australia administers HSD Authority approval arrangements and
payment of claims for HSDs.

HSD private hospital approval

HSDs are classified as Authority Required items.

The prescriber must seek Authority approval from Services Australia,
before prescribing a HSD to be supplied via a private hospital pharmacy
or community pharmacy.

Prescribers must quote the hospital provider number when applying in
writing.

The prescriber must provide a private or public hospital provider number
for Complex Authority Required (CAR) and HSD items. They must do this in
writing or by telephone at the time of application.

HSD and CAR private hospital items:

-   can be approved under private item codes
-   when prescribers use participating public hospital prescription
    stationery to prescribe these items

Exceptions to the quantity and number of repeats approved may include
complex listings that have specific limitations on the quantity and
repeats that can be prescribed. See Written Authority Required Drugs.

Approval is contingent upon the hospital accepting the following
conditions, ensuring that:

-   supply is to eligible community patients
-   prescribing is in accordance with the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) criteria. These reflect the recommendations of the
    Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) and are consistent
    with the therapeutic uses approved by the Therapeutic Goods
    Administration (TGA) for the supply of the drug

Harmonisation of Authority Required (Streamlined) listings across public and private hospitals

HSDs can be prescribed though private hospitals using Authority Required
(Streamlined) codes.

Private and public hospital listings have different item codes and
Authority Required (Streamlined) codes for the same medicines.
Prescribers must check that the correct combination of item and
Authority Required (Streamlined) codes are used for each prescription,
according to the appropriate type of hospital.

HSD listing in PBS Schedule

The Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits (PBS Schedule) lists HSD items
in two sections:

-   one section for public hospitals, and
-   the other section private hospitals

Information in the sections include the addition of maximum quantities
and specified number of repeats for all HSD drugs for private and public
hospitals.

HSDs for private hospitals remain Authority required.

The Resources page contains a diagram of the improved community access
arrangements under the HSD program.

Related links

Private hospitals approved to prescribe and/or supply Highly Specialised
Drugs (HSD)

Highly Specialised Drugs (HSD) Program

Authority approval processing for Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
