
Computed Tomography of the Coronary Arteries (CTCA) - recognition and removal 012-18062208

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the recognition and removal of
specialists or consultant physicians as eligible to provide Computed
Tomography of the Coronary Arteries (CTCA) for Medicare purposes.

On this Page:

Recognition of Training in CTCA

Recognition of a specialist or consultant physician as trained in CTCA
acknowledges that training and ongoing education are important elements
of maintaining high quality standards within the provision, supervision
and reporting of CT Coronary Angiography services.

Access to Medicare

Recognition for Medicare purposes as a specialist or consultant
physician trained in CTCA allows the medical practitioner to access
relevant items in the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS).

Continued access to relevant MBS items requires the medical practitioner
to continue to meet the eligibility requirements as detailed in the
Health Insurance (Diagnostic Imaging Services Table) Regulations 2020.

Eligibility for Recognition

In order to be recognised as trained in CTCA for Medicare purposes, a
specialist or consultant physician must be recognised by the Conjoint
Committee for the Recognition of Training in CT Coronary Angiography
(the Conjoint Committee).

Application for Recognition

Specialists or consultant physicians recognised by the Conjoint
Committee do not need to complete an application for recognition for
Medicare purposes. The Conjoint Committee advises Services Australia
directly regarding a medical practitioner’s recognition of training in
CTCA by the Conjoint Committee.

Legislation Recognising CTCA

Recognition as a specialist or consultant physician trained in CTCA is
made by the Chief Executive Medicare (or their delegate) under the
Health Insurance (Diagnostic Imaging Services Table) Regulations 2020.

Recognition is recorded on the medical practitioner’s stem in the
Provider Directory System (PDS).

The References page contains links to the legislation and regulation.

Removal of Recognition

A medical practitioner may request recognition for CTCA is removed for
Medicare purposes by making a written request to Services Australia. The
agency will also remove a medical practitioner’s recognition of training
in CTCA if notified by the Conjoint Committee that the specialist or
consultant physician no longer meets Medicare eligibility requirements.

Disputes Regarding the Removal of Recognition

If a specialist or consultant physician wishes to dispute the removal of
their recognition as trained in CTCA they should be directed to contact
the Conjoint Committee.

The Resources page contains contact information for the Conjoint
Committee.

Application/Removal Enquiries

Direct enquiries about processing an application for recognition/removal
to the Provider Registration team.

Continuing Professional Development Enquiries

Direct enquiries about continuing professional development to the
Conjoint Committee.

The Resources page contains contact information for the Conjoint
Committee.

Disclosure of information/Privacy Incidents

The agency has the responsibility to maintain records relating to
personal and business information. People provide this information with
the understanding that our agency will protect this from unauthorised
access, use or disclosure. It is important for customers to remain
confident that our agency will protect their information and comply with
the privacy provisions of the various legislation it administers.

A privacy incident can occur when information held by the agency is
inappropriately collected, lost, subject to unauthorised
use/access/modification, and/or disclosure. Privacy incidents may
include cases where personal information held by the agency is
discovered to be incorrect, inaccurate, not up-to-date, incomplete,
irrelevant or misleading. All privacy incidents should be reported to
the team leader immediately.

The Resources page contains a link to the agency's Privacy and Secrecy
page.

The Resources page contains links to contacts, websites, letters and
examples.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
