
Physiotherapist - provider eligibility and registration 012-18070323

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about eligibility and registration
requirements for physiotherapists.

On this Page:

Physiotherapists

Physiotherapists are allied health professionals who assess, diagnose,
treat and prevent a wide range of health conditions and movement
disorders.

Physiotherapy helps:

-   repair damage
-   reduce stiffness and pain
-   increase mobility, and
-   improve quality of life

Physiotherapy extends from health promotion to injury prevention, acute
care, rehabilitation, maintenance of functional mobility, chronic
disease management, patient and carer education and occupational health.

Disputes about removing a registration

Direct any disputes about registration to the Australian Health
Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra). The Resources page has the
contact details.

Medicare eligibility and registration

An applicant must have current registration to practise physiotherapy
with the Physiotherapy Board of Australia. This board is supported by
the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Evidence of registration may be:

-   a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate submitted with an
    initial application for a provider number
-   an existing 'shell' record in the Provider Directory System (PDS)
    where registration details are prepopulated
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Registration is renewed annually on 30 November.

The Resources page has a link to the Ahpra website.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line and email inbox, managed by
Medicare Provider Services (MPS), are used as the front door for all
enquiries relating to processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer trained in
all aspects of provider registration. These Service Officers raise
complex enquiries to their team leader or a Programme Support Officer
(PSO). Where required, the enquiry will be escalated to a Programme
Officer (PO) who will liaise with the Provider Eligibility team in
National Office for assistance.

The Resources page contains a quick reference guide, useful contacts,
and links to external websites.

Related links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Physiotherapy services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
