-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about amending the Location Specific
Practice Number (LSPN) register.

Authorised representative

An authorised representative must be nominated for partnerships,
companies, government agencies and public bodies. This person may also
be the responsible executive officer who signs the form, but the 2 roles
are to be distinguished. Examples of a responsible executive officer
include:

-   Chief Executive Officers
-   Account Managers, and
-   Directors

The nomination of an authorised representative is optional for practices
owned by an individual.

The proprietor, or a currently listed authorised representative, must
sign the amendment form to nominate a new authorised representative. If
one of the above are not able to sign the form, the practice must:

-   have the forms signed by someone in a managerial position at the
    practice
-   include a signed letter outlining the change and why an authorised
    representative is unavailable to sign the declaration form

Note: authorised representatives cannot nominate themselves.

Both authorised representatives have equal authority to act on the
proprietor’s behalf. The only difference between the 2 is that system
generated correspondence is addressed to the primary authorised
representative.

Where a new Authorised Representative:

has been nominated on the amendment form, and

the form is not signed by a listed proprietor or current Authorised
Representative:

-   the applicant can attach a letter to the form that has been signed
    by a responsible executive officer authorising the change of
    representative
-   this request must explain the authority this person has to act on
    behalf of the proprietor, including their position
-   it must also outline the circumstances which prevented the eligible
    people from signing the request

Service Officers must address manual correspondence to the authorised
representative or proprietor that sent the request/forms.

LSPN and HPOS

Users who have their HPOS account linked to their LSPN registration can:

-   view
-   amend, and
-   renew their practice registration online

See LSPN and systems (Provider Directory System and Health Professional
Online Services) for more details on LSPN and HPOS.

Annual LSPN updates

Diagnostic Imaging and Radiation Oncology Practices are required to
update registration details as recorded by Services Australia (the
agency) when those changes occur. An annual reminder letter is sent to
practices requesting an update to details contained on the register.

Should an authorised person from the practice fail to respond by the
'end date,' their registration may be suspended. If they fail to respond
within 3 months from the date of suspension, their registration may be
cancelled.

Service Officers renew the registration of active and suspended
practices. Registrations of active and suspended practices can also be
renewed via HPOS by an Administrator. Delegate approval is required to
suspend or cancel a practice. Delegate approval is required to reinstate
a cancelled practice registration. Any request to register a practice
which was cancelled in the previous 12 months must be escalated to Local
Peer Support (LPS) for consideration by the Pathology and Diagnostic
Imaging Team.

For more details on the renewal, suspension and cancellation process,
see Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN)
registration for Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO)

The Process page contains processing instructions for annual LSPN
practice registration renewals and suspensions.

The Resources page contains links to forms, contact details and examples
relating to the LSPN register.

Requests for equipment lists

A practice may require an equipment list to confirm that equipment on
the LSPN record is correctly listed and current as part of their annual
review. Practices must access their equipment list through HPOS. This
information is no longer available via email except in exceptional
circumstances. Do not provide equipment lists to practices under any
circumstances.

HPOS

HPOS users can download an equipment list at any time if linked to the
LSPN record as an Administrator or Staff. Please guide practice staff on
how they can register for HPOS and be linked to their LSPN record if
they aren’t already.

See LSPN - HPOS User Guide for more details.

Accreditation

A diagnostic imaging practice can only request accreditation of
Diagnostic Imaging modalities with an accreditor once the practice is
registered and been allocated an LSPN. The practice can then contact one
of the 3 approved accrediting bodies to arrange accreditation:

-   HDAA Australia Pty Ltd (HDAA)
-   Quality Innovation Performance (QIP)
-   National Association of Testing Authorities Australia (NATA)

The chosen accrediting body will provide a report to the agency with the
modalities and accreditation period for which the practice has been
accredited. Eligibility for Medicare benefits for services on specified
modalities will commence on the accreditation start date.

Current accreditation details are available on the published extract of
the LSPN register from 19 June 2022. The Resources page contains a link
to the register.

Note: accreditation is not required for Radiation Oncology practices.

Processing Accreditation Reports in PDS

Accreditation reports are sent to the agency and uploaded into PaNDA.
There are 4 types of accreditations updates. These include:

-   creating new start and end dates for each modality
-   ending accreditation for a modality
-   amending existing start and end dates for a modality
-   renewing accreditation for each modality

Only one current accrediting body should be listed on the Modality
Accreditation screen. Where there is no cessation report for a previous
accreditation, the previous accreditation body is contacted to obtain a
copy of the cessation report prior to processing the new modality
report.

Capital sensitivity on equipment

The capital sensitivity measure’s purpose is to encourage diagnostic
imaging practices to regularly upgrade, and replace their equipment.
This provides more access to higher quality equipment.

This means that any diagnostic imaging services that have been performed
are no longer payable where that equipment:

-   has exceeded its effective life age, or
-   maximum extended life age

Diagnostic imaging services are still payable when they have a current
approved exemption.

This is in place for almost all diagnostic imaging equipment providing
services (excluding PET and radiation oncology) under Medicare.

See Eligibility and Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for
Diagnostic Imaging (DI) and Radiation Oncology (RO) for more details on
capital sensitivity.

MRI equipment

MRI equipment is not automatically eligible for Medicare payable
services. There are currently 3 types of MRI equipment to reflect this:

-   Fully eligible (MR1)
-   Partially eligible (MR3)
-   Ineligible (MR4)

Medicare eligible MRI equipment

MRI equipment must be co-located in a practice which also provides
x-ray, ultrasound and computed tomography services in order to be
eligible for Medicare benefits.

In addition to this requirement, an MRI machine can be fully eligible if
it is:

-   granted a licence from the Department of Health and Aged Care, or
-   located in a MMM 2-7 area (after 1 November 2022)

MRI equipment can only become partially eligible if a licence is granted
by the Department of Health and Aged Care.

Eligible MRI providers

To provide services on eligible MRI equipment a specialist must have
ongoing participation in the Royal Australian College of Radiologists'
quality and accreditation program. Failure to do so will result in the
cancellation of Medicare eligibility to provide MRI services.

Provider eligibility is effective from the date a complete LSPN form is
received by the agency or a future date if specified.

All requests for backdating eligibility to perform MRI services are
escalated to Provider Services Support via LPS. Provider Services
Support forward to the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging Team.

Linking an MRI provider to an LSPN Register on a PDS record

On receipt of a complete LSPN form from a proprietor or an authorised
representative, Service Officers must ensure:

-   active MRI equipment is located at the LSPN site
-   the provider names and numbers listed on the form are specialists in
    radiology with access to Medicare benefits, and
-   the address of the provider location matches the address of the LSPN
    site

Note: in the case of hospitals, minor variations in the address are
permitted due to hospitals often having multiple entry points. The name
of the hospital should however match.

If the provider is eligible link them to the LSPN. The system will
automatically add the MRI specialty code 118 to the Provider Stem and
Location.

When an MRI provider is linked to the LSPN register, the system will
check whether the LSPN address exactly matches the provider location
address. If there is a match, the provider location address will be
locked and cannot be amended.

The provider location cannot be edited until the:

-   LSPN address is amended to be different to the provider location, or
-   provider link to the LSPN is end dated

The system is designed to automatically add the MRI specialty code (118)
to the Provider Stem and Location if the MRI provider has been linked to
the LSPN and the Provider Stem has a current 046 or 047 specification
code.

To prevent inappropriate claiming, whenever the specialty codes 046 or
047 are end dated, the specialty code 118 on the provider stem and
provider locations will need to be end dated at the same time.

If an MRI provider is unlinked or end dated from an LSPN then the system
will end date the 118 at the relevant provider location with the same
end date.

List of MRI providers

Practice staff that have access to the LSPN in HPOS will be able to
generate a list of MRI providers for that site.

For further information see the Resources page for a link to the HPOS
user guide.

Transfer of MRI eligibility

Transfers of MRI eligibility within MMM1 areas have to be approved by
the Department of Health and Aged Care (Health). Processing can only be
done once National Office receives approval via email notification from
Health.

Health will provide the date and details for the return of eligibility
to the original site or equipment.

Cardiac MRI providers

Cardiac MRI providers are:

-   a specialist in diagnostic radiology or a consultant physician; and
-   recognised by the Conjoint Committee for Certification in Cardiac
    MRI

The Department of Health and Aged Care send Services Australia a list of
providers that have been certified. Services Australia assess that the
provider is a recognised specialist in diagnostic radiology or a
consultant physician. The specification code 655 is added on the
provider stem in PDS if all eligibility criteria is met.

Eligible PET providers

Credentialed Positron Emission Tomography (PET) providers must complete
a specific PET provider statutory declaration (HW064) prior to being
eligible to claim Medicare benefits for the PET services they provide.
See Positron Emission Tomography services for credentialed medical
practitioners for eligibility requirements and processing instructions
in PDS and LSPN.

Changes to Primary Information

Where the practice has made changes to their primary information, the
practice must notify the agency within 28 days of these changes taking
effect. Primary information includes:

-   the business name
-   the details of the proprietor (including, where the proprietor is a
    company) of the practice or the base for mobile diagnostic imaging
    equipment
-   the Australian Company Number (ACN)
-   the Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   details of the equipment on the premises or base for mobile
    diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment
-   the address of the premises
-   the address of the proprietor or base (for bases for mobile
    diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology equipment, if applicable)

The practice can notify the agency of these changes by completing an
Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation
oncology practice form (HW061). The Resources page contains a link to
the form.

Requests to backdate changes to primary information must be escalated to
Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer Support (LPS) for consideration by
the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging Team.

Certain changes to primary information require the practice to apply for
a new LSPN, see the LSPN relocations section for more details.

LSPN takeovers and change in ownership/proprietorship (primary information)

Changes to LSPN business information, including takeovers and change in
ownership

Practices must:

-   tell the agency of a change to business information within 28 days
-   advise the changes using an Application to register or amend a
    diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061). The
    Resources page contains a link to the form. If ownership has
    changed, the form must be signed by both the:
-   outgoing proprietor or authorised representative, and:
-   incoming proprietor

Assessing LSPN applications for takeover or change in
ownership/proprietorship

If Service Officers receive an application for an LSPN that is subject
to a change of business information, the application should be assessed
as below:

-   Where the practice has notified the agency within 28 days of the
    changes, the dates on the application form are to be used
-   Where the practice has notified us more than 28 days after these
    changes taking effect, the date of lodgement should be used
-   Escalate requests to backdate changes of business information to
    Medicare and Aged Care - Local Peer Support (LPS) for consideration
    by the Pathology and Diagnostic Imaging Team. These changes cannot
    be backdated more than 28 days from the date of lodgement

If Medicare eligible MRI equipment is located at a diagnostic imaging
practice that is changing practice/trading name, they are required to
contact the Department of Health and Aged Care about their 'Deed of
Undertaking’. Advise the practice to email all the details to MRI
enquires.

See the Register for a Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for
Medicare process page for more details on Registration for an LSPN as
part of a takeover.

Practice relocations

A new LSPN is required when a practice changes address. In order to
ensure there are no gaps between billing dates, practices are
responsible for closing their existing LSPN record and applying for a
new LSPN.

Moving levels or suites within the same address is considered a
relocation and requires a new LSPN. Practice addresses should only be
updated if the practice has not relocated and the request is to correct
or provide more detail to the address details.

Practices need to provide the below information on the Application to
register or amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice
form (HW061):

-   A closure date at question 4 of the form for their existing LSPN,
    and
-   A start date at question 6 for their new LSPN

All equipment owned by the closing practice must be:

-   end-dated on the practice being cancelled, and
-   added to the LSPN register for the new practice if included on the
    new registration form

If Medicare eligible Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) equipment is
located at a diagnostic imaging practice that is changing location, they
are required to contact the Department of Health and Aged Care about
their 'Deed of Undertaking’. Tell the practice to email all the details
to MRI enquires.

Assessing LSPN applications for relocation

If Service Officers receive an application for a practice that is
relocating, assess the application as below:

If the proposed relocation is in the future, the dates on the
application form are to be used

If the application is submitted after the relocation date:

-   use the date of lodgement as the end date of the existing location
-   use the following day as the start date of the new location

Do not backdate relocations

See Register for a Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) for Medicare
for more details on Registration for an LSPN as part of a relocation.

Note: if the closure and start date have not been provided on the form,
the application form should be returned with the appropriate standard
letter template.

Practice closures

Where a practice has closed, a completed Application to register or
amend a diagnostic imaging or radiation oncology practice form (HW061)
is required. The practice will need to provide a closure date at
question 5 of the form. The Resources page contains a link to the form.

Note: if the closure date has not been provided on the form, the
application should be returned with the appropriate standard letter
template.

Practice closures cannot be backdated. The cancellation of the
practice's registration takes effect the date after the date of
lodgement or the date specified in the form, whichever is later.

The Resources page contains:

-   a link to the Application to register or amend a diagnostic imaging
    or radiation oncology practice form (HW061)
-   email and letter templates
-   contact details for the Department of Health and Aged Care, and
-   Services Australia website links

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
