
Provider number applications for medical practitioners and their requirements under the Health Insurance Act 1973 012-42060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about amendments to section 19AB of
the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) and the impact on medical
practitioners. It includes determining if a medical practitioner is
subject to Sections 19AA and/or 19AB and how to process a provider
number application for a standard medical practitioner.

Section 19AA of the Health Insurance Act 1973

Section 19AA of the Act imposes restrictions on medical practitioners
who are an Australian or New Zealand permanent resident or citizen.
Section 19AA of the Act restricts a medical practitioner from claiming a
Medicare benefit for services delivered in certain situations. A medical
practitioner satisfies section 19AA where they are:

-   a specialist in a specialty other than General Practice
-   a consultant physician
-   a general practitioner, or
-   on an approved 3GA placement

Medical practitioners not subject to Section 19AA

A medical practitioner is not subject to Section 19AA if they:

-   were registered with an Australian Medical board before 1 November
    1996
-   had completed an internship or supervised training on or before 1
    November 1996, and
-   became an Australian citizen or permanent resident before 1 November
    1996

Note: medical practitioners are recorded in PDS as not being subject to
section 19AA or 19AB if they have a 104 specialty code.

Section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973

Section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) imposes
restrictions on medical practitioners who did not obtain their primary
medical qualifications in Australia. For Medicare purposes, these
medical practitioners are known as overseas-trained doctors (OTD) or
foreign graduates of an accredited medical school (FGAMS).

OTD and FGAMS are subject to the restrictions of section 19AB for a
minimum period of 10 years from the date of their first medical board
registration in Australia. The restriction is commonly called the 10
year moratorium.

A medical practitioner may satisfy section 19AB of the Act by the
application of a class exemption when they have met the criteria. Where
a class exemption cannot be granted, an application for a Section
19AB(3) exemption is made to the Department of Health and Aged Care.

See 19AB class exemptions for medical practitioners in Medicare and
Applying for and processing a section 19AB exemption with the Department
of Health and Aged Care for more information.

The 10 year moratorium

Under section 19AB, overseas-trained doctors (OTD) or foreign graduates
of an accredited medical school (FGAMS) must work for at least 10 years
at a:

-   Distribution Priority Area (DPA) if they are a General Practitioner
    (GP)
-   District of Workforce Shortage (DWS) if they are a non-GP specialist
    or consultant physician

All international medical graduates are subject to the 10 year
moratorium. There are no exceptions.

The moratorium and section 19AB restrictions end after 10 years if the
medical practitioner is an Australian permanent resident or citizen.

If the medical practitioner remains a temporary resident beyond the 10
year period, the moratorium continues until they become an Australian
permanent resident or citizen.

Medical practitioners no longer subject to section 19AB from 1 April
2010

From 1 April 2010, medical practitioners are not subject to the
restrictions of section 19AB of the Act if they:

-   gained their primary medical degree from an accredited Australian or
    New Zealand medical school, and
-   were an Australian or New Zealand permanent resident or citizen at
    the time they enrolled in an accredited Australian or New Zealand
    medical school

Accredited medical schools are determined by the Australian Medical
Council Limited (AMC). See Resources for a link to the AMC website,
which lists accredited medical schools.

These medical practitioners remain subject to the restrictions under
section 19AA of the Act.

Determining eligibility

A medical practitioner who was an Australian or New Zealand permanent
resident or citizen when they enrolled in an accredited medical school
in Australia or New Zealand must complete the Application for a Medicare
provider number and, or prescriber number for a medical practitioner
form (HW019) or complete the Digital Provider Number Registration (DPNR)
process. Evidence is required of residency status at time of enrolment
in an accredited medical school with the HW019. Services Australia uses
this information to determine if section 19AB of the Act applies to the
medical practitioner and records this on their provider file.

Acceptable evidence of residency status

Acceptable evidence of residency status to confirm a medical
practitioner is not subject to section 19AB may include:

Australian permanent resident visa:

-   Visa email confirmation
-   Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) confirmation (print
    /screen shot), or
-   Visa label in passport

Australian citizenship certificate:

-   Citizenship certificate, or
-   Bio-data (picture) page of their Australian passport

New Zealand permanent residency visa, or

New Zealand passport

Medical practitioners must provide proof of residency at the time of
enrolment in an Australian or New Zealand accredited medical school.
This ensures the medical practitioner was an Australian or New Zealand
permanent resident or citizen when they enrolled in an accredited
medical school and the restrictions of section 19AB do not apply.

If a medical practitioner submits a New Zealand passport and the place
of birth is within New Zealand, this is sufficient evidence the medical
practitioner was a New Zealand citizen when enrolled in an accredited
medical school.

Medical practitioners no longer subject to section 19AB from 1 April 2010 - Provider Directory System (PDS)

Medical practitioners with an existing provider file in PDS when
legislation changed

Where a medical practitioner has supplied evidence proving residency
status at the time of enrolment in an accredited medical school in
Australia or New Zealand, they are recorded in PDS as:

-   subject to section 19AB up to and including 31 March 2010
-   not subject to section 19AB from 1 April 2010

Evidence confirming the medical practitioner was an Australian or New
Zealand permanent resident or citizen when they enrolled in an
accredited medical school in Australia or New Zealand must be supplied
before the medical practitioner is recorded in PDS as not being subject
to section 19AB from 1 April 2010.

Creating a new PDS provider file for a medical practitioner with date of
first medical board registration prior to 1 April 2010

Medical practitioners impacted by the legislation changes in 2010 are
recorded in PDS as being subject to section 19AB up to and including 31
March 2010.

Medical practitioners must supply proof they were an Australian or New
Zealand permanent resident or New Zealand citizen when they first
enrolled in an accredited medical school in Australia or New Zealand.

Medical practitioners must also supply evidence they held Medical board
registration in an Australian state or territory prior to 1 April 2010.

Creating a new PDS provider file for a medical practitioner with date of
first registration as a medical practitioner after 1 April 2010

Medical practitioners are reflected in PDS as not being subject to
section 19AB if they:

-   were a New Zealand permanent resident or citizen when they enrolled
    in an accredited medical school in Australia or New Zealand, and
-   held medical board registration in an Australian state or territory
    on and after 1 April 2010

Business Structure legislation effective 1 July 2018

Important changes resulting from the Health Legislation Amendment
(Improved Medicare Compliance and Other Measures) Act 2018 (the Health
Legislation Amendment Act) took effect 1 July 2018. This Act amends the
Health Insurance Act 1973.

Shared Debt Recovery Scheme

The Health Legislation Amendment Act also introduced the Shared Debt
Recovery Scheme (SDRS) on 1 July 2019. The Scheme enables the
Commonwealth to hold both a practitioner (primary debtor) and another
party (secondary debtor) responsible for repayment of compliance debts.
These debts may occur from incorrectly claiming Medicare benefits and
can be made through a shared debt determination.

The Scheme was introduced because Medicare billing is often:

-   delegated to non-practitioners
-   administered through centralised billing areas
-   can be influenced by organisational processes and policies

In some instances this has led to incorrect billing practices.

Legislative changes in relation to Specialist General Practitioners

From 16 June 2021, legislation was introduced which enables the agency
to recognise a health professional as a Specialist General Practitioner,
when advised in the Ahpra data feed, as eligibility to receive higher
Medicare rebates.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration, Australian Medical Council Limited and the
Department of Health and Aged Care (Health) websites and supporting
document requirements.

Contents

New Zealand medical practitioners - provider eligibility and
registration

Processing provider number applications for overseas trained or
temporary resident medical practitioners

Processing a change in residency status for a medical practitioner

19AB class exemptions for medical practitioners in Medicare

Applying for and processing a section 19AB(3) exemption with the
Department of Health and Aged Care

Processing provider number applications for Interns in Medicare

Related links

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

3GA placements post 1 January 2019

3GA placements pre 1 January 2019

Ahpra Information window

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Handling provider registration telephony for calls with health
professionals

Provider number for health professionals in Medicare

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for Health
Professionals

Provider location details for health professionals in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
