
Midwives - provider eligibility and registration 012-19040503

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility and registration requirements for
midwives.

On this Page:

Midwives

A midwife is a health professional who offers care to women during their
pregnancy, labour and birth, and during the post delivery period. They
also care for the newborn through to 6 weeks of age, including assisting
with breastfeeding.

Not all midwives are eligible for Medicare. The Nursing and Midwifery
Board of Australia deem a midwife as eligible, based on their
qualifications and clinical experience.

Medicare eligibility and registration

To be eligible for a provider number or a prescriber number:

-   the applicant must have current registration to practise with the
    Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia. This board is supported by
    the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra)
-   the Profession field on the registration certificate must state
    'Midwife'

The registration record must state in the 'Endorsement' section:

-   'An endorsed midwife qualified to prescribe schedule 2, 3, 4 and 8
    medicines and to provide associated services required for midwifery
    practice in accordance with relevant state and territory
    legislation', or
-   'Endorsed as qualified to prescribe schedule 2, 3, 4 and 8 medicines
    required for midwifery practice across pregnancy, labour, birth and
    postnatal care, in accordance with relevant State and Territory
    legislation'

Evidence of registration may be:

-   a copy of the Ahpra registration certificate submitted with an
    initial provider number application
-   an existing 'shell' record in the Provider Directory System (PDS)
    where registration details are prepopulated
-   Ahpra Information window (if available), or
-   Ahpra website search result

Registration is recorded on the provider stem in PDS. Further
confirmation of registration (such as a certificate) is not required if
PDS shows a current Australian (AUS) registration in the 'Registration'
section of the provider's record.

Recognition of a midwife for Medicare purposes is made by the Chief
Executive Medicare (or their delegate) under the Health Insurance
(Section 3C Midwife and Nurse Practitioner Services) Determination 2020
made under subsection 3C(1) of the Health Insurance Act 1973. See the
References page for a link to the legislation.

Medicare Benefit Schedule (MBS) information

To access Medicare benefits midwives must:

have a collaborative arrangement with a medical practitioner, and

-   Services Australia does not need to sight evidence of the
    arrangement. More information about collaborative arrangements can
    be found on the Department of Health and Aged Care’s website via a
    link on the Resources page

be working in a private practice (which means they cannot provide
Medicare services as an employee of a public hospital or other
government funded entity), or

be working in a public facility which has been granted an exemption
under Subsection 19(2) or 19(5) (including locations listed on COAG
Direction) of the Health Insurance Act 1973, see Section 19(2) or 19(5)
Directions for more information, and

have professional indemnity insurance. Services Australia does not need
to sight evidence of this

Midwives working in public practice are eligible for a provider number
for the purpose of referring and requesting only. A Service Rule is
applied at public practice locations to prevent the claiming of Medicare
benefits.

Enquiry escalation

The Provider Registration enquiry line is used for all enquiries
relating to the processing of provider registrations.

Enquiries to this area are responded to by a Service Officer (SO). These
Service Officers escalate complex enquiries to a Programme Support
Officer (PSO) who will liaise with a Programme Officer (PO) if required.
Enquiries requiring further legislative or policy advice are escalated
to the Provider Eligibility and Accreditation team in National Office.

The Resources page contains quick reference information, links to useful
contacts, and external websites.

Related Links

Allied health and non-medical health professional registrations for
Medicare

Allied health and non-medical health professionals' provider number
applications and requests

Provider Directory System (PDS) field codes for allied health and
non-medical health professionals

View and process EFT payments on the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Ahpra Information window

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
