
Applying for and processing a section 19AB(3) exemption with the Department of Health and Aged Care 012-21121523

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about exemptions to section 19AB of
the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) where the application is made to
the Department of Health and Aged Care (Health).

Section 19AB and section 19AB(3) of the Health Insurance Act 1973

Section 19AB of the Health Insurance Act 1973 (the Act) imposes
restrictions on a medical practitioner who is an overseas trained doctor
(OTD) or a foreign graduate of an accredited medical school (FGAMS).

A medical practitioner subject to the restrictions of section 19AB must
satisfy section 19AB of the Act in addition to other legislation
applicable to the medical practitioner prior to accessing a Medicare
benefit.

A medical practitioner may satisfy section 19AB of the Act with the
granting of a 19AB class exemption by Services Australia where the
criteria for the class exemption is met. Where a class exemption cannot
be granted, an application for a section 19AB(3) exemption is made to
Health.

Section 19AB(3) of the Act provides Health the ability to grant an
exemption in writing from section 19AB restrictions applying in respect
of a person or a class of persons.

To apply for a for a section 19AB(3) exemption, the medical practitioner
must:

-   complete an Application for a Medicare provider number and, or
    prescriber number for a medical practitioner form (HW019)
-   provide a letter of support from the employer as to why they require
    access to Medicare benefits, the practice location address and the
    period of employment, and
-   residency documents

The above must be sent to Services Australia to make the application to
Health.

The 19AB Application Spreadsheet

Services Australia applies to Health on behalf of a medical practitioner
for an exemption under section 19AB(3) of the Act. Requests for section
19AB(3) exemptions are sent via an Excel spreadsheet along with the
application and supporting documentation. The Excel spreadsheet lists
the medical practitioner’s details, the location/s applied for, level of
access requested and ensures any other legislative requirements are met.
Health use the information supplied in conjunction with the Health
Insurance (Section 19AB Exemptions Guidelines) Determination 2019 (the
Guidelines) in their assessment of a section 19AB(3) exemption request.

The 19AB Application Spreadsheet is located on the Resources page.

Spousal exemption

Under the Guidelines, a medical practitioner must submit an application
for consideration of a spousal exemption directly to Health. Health’s
assessment and decision is based on the Guidelines and the information
provided by the medical practitioner in their application.

If successful, Health will issue the medical practitioner with a letter
of support. The letter of support from Health, along with an Application
for a Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number for a medical
practitioner form (HW019) and all other supporting documents must be
submitted to Services Australia as supporting documentation for the
application of a section 19AB(3) exemption. Approval of a spousal
exemption will allow the medical practitioner to practice within a
reasonable distance of their spouse’s primary place of employment.

The letter of support issued by Health for the spousal exemption
supports the applicant’s section 19AB(3) exemption and does not replace
the requirement of support from the medical practitioner’s employer. The
letter of support from the medical practitioner’s employer is required
in all instances where an application needs to be sent to Health for
further assessment and must include:

-   the medical practitioner’s name
-   the term and location(s) of employment, and
-   why access to Medicare benefits is required at the requested
    location

Replacement provisions

A medical practitioner may be granted a section 19AB(3) exemption under
replacement provisions in the Guidelines. Supporting documentation
confirming the medical practitioner is replacing a medical practitioner
previously issued a provider number under a section 19AB exemption is
required to be submitted with the Application for a Medicare provider
number and, or prescriber number for a medical practitioner form (HW019)
to Services Australia.

The medical practitioner being replaced must have closed their provider
number at the practice and have ceased working at the practice and in
the local statistical area within the last 12 months.

Locum provision

Health may issue a section 19AB(3) exemption under locum provisions of
the Guidelines. Under locum provisions, a medical practitioner may be
granted a section 19AB(3) exemption to work for up to 6 months in an
area that is not a Distribution Priority Area (DPA) or a District of
Workforce Shortage (DWS). Exemptions granted in a locum capacity enable
all-hours access to Medicare benefits for a maximum period of 6 months
per practice location and are unable to be extended or repeated.

To apply for a locum exemption the medical practitioner must submit a
letter of support from their employer stating the reason they require
access to Medicare benefits and the period of employment with their
Application for a Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number for
a medical practitioner form (HW019). The letter must state the medical
practitioner is seeking a locum exemption.

Assist at operations

Definition of professional service

The definition of a professional service in section 19AB of the Act
includes assistance at operations items. Overseas trained doctors and
foreign graduates of an accredited medical school need a valid section
19AB exemption to access Group T9 Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) items
(items 51300-51318).

Health may issue a section 19AB(3) exemption under Assist at operations
to temporary residents. If the medical practitioner is an Australian
citizen or permanent resident they may be eligible for an Assist at
operations class exemption. See 19AB class exemptions for medical
practitioners in Medicare for more information.

To apply for an Assist at operations 19AB(3) exemption from Health, the
medical practitioner would be required to provide the following:

An Application for a Medicare provider number and, or prescriber number
for a medical practitioner form (HW019) with related business structure
and banking details.

Copies of pages from their passport including personal details and
Australian visa

Evidence of current registration with the medical board (if this is
their first application for a provider number or they hold limited
registration)

Letter of support from their employer or the hospital stating the reason
they require access to Medicare benefits for assisting at operations and
the period of employment or a copy of their employment contract, which
references assisting at private operations as part of their employment

If the visa is not a 407 and the letter of support is not from the
hospital, then one of the following documents is also required:

-   letter of support from the hospital
-   training schedule, or
-   medical registration that states the medical practitioner is
    training on the ‘competent authority’ pathway

The Resources page contains:

Medicare Provider Registration contact details

External websites:

-   Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) - Register
    of practitioners
-   Attorney-General's Department
-   Australian Medical Council Limited
-   Australia Post - Find a postcode
-   Department of Health and Aged Care - Section 19AB restricted doctors
    and access to Medicare

the 19AB Spreadsheet template

Related links

Applications for a provider number for medical practitioners and
sections 19AA/19AB requirements

Section 19(2) and 19(5) Directions

Ahpra Information window

Business structure and bank account details for EFT for health
professionals

Provider specialty codes and the Provider Directory System (PDS)

Perform telephone security check for Medicare health professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
