
Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes 012-14000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the MI schemes.

Government intent

The Medical Indemnity Act 2002 (the Act) was introduced to strengthen
the availability of medical services in Australia. The legislation
provides a financial assistance package which helps keep MI insurance
premiums at an affordable level by providing financial support to
Medical Indemnity Insurers (MII) and Medical Defence Organisations
(MDO).

Participating MIIs and MDOs can request a payment under the following 6
MI schemes, which are administered by Services Australia:

-   High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (HCCS)
-   Allied Health High Cost Claim Indemnity Scheme (AHHCCS)
-   Run-Off Cover Indemnity Scheme (ROCS)
-   Incurred But Not Reported Indemnity Scheme (IBNR)
-   Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (ECS)
-   Allied Health Exceptional Claims Indemnity Scheme (AHECS)

More information is available on Services Australia website. See the
Resources page for links to these websites.

On this Page:

HCCS

HCCS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 January 2003 to
remedy the upward pressure on MI premiums by reducing the large cost of
claims on MIIs and MDOs. The HCCS is funded by the government, which
pays 50% of out of pocket costs by MIIs and MDOs that are greater than
the applicable HCCS threshold amount, up to the limit of a medical
practitioner’s or Allied Health professional’s indemnity cover. Funding
is provided by the Department of Health and Aged Care via a sweeping
account arrangement.

In order for a claim to be eligible under the HCCS, it must reach a
threshold that depends on the date the insurer was first notified of the
claim. The 4 thresholds are:

-   $2 million for claims notified between 1 January 2003 and 21 October
    2003
-   $500,000 for claims notified between 22 October 2003 and 31 December
    2003
-   $300,000 for claims notified between 1 January 2004 and 30 June 2018
-   $500,000 for claims notified on or after 1 July 2018

ROCS

ROCS is set out in legislation that commenced on 1 July 2004 to remove
the need for medical practitioners to fund their own run-off cover when
they have left the private medical workforce. It also provides a
guarantee that the cost of MI claims covered by the scheme will be
funded. Under ROCS, the government covers the full cost of eligible
claims (100%). In addition, the MIIs and MDOs can claim a handling fee
(5%) of the amount being claimed. ROCS is directly funded through
contributions collected under ROCS Support Payments, which is a payment
by MIIs based on a proportion of each medical practitioner’s insurance
premium collected annually through a contribution year. Prior to ROCS,
medical practitioners needed to purchase death, disablement, and
retirement run-off cover from MDOs when the medical practitioner stopped
practising.

IBNR

IBNR assists eligible an MDO by funding medical insurance payouts in
specified circumstances and covers claims for incidents that took place
before 30 June 2002. Under IBNR, the government covers the full costs of
eligible claims (100%) from MDOs that do not have adequate reserves to
cover their liabilities. In addition, MDOs can claim a handling fee (5%)
of the amount being claimed. Funding is provided by the Department of
Health and Aged Care via a sweeping account arrangement.

Under IBNR, an MDO is a participating MDO, providing:

-   they were not in existence on 30 June 2002, or
-   the Minister for Health has determined under Section 12 of the Act
    that it is not a participating MDO
-   only 1 MDO (Avant Insurance Limited) is currently determined as
    being able to participate in IBNR

ECS

ECS is designed to protect medical practitioners against personal
liability for eligible claims that exceed the level of their insurance
cover. Funding is provided by the Department of Health and Aged Care via
a sweeping account arrangement.

The ECS covers incidents that are notified on or after 1 January 2003. A
claim can be for a single incident or for a series of related incidents.

To determine whether the medical practitioner’s contract limit equals or
exceeds the relevant threshold, the relevant threshold is, if the MIIs
was first notified of the claim, or of facts that might give rise to the
claim. The thresholds are:

-   $15 million for claims notified between 1 January 2003 and 1 July
    2003
-   $20 million for claims notified on or after 1 July 2003

Medical Indemnity Insurance

In Australia, it is a mandatory requirement for registered healthcare
practitioners to hold the appropriate medical indemnity insurance for
healthcare practice in Australia.

Medical indemnity insurance plays a vital role within the Australian
health system by working to protect both healthcare practitioners and
patients in the event of an adverse incident arising from medical care.
While Australia’s health system is generally very safe, things
occasionally go wrong and patients may sometimes be harmed in the
process of receiving medical care.

Medical Defence Organisation (MDO)

MDO were originally set up by doctors over 100 years ago to deal with
legal and ethical aspects of medical practice, such as negligence. They
were established as friendly societies and mutual funds, which were
owned by their members and provided indemnity to doctors on a
discretionary basis.

The role of MDOs has grown and changed over the past century. They are
now large organisations, with a high degree of experience in medical and
legal issues.

Medical Indemnity Insurer (MII)

Since July 2003, medical indemnity must be provided via an insurance
contract. Medical Indemnity Insurers (MIIs) are required to meet the
same prudential standards as general insurance companies and are
regulated by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority (APRA). This
provides a high level of security for consumers and doctors.

MIIs are subsidiaries of MDO’s.

MI payment application forms

An eligible MII or MDO needs to submit an approved MI payment
application with the relevant supporting documentation to Services
Australia. MI payment applications and supporting information for all MI
schemes is available on the Services Australia website. See the
Resources page for a link to this website.

Payment schedule

The payment schedule for MI is legislated in the Act.

For eligible MI applications submitted under HCCS, ROCS and IBNR, the
payment requirements are legislated under section 37 of the Act. The Act
states that payments must be made to the insurer before the end of the
month immediately following the month in which the application was
received.

The only exception is where a request for additional information has
been sent to the MII or MDO under section 38 of the Act. The delegate
must give the person/MII/MDO at least a minimum of 28 days to respond to
the request for information. In this case, the payment must be made
before the end of the month that immediately follows the month in which
the requested information is provided and the claim meets the
eligibility criteria.

For claims submitted under the ECS, payment requirements are legislated
under Section 37B of the Act. See the References page for a link.

Review for Decision

If an insurer would like to dispute the delegate’s decision in relation
to an application for payment under the medical indemnity claim scheme,
Services Australia will take all necessary steps to resolve the dispute
informally with the relevant Medical Defence Organisation (MDO) or
Medical Indemnity Insurer (MII).

If a satisfactory resolution cannot be reached through an informal
process, the applicant may elect to request a review of decision. The
request will be in writing and should set out the details of the
dispute.

It is recommend that the person selected to undertake the review is at
the EL2 or above at the SES level and is provided all the documentation
supplied with the application to allow the person to undertake a full
assessment of the matter. The delegate who made the original decision
should not undertake the review. However, if the Medical Indemnity
Insurer (MII) or Medical Defence Organisation (MDO) provides new
information, the delegate can reassess the decision. However, if the
original decision does not change, the matter should be provided to the
relevant SES band 1 or above for the review. The internal review is an
administrative service that Services Australia provides to MDOs and
MIIs. It is not set out in the Medical Indemnity Act 2002 or in other
legislation. Services Australia will acknowledge receipt of the request
for review within 28 days of the request being received.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the Department of Health and Aged Care where health professionals can
access information about MI.

Contents

Medical Indemnity (MI) Schemes Claiming

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
