
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) technology for Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 012-05020050

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what a Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) is, what SHA-1
and SHA-2 are used for and what to do if a provider contacts Services
Australia to request a SHA-1 and SHA-2 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
certificate.

What is Secure Hash Algorithm?

Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) uses Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)
technology to secure messages and transactions sent over the internet.

Services Australia issues certificates that use either SHA-1 or SHA-2
technology. SHA-1 is older and less secure; SHA-2 is newer and more
secure.

We currently issue both as they are used for different program
applications.

What SHA-1 is used for?

SHA-1 certificates are used for business-to-business (B2B) messages and
transactions. These types of messages and transactions occur through
patient administration systems and practice management software. The
user does not have to open a website browser to do these types of
actions.

An example of this is claiming payments through Medicare Online Claiming
at a provider’s place of practice via their preferred software package.

We issue SHA-1 PKI site certificates, as usually B2B messages and
transactions use PKI site certificates.

What SHA-2 can be used for

SHA-2 certificates are used for transactions, messages or claiming
through websites. This is when the access is via a browser and the user
is sending messages or transactions over a website.

An example of this is accessing services through Health Professional
Online Services (HPOS).

We issue SHA-2 PKI individual certificates, as usually website messages
and transactions use individual certificates. Where there is a need for
site certificates via a website, we issue a SHA-2 site certificate

Note: some older browsers will still accept SHA-1 PKI individual
certificates.

Requests for certificates

Contact eBusiness Service Centre if a provider contacts us to request a
SHA-2 PKI site certificate, or a SHA-1 PKI individual certificate.

The Resources page contains a link to eBusiness Service Centre contact
details.

Related links

Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificates

Evidence of identity processing for an individual in the Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
