
General Practice Training Program for Medicare 012-42030040

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the General Practice Education
and Training Ltd (GPET), which oversees the delivery of the General
Practice Training Program through a number of Regional Training
Providers and approves training placements under Section 3GA of the
Health Insurance Act 1973 for Medicare benefit purposes.

On this Page:

Important changes to 3GA placement programs from 1 January 2019

New arrangements to the 3GA College Fellowship pathways come into effect
1 January 2019. Under the new arrangements, new placements will be
registered under 1 of 3 pathways:

-   Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) 3GA
    pathway
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine (ACRRM) 3GA pathway
-   More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP) 3GA pathway

Practitioners registered on the AGPT program before 1 January 2019 can
continue to claim under this arrangement until 30 June 2023.

For more information about the new 3GA pathway arrangements, see 3GA
Placement Programs and More Doctors for Rural Australia Program (MDRAP).

The Australian General Practice Training program

The Australian General Practice Training program is an Australian
Government funded initiative, which provides postgraduate vocational
training leading towards a Fellowship of either:

-   The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
-   Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine

Training is provided in urban, regional and rural locations and is
delivered through regional training providers.

Register a training placement

General practice training placements are approved by GPET in Canberra
and sent to the Provider Registration team in Services Australia in the
state or territory for the location of the placement.

A general practice trainee must:

-   be a registered medical practitioner
-   have a provider number for the specific practice location

Placements are time and location specific. The legislation prevents a
placement being registered with a start date earlier than the date that
Services Australia receives the placement advice.

A delegate of the Chief Executive Medicare notifies the medical
practitioner when they are included on the Register of Approved
Placements and of:

-   the location address
-   their provider number
-   the effective period of the registered placement

Medical practitioners must take note of the expiry date of the
registered placement, as Services Australia does not send reminder
letters.

Access to Medicare benefits

General practice trainees can access the 'General Practitioner' items in
the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) (including the Group A1 attendance
items) during the period and at the location of the registered training
placement.

Some general practice trainees may also be subject to restrictions on
accessing Medicare benefits under section 19AB of the Health Insurance
Act 1973 and must therefore have a valid section 19AB exemption for the
location and period of the placement to access Medicare benefits, in
addition to the approved placement.

Further information about the relevant items and rules can be found in
the MBS. The Resources page contains a link to MBS Online.

Payment of Medicare benefits is also subject to the medical practitioner
being registered with the Medical Board of Australia and satisfying any
other legislative provisions that may apply at the date of service.

Enquiries

General practice training program

Direct enquiries about the general practice training program to General
Practice Education and Training Limited (GPET).

The Resources page contains a link to the GPET website, including
contact details.

General practice training placements

Direct enquiries about registering a general practice training placement
to Medicare Provider Registration Tier 2 support.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Medicare
Provider Registration, the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) and GPET
websites.

Related links

Provider registrations in PDS

3GA Placement Programs and More Doctors for Rural Australia Program
(MDRAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
