
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) and Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service 012-03050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for staff processing Healthcare
Identifiers (HI) Service organisation application forms where an
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) record is
present.

Note:

For applicant details on any form, a Service Officer is to key
additional personal details supplied by an applicant into the eHealth
Program system (EHP). The preferred details are to remain the same
unless the applicant requests they be changed.

On this Page:

HI Service and Ahpra interactions

Ahpra is a trusted data source (TDS) for the HI Service.

Ahpra is a national registration and accreditation scheme in which 14
health professions are regulated by a nationally consistent legislation.

HI Service and Ahpra interactions consist of the:

-   pre-allocation of HPI-I numbers from the HI Service to Ahpra,
    enabling Ahpra to allocate HPI-I numbers to their practitioners for
    registration in the HI Service
-   retrieval and processing of Ahpra registrations and record
    amendments through a secured channel
-   publication of a consolidated response back to Ahpra for each
    registration and record amendment processed

Ahpra professions

Ahpra professions include:

-   chiropractor
-   dental practitioner
-   medical practitioner
-   nursing and midwifery
-   optometrist
-   osteopath
-   pharmacist
-   physiotherapist
-   podiatrist
-   psychologist
-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Health Practitioners
-   Chinese medicine practitioners
-   medical radiation practitioners
-   occupational therapists

Acceptance of registration requests

Services Australia:

-   does not accept direct registration requests from Health
    Practitioners that are registered under an AHPRA profession
-   does accept direct registration requests from Health Practitioners
    that are not registered under an AHPRA profession

History of initial allocation of Ahpra records within the HI service

In early 2010, the HI Service supplied Ahpra with a pre-allocated range
of Healthcare Identifiers (HPI-I). Ahpra then allocated an identifier to
each of their registered providers.

An initial bulk extract (including personal, demographic, professional
information and the Ahpra assigned HPI-I) was sent to the HI Service.
This was followed by a nightly extract of health practitioner
information consisting of records that were either created or amended
during that working day.

From May 2014, Ahpra updates the HI Service with a real time web
service, allowing immediate updates to provider records when they occur.

Ahpra data

Ahpra is the organisation responsible for the implementation of the
National Registration and Accreditation Scheme and supports the
appropriate National Health Practitioner Boards.

Information was collated from the individual registration boards and is
now managed nationally by Ahpra. Individuals are required to renew their
registration membership with Ahpra at a specified time. Profession
information on the eHealth Program (EHP) database has a start and end
date as supplied by Ahpra.

Updates from Ahpra via web service

Ahpra uses a HI Service Healthcare Provider Individual identifier to
amend a provider's record.

The general uses of this web service include, but are not limited to:

-   creating a new healthcare provider individual
-   specifying which name, address and communication details are
    preferred for use in correspondence
-   creating alternate names, addresses, communication details and
    provider types for a provider individual
-   updating existing names, addresses, communication details and
    provider types for a provider individual
-   notifying the HI Service of the death of a provider individual

Ahpra are not required to differentiate between create and update
requests. The HI Service will assess each request and determine which
details have changed; creating or updating information sets accordingly.

Where an Ahpra data feed is being processed and details are different to
those Ahpra has originally supplied, this will be assessed as an update
request, and will replace the old set of information with the new set of
information.

The Resources page contains a table describing the interaction and
allocation process between the Health Identifier (HI) Service and the
Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Related links

Evidence of identity for Healthcare Identifiers (HI) Service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
