
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about forms and letters for the PIP
and WIP - Practice Stream.

Current form versions

A practice must lodge a current version of all Practice Incentives
forms.

The form code and publication date (month year) is in the footer of all
Practice Incentives forms.

See the Practice Incentives forms list on the Resources page for a list
of current form versions.

Old form versions

Old form versions are not acceptable.

Return old form versions to the practice. See the related Operational
Blueprint procedure for the right letter.

The ‘Latest news’ section of the Incentives News Update (INU) tells
practices about new forms.

A practice can find the current quarters INU on the PIP ‘How to manage’
webpage on the Services Australia website.

Services Australia will accept old form versions for 1 payment quarter
after the change is notified in the INU.

If a form was current at the original date of lodgement, and the
practice resubmits the same form after the cut-off date for the old
form, this is acceptable.

See Practice Incentives forms list on the Resources page for a list of
old form versions and their cut-off date.

The Resources page has a link to PIP forms.

Form pages

A practice must submit all pages of the current form, even if it only
needs to be partially completed. This ensures the practice changes are
updated correctly. Requests including pages from both current and old
form versions cannot be accepted, unless received before the old form
cut-off date.

For example

A practice submits a Practice Incentives Change of practice details
(IP005) form for authorised contact person changes. Only pages 1, 2, 4
and 6 are received. Reject the form.

See also: Authorised contact person changes for PIP and WIP – Practice
Stream

Form identification codes

All Services Australia forms have an identification code. For the
Incentive Programs, it starts with ‘IP’ followed by a form code.

The form code consists of a 3 digit number, followed by a decimal and
another 4 digit number.

The first 3 digits refer to the form code. The last 4 digits refer to
the form version number. It is based on the publication date of the last
form update in the format YYMM.

For example, 001.2002:

-   The form code is IP001
-   The version number is .2002 (2020 February)

The form code is in the bottom left hand corner on each page of the
form.

Retaining forms

Health may conduct compliance audits to make sure practices meet the
requirements of the PIP, individual incentives and/or WIP – Practice
Stream.

Practices must keep all practice documents for at least 6 years from the
date the declaration is complete.

Practices can keep their documents in a hard copy or electronic format.

Attachments listing updates for multiple practice locations

A practice may include an attachment that lists updates for multiple
practice locations. This is acceptable for the below forms only:

-   Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse
    practitioner and health professionals details (IP003)
-   Practice Incentives Change of practice details (IP005)
-   Practice Incentives Practice closure or withdrawal (IP007)
-   Practice Incentives Change of practice ownership (IP010)

The Resources page has a link to the forms.

Each page of the attachment(s) must include:

all of the individual location specific details that are required on the
form. For example, the IP003 form requires the:

-   practice ID number
-   practice name
-   practice address, and
-   provider number

the full name and signature of the same signatory who signed the form.

Acceptable signature blocks

The required number of right signatories must sign and complete the
relevant declaration.

Accept the form when:

-   it has a first name initial and the full last name, or
-   the first name has been shortened (for example, ‘Alexander’ Smith is
    ‘Alex’ Smith)

A form is not acceptable when no name or the last name only is given.

See the Resources page for Acceptable Signature Blocks.

Scanned, electronic and stamped signatures

Signatures that are scanned, electronic and stamped are not acceptable.
Return any form that has this type of signature.

Exception:

Electronic or stamped signature can be provided for the University
certification on the Practice Incentives Program Teaching payment claim
(IP006) form.

They are not acceptable for the general practitioner, student or
authorised contact person signature blocks on the IP006 form.

Address variances

The address on all documents must match the address on the practice
profile. This includes:

-   All practice incentives forms
-   Accreditation certificates, and
-   Addresses registered to provider numbers

Where the practice address or provider number on the document is:

-   Slightly different - escalate to the Local Peer Support (LPS) via
    the Incentives Escalation Database to see if it can be accepted
-   Completely different – return the documents to the practice using
    the correct letter

PIP/WIP – Practice Stream Online validates all practice addresses to
match Australia Post’s data which may result in variances between PIP
Online and WIP – Practice Stream Online and a practice’s advised
address. The location address is harmonised to the Australia Post
address to reduce the risk of overpayment or underpayment to the
practice, based on their actual geographical location.

The address advised by the practice can be used in the postal address
field, noting that this address will show on all correspondence to the
practice.

To avoid possible administrative issues, make practices with such
address variances aware that when submitting Practice Incentives forms,
the address on the form must match the address we have registered for
the practice.

If the practice requests an address variance be corrected, escalate to
the LPS via the Incentives Escalation Database for further assessment.
All requests are to be submitted by a practice owner or authorised
contact in writing.

When keying practice location addresses, the below message will appear
if the address is not recognised:
‘2307 – The address entered is not recognised by Australia Post. You
should use the Australia Post address for the practice’s physical
location. Using the keyed address may result in underpayments or
overpayments to the practice. Do you want to continue to use the address
entered?’

Confirm the warning message and continue to process the form.

Amending forms

Unless advised in the specific Operational Blueprint procedure, do not:

-   write any information on forms
-   respond to unanswered questions on a form
-   amend information provided on a form

Uploading letters

Upload all letters to the practice profile.

Do not upload letters to PaNDA when a work item needs more information.

Only upload letters to PaNDA if:

-   the practice does not provide their practice ID
-   the practice ID is incorrect
-   an IP011 form is rejected or
-   an application that is not registered in the system is rejected

Upload associated documents in PIP and WIP – Practice Stream Online
advises which system to upload documents to.

See also: Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP – Practice
Stream

The Resources page contains:

-   forms and letters lists, and mandatory form fields
-   acceptable signature blocks
-   determining addressee and postal address
-   acceptable abbreviations
-   links to Services Australia website

Related links

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
