
Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) patient registration and withdrawal for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) 012-10070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for registering or withdrawing
patients from the Indigenous Health Incentive.

Aims of the Incentive

The PIP IHI supports general practices and Indigenous health services
(practices) to provide better health care for Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander Australian patients, including best practice management
of chronic disease and mental disorders.

Eligibility

To be participate in the IHI, practices must be approved for the PIP and
meet the eligibility requirements set out in the PIP and IHI guidelines.
They can apply for the IHI:

-   with their PIP application using the Practice Incentives practice
    application form (IP001), or
-   after they are approved for the PIP, using the PIP IHI practice
    application form (IP026)

See the Resources page for more information.

Patient registration

The patient, parent or guardian must provide consent each calendar year
for the patient to be registered for the IHI. If a patient is registered
for the first time in November or December of a given year, they will be
registered from 1 January to 31 December of that year, and 1 January to
31 December for the following year.

From 1 January 2023, eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australian patients of all ages can be registered for the IHI.
Registration for eligible patients under 15 will commence from 1
November 2022, for the 2023 calendar year.

Practices can register their Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
Australian patients via:

-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS), or
-   PIP IHI patient registration and consent form (IP017)

Practices can use an electronic version of the form created using their
practice software. Accept these forms when:

-   the form is current
-   its structure is the same
-   the declaration refers to Services Australia

If the form is missing any of these details, return the form to the
practice. If there is doubt over whether the form can be accepted
Services Officers can escalate to the Program Support Officer (PSO).

When a practice uses HPOS, they do not need to submit a copy of the
form. However, they must get the patient to sign the consent form and
keep it for 6 years for compliance and audit purposes.

Payments

Practices can get a one-off sign-on payment of $1,000 if they register
for the PIP Indigenous Health Incentive. Services Australia pay the
amount to practices in the next quarterly payment after they are
approved.

Practices that meet the eligibility criteria can get one registration
payment per patient per calendar year, for patients over 15.
Registration payments are not paid for patients under 15.

Tier 1 and Tier 2 outcome payments are based on MBS services provided to
registered patients within a 12-month assessment period. Practices can
get Tier 1 and/or Tier 2 payments if they achieve the required number of
processed MBS services for the patient in the 12-month assessment
period.

Patient withdrawals

Patients can withdraw from the PIP IHI at any time. To withdraw they
must complete the PIP Indigenous Health Incentive patient withdrawal of
consent (IP029) form.

Practices can request a patient withdrawal by sending a message or email
using HPOS. The request should include:

-   the patient’s name, and
-   Medicare number

They do not need to complete the IP029 form.

Note: patients who want to change their usual practice should complete
the Practice Incentives Program Indigenous Health Incentive patient
registration and consent form (IP017) with the new practice details.

PBS Co-payment Measure

On 1 July 2021, the Closing the Gap (CTG) Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) Co-payment Measure was separated from the PIP IHI.

Practices must register eligible patients for the PBS Co-payment Measure
online through Health Professionals Online Services (HPOS) using their
Provider Digital Access (PRODA) account.

Phone enquiries should be directed to PBS general enquiries.

Searching for IHI patient registrations

There are 2 options to search for IHI patient registrations.

Option 1: Searching from the practice profile

-   lists all registrations for the patient at that practice.
-   is available for both internal and external users

Option 2: IHI Patient Search tab

-   searches IHI patient registrations across all PIP practices
-   lists current and past registrations at all practices
-   is for internal users only

Both options use the following search criteria:

-   Search criteria 1 – uses the patient’s Medicare card number and
    individual reference number (IRN)
-   Search criteria 2 – uses the patient details. Criteria 2 allows for
    searches where the all patient details may not be known.

See the Search and update a patient registration using the IHI patient
search tab table on the Process page for more information,

Reviewing Patient Assessment Details for outcome payments

The Patient Assessment Details screen provides information about Tier 1
and Tier 2 outcome payments for individual patients. It shows if an
outcome payment was made for each tier. It also provides a breakdown of
the MBS items processed under each tier for the relevant assessment
period.

Patients can be registered at multiple practices. The Tier 1 outcome
payment will be paid to practices that billing the relevant MBS items as
outlined in the guidelines.

For more information on the Patient Assessment Details screen, see the
Review patient assessment details and outcome payment table on the
Process page

See the IHI guidelines on the Resources page for more details about the
Tier 1 item numbers and outcome payment.

The Resources page contains a table for Registration and Outcome
payments transition, links to letters and useful websites. There are
also details about consent dates and signing consent forms and
guidelines about warning messages.

Related links

Incentive Programs

Application for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) Indigenous Health
Incentive (IHI)

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Enquiry management for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Closing the Gap (CTG) PBS Co-payment Program

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
