
Nursing home services for Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP) 012-17020090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about nursing home services for
Veterans' Affairs Processing (VAP).

On this Page:

Nursing home contributions

Services Australia pays nursing home contributions to eligible veterans
on behalf of the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Nursing home contributions are paid retrospectively. Claims sent for
advance dates are held until the claimed dates have passed.

Note: where dates claimed span more than a single calendar month Service
Officers may be required to split the claim.

Fee calculation

Nursing home fees are set at a daily amount. The amount 'per day' is
rounded up to the nearest 5 cents. Multiply the number of days by the
QITI item fee to obtain the fee paid.

Fees are updated 20 March and 20 September annually. If this has not
occurred, contact the VAP Helpdesk.

Nursing home contribution item numbers:

-   NH03 (pensioner rate)
-   NH04 (non-pensioner rate)
-   NH05 (veteran is in hospital)
-   NH06 (resident contribution for Victoria Cross recipients in
    residential care)

Telephone enquiries

Service Officers taking nursing home enquiries can advise providers:

-   of fee calculation details
-   of eligibility and claiming requirements
-   it is preferred a completed D1217 Claim for Treatment Services
    voucher is forwarded but this is not mandatory. It is acceptable for
    a service provider to forward an invoice only
-   accommodation charges, chemist costs and general personal
    maintenance are not payable
-   invoices are to include the provider number, full veteran name, file
    number, item number and claiming period
-   they should receive an approval letter from Department of Veterans'
    Affairs (DVA) advising them of their provider number and what item
    number to claim. If the provider is unsure of those details, they
    should refer to this letter. If they do not have this letter, refer
    them to DVA

If the enquiry is regarding a claim that has not been paid:

-   check if payment is present on the veteran's history. Key VHOI, file
    number, SORT/DOS, ITEM/NH
-   confirm the dates claimed are in the past. If dates are in the
    future, advise the provider that the claim will be processed once
    the last date in the claim has passed
-   check if the claim is in pend. Key VQRF, provider number

If the claim cannot be located on system check if a manual claim has
been received. If a manual claim has not been received request the
provider send a copy.

Note: if further assistance is required refer the enquiry to a Program
Support Officer (PSO)

Convalescent care

Services Australia pays convalescent care for eligible veterans on
behalf of the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Convalescent care refers to a period of recovery from an acute illness
or operation that has been prescribed by the patient's treating medical
officer and must immediately follow an acute episode at an approved
hospital or day procedure centre. While convalescent care is most often
taken in an Aged Care Facility, it should be arranged in the most
appropriate setting available to meet the need for care, for example,
hostel or nursing home, convalescent or supported care home or hospital.

Eligible DVA clients are paid up to a total of 21 days of convalescent
care per financial year. In special circumstances DVA may approve above
the 21 day limit for convalescent care. In these instances comments will
be included in a PARS approval record.

Claims for convalescent care are paid retrospectively. Claims sent for
advance dates are to be held until the claimed dates have passed.

Payments for non-government funded facilities are only made to Victorian
facilities.

The Resources page contains the convalescent care business rules.

Convalescent care treatment type and entitlement

Treatment type

-   Convalescent care

Entitlement

-   Gold card - All services
-   White card - Specific conditions only

Convalescent care items and fee calculations

Claimable items

-   NH50 - Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment for
    convalescent care in government funded facility
-   NH51 - DVA payment for convalescent care in a non-government funded
    facility - Victoria only

Fee calculations

Convalescent care item NH50 fees are set at a daily amount. Multiply the
number of days approved by DVA by the QITI item fee to obtain the fee
paid (up to a maximum of 21 days per financial year).

Convalescent care item NH51 is paid at the fee approved by DVA.

Community care

Services Australia pays community care for ex-prisoners of war (ex-POWs)
and Victoria Cross (VC) recipients on behalf of the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Claims for community care are paid retrospectively. Claims sent for
advance dates are to be held until the claimed dates have passed.

All services must be prior approved by DVA.

Note: veterans from other nations are ineligible.

The Resources page contains a list of the community care (VAP) business
rules.

Community care treatment type, items and fee calculations

Treatment type

-   Nursing Home (NH)

Claimable items

-   NH07 - Daily community care package fee for ex-prisoners of war
    (ex-POW) and Victoria Cross (VC) recipient pensioner, part-pensioner
    and non-pensioner rate
-   NH08 - Income tested community care package fee for ex-POW and VC
    recipients who are part or non-pensioners in community care, who
    receive additional income above the maximum basic rate for a single
    person and who assessed as having to pay an additional fee

Note: items NH07 and NH08 must be claimed concurrently, if applicable.

Fees calculations

Community care items NH07 and NH08 fees are set at a daily amount.
Multiply the number of days by the QITI item fee to obtain the fee paid.

Transition care

Services Australia pays transition care for ex-prisoners of war
(ex-POWs) and Victoria Cross (VC) recipients on behalf of Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

DVA pays transition care co-payments on behalf of ex-POWs and VC
recipients receiving Australian Government funded Transition Care
packages, Community Aged Care Packages (CACPs), Extended Aged Care at
Home (EACH) and Extended Aged Care at Home Dementia (EACHD).

These programs are administered by the Department of Health and Aged
Care, and are an alternative to low and high care residential aged care.
Services can be provided in registered aged care facilities (RACF),
hospitals where this service is separate to the hospital episode or can
be community based, for example, in the home.

Eligible DVA clients may be paid up to a total of 12 weeks for each
episode of transition care. In special circumstances DVA may approve 1
extension no longer than 42 days per episode of transition care. In
these instances comments will be included in the PARS approval record.

Claims for transition care are paid retrospectively. Claims sent for
advance dates are to be held until the claimed dates have passed.

Providers of transition care services must be approved under the Aged
Care Act 1997 and must comply with conditions set down in the Aged Care
Principles.

The Resources page contains a list of the Transition care business
rules.

Transition care treatment type and entitlement

Treatment type

-   Nursing Home (NH)

Entitlement

-   Gold card - All services
-   White card - Specific conditions only

Transition care items and fee calculations

Claimable items

-   NH09 - Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) co-payment for the
    provision of transition care services to ex-prisoners of war
    (ex-POWs) and Victoria Cross (VC) recipients in a RACF or other
    institution
-   NH10 - DVA co-payment for the provision of transition care services
    to ex-POWs and VC recipients in a community setting, including the
    home
-   NH11 - DVA co-payment for the provision of transition care services
    to ex-POWs and VC recipients in a public hospital

Fee calculations

Transition care item NH09, NH10 and NH11 fees are set at a daily amount.
Multiply the number of days approved by DVA by the QITI item fee to
obtain the fee paid (up to a maximum of 12 weeks per transition care
episode).

If the provider has not included a D1217 claim for services voucher with
their claim, attach a blank D1217. Record only the provider number and
date of lodgement on the D1217.

Short term restorative care (STRC)

Short-Term Restorative Care (STRC) will commence from 1 January 2017 in
a phased national rollout, aiming to reverse and/or slow ‘functional
decline’ in older people and improve their wellbeing, and delay
hospitalisation. STRC is a type of Flexible Care which can be provided
in a residential care facility, or in a home/community setting.

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) will pay the daily fee
component for STRC services for ex-prisoners of war (ex-POWs) and
Victoria Cross (VC) recipients.

STRC will be delivered by approved service providers through the
Department of Health and Aged Care, after an Aged Care Assessment Team
(ACAT) assessment. Upon the completion of the delivery of an episode of
service, the provider can claim the daily care fee for the full period
of that service via VAP. Each provider must be registered with VAP in
order to claim.

DVA will be responsible for confirming the ex-POW or VC recipient status
of DVA clients.

STRC claims made through VAP will require DVA Prior Approval. Approval
will only be given after the full period of STRC service is complete.
Each STRC Approval will be for a specific period of service and must
have a commencement/start date (date of entry) and
cessation/completion/end date (exit date).

Short term restorative care (STRC) treatment type and entitlement

Treatment type:

-   Nursing Home (NH)

Entitlement:

-   Gold card - ex-POW (DVA Prior Approval required)
-   Gold card - VC recipient (DVA Prior Approval required)
-   White card - not eligible

Short term restorative care (STRC) items, fee calculations and speciality codes

Claimable items:

-   NH12 - Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment for the
    provision of Short Term Restorative care services to ex-prisoners of
    war (ex-POWs) and Victoria Cross (VC) recipients in a RACF.
-   NH13 - Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment for the
    provision of Short Term Restorative care services to ex-prisoners of
    war (ex-POWs) and Victoria Cross (VC) recipients in an in-home or
    community setting

Fee calculations

-   NH12 - The maximum fee claimable is 85 percent of the daily rate of
    a single pension for care delivered in this setting. QITI will be
    updated when pension rates are changed in the March and September
    statutory increases
-   NH13 - The maximum fee claimable is 17.5 percent of the daily rate
    of a single pension for care delivered in this setting. QITI will be
    updated when pension rates are changed in the March and September
    statutory increases

Specialty Codes

A new specialty code has been created, C21 271 DVA Short term
Restorative Care.

Only Providers/Services with C21 271 will be eligible to claim STRC
against NH12 or NH13.

The Resources page contains the business rules for convalescent care,
community care and transition care and a link to the NH fees quick
reference guide.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
