
Payment recovery for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10010100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Practice enquiries during a recovery process

The debtor should contact PIP for any questions about the calculation of
a debt. Program Management will provide advice in response to individual
enquiries about the calculation of a debt on a case-by-case basis.

The debtor should contact Medicare debt recovery for any questions on
how to repay the debt.

Enquiries during the recovery process on the:

-   Recovery process, Payment incentive recoveries will give a response
-   Overpayment or the program/s, Payment incentive recoveries will give
    a response to Medicare debt recovery. Medicare debt recovery will
    then give a response to the debtor

A response must be given to the debtor within 5 working days.

‘Warm transfer’ calls to Medicare debt recovery. If the number is busy,
give the correct number to the debtor and ask to call at a later time.

An overpayment can be appealed. The debtor can find more information on
the overpayment letter.

Audit and compliance checks

The Department of Health (Health) conducts audit and compliance activity
for the PIP and WIP – Practice Stream, and recovers funds where
overpayments are identified. Since 2018, Health has undertaken voluntary
compliance activity and recovered funds for PIP After Hours Incentive,
Procedural GP Payment, and the WIP – Practice Stream.

To check if a practice is subject to any recovery activity by Health for
these Incentives, a Recoveries Officer must email Program Management and
confirm:

-   Which incentive the recovery is for
-   How Services Australia was notified
-   The impacted payment quarters and amount of the recovery
-   The date the practice became ineligible for the incentive or payment
    tier/level
-   If the practice was eligible for a lower payment tier/level

For Procedural GP Payment, the names of the GPs.

Requests from practices to voluntarily repay funds for incentives other
than After Hours Incentive, Procedural GP Payment, or WIP – Practice
Stream do not need to be escalated for a compliance check.

Do not disclose practice or payment information to a third party.

Program Management (Policy team) will confirm if:

-   the practice was subject to any audit or compliance activity in the
    period of the overpayment
-   a debt recovery has been raised by Health for the same period
-   any further action is needed

eHealth compliance

Health manage eHealth Incentive compliance.

A practice must contact Health for all eHealth Incentive compliance
questions.

Health’s return email and postal address is on the compliance
correspondence from Health.

A Practice must quote the reference number on the compliance
correspondence in their response.

Forms

Practice Incentives Overpayment information and summary sheet (IP032)

Letters

Recovery of PIP payments (z1844) letter

Recovery of WIP - Practice Stream and PNIP payments (z1669) letter

Contacts

Incentive programs processing team

Payment incentive recoveries

Medicare debt recovery

Practice Incentives Program (PIP)

Workforce Incentive Program contacts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
