
Payments for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) and Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream 012-10010090

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the incentives payments process to practices in
the PIP and WIP - Practice Stream.

Practice Incentives payments

Incentives payments encourage general practices to:

-   provide quality care
-   enhance capacity, and
-   improve access and health outcomes for patients

Incentive payments are calculated and paid in February, May, August and
November.

The Resources page has more information on the payment quarters,
reference periods and point-in-time dates.

PIP payments can include:

Incentive payments

Rural loading

-   Based on a practice’s Rural, Remote and Metropolitan Areas
    classification
-   The PIP Rural Loading guidelines has more information on calculating
    the Rural Loading payment for the PIP. The Resources page has a link

WIP - Practice Stream payments can include:

Incentive payments

Rural loading

-   Based on a practice’s Modified Monash Model classification
-   The WIP guidelines has more information on calculating the Rural
    Loading payment. The Resources page has a link

Department of Veterans' Affairs loading (annually in August)

-   Based on the number of DVA Gold Card holders who receive an ‘in
    room’ consultation in an eligible practice each year

Practices can access their quarterly payment advice using the HPOS
Messages. The practice must set their online subscriptions to ‘Access
Online’. The Resources page contains a link to the HPOS Messages.

The WIP guidelines on the Resources page has more information on
calculating the DVA loading payment for the WIP - Practice Stream.
Payments can be paid up until the last day of the payment month.

They do not include a Goods and Services Tax.

The PIP and WIP - Practice Stream guidelines have more information on
rural loading and DVA payments. The Resources page has a link.

Eligibility

A practice must submit an application and have a status of approved by
the point-in-time date to receive a payment for the current payment
quarter.

They must meet all of the eligibility criteria of the:

-   PIP and/or the WIP - Practice Stream
-   relevant individual incentives

The practice must maintain eligibility on an ongoing basis to receive
payments in the future.

See the Resources page for point-in-time dates.

Payment calculations

Most of the incentive payments are calculated based on the size of the
practice. This is known as the Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent
(SWPE).

The SWPE is based on the Medicare and the Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) services a practitioner gives to patients at the practice.
Twelve months of historical billing is used to capture the SWPE. This is
known as the 12-month historical reference period. This starts 16 months
before the payment quarter.

To work out the SWPE, the fraction of care provided to each patient per
practice is calculated. This is known as the Whole Patient Equivalent
(WPE). This WPE is weighted for age and gender of each patient.

It will take around 6 payments (18 months) for a practice to calculate a
full SWPE value.

The Services Australia website has more information on calculating a
payment.

See the Resources page for a link to the website or for more information
on the 12-month historical reference period.

WIP - Practice Stream SWPE

For the WIP - Practice Stream, practices will be given a default SWPE
value of 1,000 until the practice:

-   receives 6 payments. After the 6 payments, the practice’s true SWPE
    value is used. Even if it is not greater than 1,000, or
-   true SWPE value is greater than 1,000

Practice payments are based on the information available on PIP Online
and WIP - Practice Stream Online at the point-in-time date.

A practice must add all of the practitioners working at the practice to
their practice profile. This will capture all the Medicare and the DVA
services and calculate payments correctly. Incentive payments may be
miscalculated if an incorrect provider number is used to bill the
Medicare and the DVA services.

The program guidelines has more information on the SWPE. The Resources
page has a link.

Processing forms during the quarterly calculation month

The quarterly calculation months are the months when the incentive
payments are made to practices. These are February, May, August and
November.

The Resources page has more information on the payment quarters,
reference periods and point-in-time dates.

Do not process the below work types during the quarterly calculation
month:

-   Practice relocation
-   Change of practice ownership
-   Practice amalgamation
-   Update practice bank details
-   Practice location amendments

Process these work types only when Program Management (payments team)
confirms the payment release is complete. An operational message will
advise staff of this.

If the above work types are allocated, review the work item. If the work
item needs to be:

-   Rejected, return the work item to the practice as per the relevant
    Operational Blueprint procedure
-   Processed, pend the Work Item until the first day after the
    calculation month

Process all other work types.

Held payments

The practice payments will be placed on hold for the below reasons:

-   The practice does not meet the relevant eligibility criteria for the
    program
-   The practice makes a change of practice ownership or a practice
    relocation update through Health Professional Online Services
-   If deemed suitable by the Incentives Processing team or Program
    Management (policy and payments team)

Advise the practice in writing if payments are on hold. Include the:

-   reason for the payments being on hold
-   documents needed to release the held payments

The practice payments will stay on hold until the practice:

-   provides the documents needed to release the held payments
-   fixes the reason for the payments being on hold
-   meets the relevant eligibility criteria
-   is eligible

If the practice does not do the above, the 3 quarter rule applies.

A held payment may be released in the next payment run if there are no
issues.

The Program Management (payments team) carry out payment runs on a
fortnightly basis (as per the ICT schedule). This is outside of the
regular quarterly calculations.

Escalate to the Programme Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives
Escalation Database to see when the held payments are to be released.
There are times where a fortnightly payment run will not be made.

A practitioner’s General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP
ACAI) for Practice Incentives Program (PIP) payment will be placed on
hold if the PIP payments are on hold for the relevant practice. Once the
practice payment hold is removed, the ACAI payment will be released in
the next payment quarter.

The Resources page has scenarios about when not to hold payments, remove
holds and request payment releases.

Manual payments – FINNET

PIP and WIP - Practice Stream payments cannot always be made within the
online system. In these cases:

-   the FINNET system is used to make payments
-   the Payment History screen does not show the payments
-   a comment with the payment details and release date is added to PIP
    or WIP - Practice Stream Online
-   Program Management send payment advices if applicable, but they are
    not viewable online

Scenarios where FINNET payments may be made include:

payment releases to a:

-   previous owner
-   closed practice

practices that had their PIP payment cancelled and the payment included
an IHI sign on payment. If the payment is adjusted, the IHI sign on
component is made via FINNET

For more information about FINNET payment comments, escalate to the
Program Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives Escalation Database.

3 quarter rule

The practice must fix the reason for the payment being on hold. The
practice has 3 consecutive payment quarters to do this.

If the practice does not do this, the 3 quarter rule applies.

PIP payments

If practice payments are on hold for 3 consecutive payment quarters,
the:

-   incentive payments will cease, and
-   practice will be withdrawn from the PIP

If the practice is PIP consenting, the practice will also be withdrawn
from the WIP - Practice Stream.

WIP - Practice Stream Payments

If practice payments are $0 and/or withheld for 3 consecutive payment
quarters, the:

-   incentive payments will cease, and
-   the practice will be withdrawn from the WIP - Practice Stream

The below are reasons why a payment is $0:

-   The practice SWPE value is zero
-   The practice employs an enrolled nurse not working under the direct
    or indirect supervision of a nurse practitioner or registered nurse

The WIP guidelines has more details on eligible nurse hours. The
Resources page has a link.

Withdrawn practices

A practice withdrawn because of the 3 quarter rule is not entitled to
any of the held payments.

Practices can appeal their withdrawal through the review of decision
process.

A withdrawn practice wanting to re-join the PIP and/or the WIP -
Practice Stream must:

-   reapply under a new practice ID
-   meet all the eligibility criteria for the relevant program
-   be accredited. See Frequently Asked Questions table for more
    information

A practice is not entitled to the Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI)
sign-on payment if they re-join the PIP within 12 months of being closed
or withdrawn.

Escalate to the Programme Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives
Escalation Database to cancel the IHI sign-on payments if:

-   the practice re-applies within 12 months of being closed or
    withdrawn, and
-   has the same practice and ownership details

Program Management (payments team) will:

-   monitor practices for the 3 quarter rule
-   withdraw practices if deemed suitable
-   advise the practice in writing that they are withdrawn from the
    program(s)
-   consider exceptional circumstances on a case-by-case basis

Electronic funds transfer (EFT)

All incentive payments are made via EFT.

The Reserve Bank of Australia pays an EFT to a practice's chosen bank
account.

The practice’s payment advice indicated the Payment Date. The Process
page has more information to access, view or print payment history.

A practice’s payments may not always appear in the nominated bank
account straight away. This depends on the practice’s bank.

Incentive payments cannot be made through EFT if the chosen bank account
has restrictions on EFT deposits.

Returned payments (GDES)

A failed EFT payment is a result of incorrect or old bank account
details.

Program Management (payments team) will:

-   advise of any failed payments that require follow up, and
-   arrange to redirect or refresh payments once the bank account
    details are updated

The payment status will show as Error on the Payment History screen.
Payment status types has more information.

Failed Payments (GDES) has more information on how to identify and
resolve a failed payment.

The failed payment will be released in the next fortnightly payment run
after the error is resolved.

See the Resources page for a list of payment status types.

Payment recalculations

A practice can request a payment recalculation if they have not
confirmed the Annual Confirmation Statement (ACS) for the relevant
payment quarters.

Practices can request a review using the Incentive Programs Review of
decision (IP027) form. The Resources page has a link.

Escalate eligible payment recalculation requests to the Programme
Support Officer (PSO) via the Incentives Escalation Database.

Do not tell the practice that a recalculation will occur.

Services Australia will advise a practice in writing of the outcome.
This is generally within 28 days, however this can be longer depending
on the review.

If the practice has confirmed the ACS for the relevant payment quarters,
requests for a payment recalculation will not be accepted.

Additional practitioners

A payment recalculation request is not acceptable if a practitioner is
not included on the annual confirmation statement.

The annual confirmation statement declaration confirms that the practice
details are true and correct. This includes the practitioner details.

Administrative error

A practice may be entitled to a payment recalculation if:

-   an administrative error has occurred, and
-   documents on the practice profile confirms the error

If a Service Officer finds an administrative error, they escalate to a
PSO via the Incentives Escalation Database.

Change health professional details

A practice can amend the previously confirmed health professional
details through:

-   the Practice Incentives Individual general practitioner, nurse
    practitioner or health professional details (IP003) form, or
-   a letter or email from the practice owner or authorised contact
    person

Once the hours are updated, escalate to the PSO via the Incentives
Escalation Database to see if a recalculation is needed.

A practice does not need to complete a Practice Incentives Review of
decision (IP027) form.

Investigating SWPE and/or payment decreases

When investigating the cause of a Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent
(SWPE) and/or payment decrease, Service Officers must obtain and
consider all relevant information registered on the PIP/WIP - Practice
Stream practice profile. This includes:

-   confirming eligibility
-   changes to individual incentives
-   changes to practice details
-   provider eligibility
-   additional practice branch(es)

The Process page has more information on how to investigate a
Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) and/or payment decrease.

Effect of a Payee Provider Number on the SWPE

A Payee Provider Number is a provider number of a health professional
who gets paid for a service.

All services assigned to a Payee Provider Number are processed and paid
by Medicare against the Payee Provider Number rather than the individual
health professional. In some cases, a practice may assign majority of
services to a single Payee Provider Number.

A practice Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) is calculated
using the services captured by Medicare.

A practice must register their Payee Provider Number in PIP and/or WIP -
Practice Stream to get an accurate payment calculation.

If the Payee Provider Number is not registered on the practice profile,
or is registered incorrectly, the practice SWPE and payments will
decrease.

If the Payee Provider Number is registered to an ancillary provider the
services will not contribute to the practices SWPE value.

Payment calculations has more information about SWPE calculations.

MMM and transition from ASGC-RA

From 1 February 2020, the Modified Monash Model (MMM) replaced the
Australian Statistical Geographical Classification - Remoteness Area
(ASGC - RA) classification to determine a practice's eligibility for the
WIP - Practice Stream Rural Loading.

The MMM measures geographical remoteness and population to identify if a
practice is located in a:

-   city
-   rural
-   remote, or
-   very remote location

This ensures rural loadings are correctly targeted to rural and remote
areas.

Use the Health Workforce Locator on the Resources page to find a
practice's MMM classification.

Transition from ASGC-RA to MMM

A practice's rural classification may change in transition from the
ASGC-RA to the MMM.

This could affect a practice's:

-   payments, and
-   eligibility for the rural loading

A practice's:

-   ASGC-RA classification can be identified on the February 2020
    payment advice
-   MMM classification can be identified from the current payment advice

The Resources page contains information about point in time dates,
payment schedules, historical reference periods, payment status types,
placing payments on hold and releasing payments, scenarios that may
result in Standardised Whole Patient Equivalent (SWPE) or payment
decrease and links to forms, letters and guidelines.

Related links

Practice closure or withdrawal in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Change of practice ownership in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

General Practitioner Aged Care Access Incentive (GP ACAI) for Practice
Incentives Program (PIP)

Update practice bank details in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice amalgamation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice relocation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice accreditation for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice closure or withdrawal in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Practice location amendments for PIP and WIP- Practice Stream

Failed Payments (GDES) for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Associated documents and comments for PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Link WIP - Practice Stream non-consenting practices with PIP

Practitioners in PIP and WIP - Practice Stream

Health professional weekly hours in WIP - Practice Stream

Practice Incentives Review of Decision

COVID-19 Vaccine General Practice Incentive for the Practice Incentives
Program (PIP)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
