-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the Assets Test as long as the assets do not exceed the
concessional asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information on the attribution of income and
assets from controlled private companies and controlled private trusts
and who is affected.

Rules from 1 January 2002

From 1 January 2002, the way private trusts are assessed under the
income and assets tests changed. Where a customer is an attributable
stakeholder of a private trust or private company, the income and assets
of that private trust or private company may be taken into account
(attributed to the customer) when assessing their entitlement to any
income support payments or concessions.

Trusts and companies attribution

Attribution was introduced in the 2000/2001 Federal Budget. For means
testing purposes, attribution ensures that customers who hold their
assets in private companies or private trusts receive comparable
treatment to those customers who hold their assets directly.

Where a customer controls or has contributed to a private trust or
private company, the income and assets of that trust or company may be
attributed to the customer when assessing their entitlement to income
support payments or concessions. If it is a controlled private trust or
controlled private company for the customer, then the customer is an
attributable stakeholder of the private trust or private company, unless
a CAO determines otherwise. See Attributable stakeholders for private
trusts and private companies.

Attribution of the income and assets of a private trust or private
company is based on the Control Test and Source Test. See Formal control
of a private trust, Formal control of a private company, Informal
control test and Source Test on the application of these tests.

Persons affected by attribution

All means tested income support payments made under the Social Security
Act 1991 and the Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986 may be affected by
attribution.

Note: the rules do not affect Taxation or Corporations Law.

Centrelink customers and their partners (whether residing within or
outside Australia) claiming or in receipt of income support payments and
some concessions may be affected by the attribution rules. The following
are not affected by the attribution rules:

-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) entitlement
-   Family Tax Benefit Part A and B entitlement
-   Carer Allowance (CDA)
-   customers on Disability Support Pension (Blind) or Age Pension
    (Blind) (who do not receive Rent Assistance or do not have a partner
    on a means tested payment) as they are not affected by either Means
    Test

Residential Care Assessments (RCA) customers who entered care:

-   prior to 1 July 2014 are only affected by income attribution, not
    asset attribution
-   on or after 1 July 2014 require an income and asset assessment

Delegation for attribution decision

The delegation for the attribution decision is always with the Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO).

An attribution decision may impact on the payability of an income
support payment, that is, the rate of payment.

The delegation for the determination of a customer's qualification for
an income support payment or other entitlement (such as concession
cards) is with the Service Officer.

If a person is not qualified for payment it is not necessary to refer
the case to the CAO for an attribution assessment. For example, to be
qualified for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) a person needs to be unemployed.
If a person is not unemployed, they are not qualified for JSP.

Three step to the attribution decision

The legislation sets out a three step process for the attribution of the
income and assets of a private trust or private company to an
individual:

-   the private trust or private company must be a designated private
    trust or a designated private company
-   the designated private trust or designated private company must be a
    controlled private trust or private company for the individual. See
    Formal control of a private trust, Formal control of a private
    company or Informal control test
-   the individual must be an attributable stakeholder of the designated
    private trust or designated private company. See Attributable
    stakeholders for private trusts and Attributable stakeholders for
    private companies

In making the attribution decision the CAO must take into account the
formal control of the designated private trust or designated private
company, the informal control and the source test.

When making a decision as to the percentage of attribution of a
structure to a stakeholder, the CAO must refer to the relevant
(attribution) decision making principles. These are in the Social
Security (Attributable Stakeholders and Attribution Percentages)
Principles 2017.

Contents

Formal control of a private trust

Formal control of a company

Informal control test

Source test

Attribution percentages

Coding the Trust/Company Attribution (TRA) screen

Resigning/relinquishing control of a trust or company or beneficial
interest in a trust

Limited appointorship concession

Related links

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Business structures and assessment

Designated private companies

Designated private trusts

Controlled private companies

Controlled private trusts

Attributable stakeholders for private trusts

Attributable stakeholders for private companies

Genuine investors in private trusts and companies

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

Income and expenses of a business

Assets and liabilities of a business

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
