
Assessing and recording distribution income 043-04050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the processes in determining how income from a
trust or company is distributed to stakeholders and how distribution
income is recorded. Different rules apply to an approved Special
Disability Trust (SDT). This procedure does not cover SDTs.

Distribution income

Distribution income is the actual distribution from a private trust or a
dividend payment from a private company made to a stakeholder. This
includes, distributions or dividends paid to another related entity
(private trust or company). This payment can be found on the private
trust or private company distribution statement. For a private trust the
distribution statement is part of the trust tax return. It lists the
name and Tax File Number (TFN) and/or date of birth of each beneficiary
(if under 18 years of age) allocated with a distribution in that
financial year and the amount of the distribution to each. For a
company, as well as a profit and loss statement, there may be a schedule
outlining the dividends paid to shareholders. It can be declared as
cents per share or as a percentage.

Distribution income is disregarded in some situations, this is so double
counting does not occur. The circumstances are:

-   Distributions or dividends made from prior year profits to
    controllers are not assessed as they are paid out of the retained
    profits (capital) of the entity
-   Where a customer is a controller and receives an actual distribution
    or dividend payment, any distributions received that are less than
    the attribution income amount are not assessed as income. The amount
    of distribution that is less than the attribution amount, is to be
    treated as a gift from the controller and the deprivation rules are
    to apply. Only distributions in excess of the customer's attribution
    income amount are assessed as distribution income. (Any actual
    income distributions paid to genuine investors and non-controllers
    will be assessed as income for those persons as prescribed by
    section 1073 of the Social Security Act 1991)
-   Where an entity is attributed with control of a subsidiary entity
    receives a distribution from it, then the distribution will not be
    counted as part of the assessable income of the principal entity.
    The attributable income of the subsidiary entity becomes the
    principal entity's attributed income, which when combined with its
    own assessable income, becomes the attributable income of the
    principal entity. By ensuring the distribution is not counted as
    part of the principal entity's assessable income, double counting is
    avoided

Other distribution income rules specific to controllers and
non-controllers include:

-   Distributions or dividends which represent transfers of entity
    assets, sometimes known as 'capital transfers', and if paid to
    non-controllers will not be assessed as income of the
    non-controller. An example of this is the transfer of a car to a
    non-controller. However, dividends paid out of prior year profits,
    which had as their source ordinary income or capital gains of the
    entity, will be assessed as income under section 1073 of the Social
    Security Act 1991 for any non-controllers
-   When an entity ceases trading or winds up, the attribution income
    can be set to zero. In addition, the distribution income for a
    controller and their partner can also be set to zero. Where a
    controller ceases involvement with an entity the attribution income
    can be set to zero and any final distribution received is not
    assessed, but any distribution received prior to severing ties is
    assessed for 52 weeks under section 1073 of the Social Security Act
    1991
-   Distribution income for non-controllers will continue to be assessed
    as income for 52 weeks in all circumstances even when the entity has
    ceased trading or wound up or the customer is no longer involved
    with the entity under section 1073 of the Social Security Act 1991
-   Distributions may be excluded from an assessment under section 1073
    of the Social Security Act 1991 as a lump sum when the amount was
    received periodically (for example, every month) and where the
    customer can demonstrate they were paid in lieu of wages. For the
    beneficiary they will be assessed when received and not at the end
    of the financial year as a lump sum. For the controller of the
    trust, it will still form part of the attributable income but we can
    disregard gifting as they were paid in lieu of wages

Assessment of capital gains

The assessment of capital gains (that is, resulting from the sale of an
asset) will be assessed as follows:

-   for controllers capital gains from normal trading (for example, sale
    of shares, managed investments on a regular basis) will be assessed
    but not one-off sale of assets (for example, sale of a factory or a
    work vehicle)
-   for non-controllers all capital gains will be assessed as income
    along with other distributions of profit

When we assess the capital gain we usually (but not always) see the
capital gain included on the financial statements of the trust or
company.

The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has four different ways of
assessing capital gains:

-   pre 20 September 1985 - nothing assessed
-   from 20 September 1985 - indexation
-   from 20 September 1985 - 50% discount
-   from 20 September 1985 - held less than 12 months - assess all of
    the gain

Under the Social Security Act when assessing attributed income and
distributed income we assess all of the capital gain without any
discount or indexation no matter when the asset was purchased.

Accordingly, CAOs will only be able to assess the whole capital gain
from the full financial statements of the entity and identifying the
whole capital gain.

Date of event for trust distributions from private trusts

A beneficiary is entitled to receive an amount under a private trust
when the trustee exercises their power under the trust deed and makes a
resolution to distribute in favour of the beneficiary. Allocations and
distributions are assessed as income for 52 weeks under subsection
1073(1) from the date of the resolution to distribute if the dollar
amount is included in the resolution to distribute.

If the resolution to distribute states a percentage and not a specific
amount, the beneficiary's legal entitlement to a distribution only
commences from the date the amount is known. This is usually when the
tax return is completed. The date the amount is known is the date of
event.

There may be instances where a resolution to distribute a specific
amount (for example $10,000) has been made but the trust tax return has
not been lodged at the time of resolution. Where this is the case, the
onus is on the income support recipient to notify about the
distribution. Distribution income should still be assessed from the date
the resolution was made and not from the date the tax return was lodged.
See the Resources page for an example.

Distributions when resolution to distribute an amount is made, but total profit not known

Distributions from discretionary trusts when a resolution to distribute
an amount of profit is made, but the total profit is not yet known

A person is entitled to receive the amount when they have an absolute
vested interest in the amount and are legally able to demand payment of
the amount. A person cannot demand payment of an unspecified amount and
therefore is entitled to receive the amount only when a figure is
specified.

Where there has been a resolution to distribute an unspecified amount,
the distribution only becomes assessable when the person becomes
entitled to legally demand a specific amount. See the Resources page for
an example.

Gifting provisions when a distribution or dividend is paid to non-controller

Gifting provisions for controllers when a distribution or dividend is
paid to a non-controller

Distribution or dividends paid to a non-attributable stakeholder after 1
July 2000 may be assessed as a gift from the attributable
stakeholder(s), subject to their attribution percentage. The amount
received by the non-attributable stakeholder is assessed as income for
52 weeks from the date of the resolution to distribute.

Exception: distributions paid to a non-attributable stakeholder will be
disregarded under the gifting provisions for the attributable
stakeholder if:

-   the customer can show they were not in receipt of an income support
    payment and could not have reasonably known they would require
    income support at the time the distribution or dividend was paid, or
-   the non-attributable stakeholder is a Genuine Investor and the
    distribution paid to the Genuine Investor is commensurate with their
    investment in the entity

All distributions to controllers and non-controllers, including other
trusts and companies, should be coded on the system. The system will
pass the distribution amount to the customer's record and ensure any
deprivation or gifting is calculated correctly.

Distributions to full or part controllers made from profits from
previous years are not assessed as income and should not be coded.

Distributions to non-controllers made from profits from previous years
are assessed as income and should be coded as they have their source
from ordinary income or capital gains of the entity and accordingly the
distributions will be assessed as income for the non-controller for 52
weeks from the date of resolution to distribute under section 1073 of
the Social Security Act 1991.

Working Credit and Work Bonus

Distribution or dividends from a private trust or company are not
employment income. The exception is when the distributions are
considered to be paid in lieu of wages and coded as employment income.
Ordinary income is used when calculating the accrual of working credits,
but is unable to deplete the customer’s Working Credit balance to offset
this income. Work Bonus cannot be applied to distributions, dividends
nor attribution income prior to 1 July 2019, unless the distributions
are considered to be paid in lieu of wages and coded as employment
income.

From 1 July 2019, Work Bonus may be applied to distributions, dividends
or attribution income received by a customer of Age Pension age and in
receipt of income support payments (apart from PPS). Work Bonus will be
applied only where the customer’s role in the trust or company involves
personal exertion (that is, the customer’s direct involvement helps
generate income for the entity). This could include such activities such
as truck driving, book keeping, or sales.

Note: If the customer is receiving a wage or director's fees for a
private trust or company, the customer can deplete their Working Credit
balance to offset this employment income only. If the customer is
eligible for Work Bonus any available balance can also offset this
income.

The Resources page contains a summary of how attribution and
distribution income is assessed for trusts and companies.

Related links

Assessing attribution income

Recording attribution income

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Documents required to assess a private trust

Documents required to assess a private company

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
