[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of income and assets from a number
of business structures. Information on changes to business structures is
also included. For example, start-up of business and downturn in
business activity.

Assessing business income and assets

This topic covers the issues involved in assessing the information
provided on financial statements and tax returns. It contains
information on investigating and assessing:

-   assets - things a business owns
-   liabilities - amounts a business owes
-   revenue - income received by the business from operating and
    investments
-   expenses - costs associated with operating a business and generating
    income

Common business documents

There are various documents, provided by customers and their accountants
or financial advisors that assist in the analysis of the operations of a
business. This topic contains information about the following common
documents:

-   balance sheet
-   depreciation schedule
-   profit and loss statement
-   livestock trading account
-   income tax return and taxation notice of assessment (NOA)

Assessing businesses at various stages of operation

Businesses go through stages of operation, and the assessment of income
and assets required in each stage is explained. Some of these stages
and/or changes include:

-   business being purchased or sold
-   business activity commencing or ceasing
-   irregular or intermittent business activity
-   seasonal or unexpected downturn in business activity

Date of event for assessment of business structures

The date of event (DOV) is usually the date that a change of
circumstances or notifiable event actually occurred.

The date of event (DOV):

-   for the commencement of a business, is the date the business
    started, or
-   for the purchase of a business, the date the new owner takes over
    the running of the business

If a business has a change in its circumstances, the date of event (DOV)
will be the date the customer, or the accountant as their agent, became
aware of any change. This will generally occur when the customer or
their accountant prepares the annual financial statements used to
prepare their annual income tax return. The DOV is the date the
financial statement or the business income tax return is prepared or
signed, whichever is earlier.

If the tax return and financial statements for more than one year were
completed on the same day, further investigation is required to identify
if a notifiable event exists for a change in circumstances. If there has
not been a substantial change in income or assets, there is no
notifiable event for a change in circumstances, and only the later of
the two financial years should be assessed.

The customer has 14 days to advise Centrelink of any increased income as
outlined in the general notification provisions.

However, some businesses are assessed using estimates or interim profit
and loss statements. The DOV should be the date that the customer
finalised the latest estimate and became aware of this information. This
may be some time after the last day of the profit and loss period. If
there is no indication of the date the customer became aware, use the
Date of Receipt unless it is believed the customer knew about the change
to their business income more than 14 days before it was reported.

When the customer has increased net income from a new enterprise or
contracts that commenced during the year, there may be an overpayment.
However, the notifiable event is the date the customer becomes aware the
net income will differ from that recorded. This will be later than the
date the source of the new income commenced, as the customer will not
immediately know the profitability of the new enterprise.

Note: customers can hold investments in public companies for example,
shares, futures, options, warrants and derivatives. Treat Shares in
listed and unlisted public companies as financial investments. Public
companies are not assessed as business structures that require need
financial statements.

Related links

Assets and liabilities of a business

Income and expenses of a business

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Sole Traders

Partnerships

Trusts and companies assessment for Centrelink payments

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Business has ceased or has been sold

Adding shares and securities

Raising social security debts due to self-employment or business income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
