
Designated private companies 043-04010060

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps required to establish if a private
company is a designated private company. If a customer is involved in a
designated private company, the income and assets of that company may be
taken into account (attributed to the customer) when assessing that
customer's entitlement to income support or concessions.

Assessment of a designated private company

This assessment is made by a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO), based on
information provided in the Module PC - Private Company (MOD PC) and
accompanying documents.

From 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
companies are treated under the Income and Assets Tests. If the company
is not a designated private company then the customer's involvement in
the company is not assessed in accordance with Part 3.18 of the Social
Security Act 1991, that is, attribution does not apply. Pre 1 January
2002 rules are used for the assessment of a non-designated private
company.

The customer will be required to provide the consolidated accounts for
the group of companies related to the company that is being assessed.

Definition of a designated private company

Prior to July 2019

A company is a 'designated private company' at a particular time if:

(a) the company satisfies at least 2 of the following conditions in
relation to the financial year ending immediately before the assessment
period:

-   the consolidated gross operating revenue for the financial year of
    the company and its subsidiaries is less than $25 million
-   the value of the consolidated gross assets at the end of the
    financial year of the company and its subsidiaries is less than
    $12.5 million
-   the company and its subsidiaries have fewer than 50 employees at the
    end of the financial year

or

(b) the company came into existence after the end of the last financial
year that ended before that time. For example, if the company came into
existence after 30 June of the last financial year prior to the date of
the assessment, it is a designated private company.

or

(c) the company is a declared private company.

A designated private company would not be an excluded company and would
include those incorporated in any overseas country.

From 1 July 2019

From 1 July 2019 the thresholds for financial reporting for large
proprietary companies under The Corporations Act 2001 have changed. The
designated private company thresholds have increased in accordance with
those changes.

A company is a 'designated private company' at a particular time if:

(a) the company satisfies at least 2 of the following conditions in
relation to the financial year ending immediately before the assessment
period:

-   the consolidated gross operating revenue for the financial year of
    the company and its subsidiaries is less than $50 million
-   the value of the consolidated gross assets at the end of the
    financial year of the company and its subsidiaries is less than $25
    million
-   the company and its subsidiaries have fewer than 100 employees at
    the end of the financial year

or

(b) the company came into existence after the end of the last financial
year that ended before that time. For example, if the company came into
existence after 30 June of the last financial year prior to the date of
the assessment, it is a designated private company.

or

(c) the company is a declared private company.

A designated private company would not be an excluded company and would
include those incorporated in any overseas country.

Declared designated private company under the Social Securities Act 1991

The Secretary of the Department of Social Services (DSS) may, by
writing, declare that a company or class of companies is or is not a
declared private company. This delegation remains with DSS and has not
been delegated to Services Australia.

This means in effect that a company or class of companies can, at the
DSS Secretary's discretion, be declared to be a private company for the
purposes of the Social Security Act 1991 even though they may not meet
the other criteria for a 'designated private company'.

Reviewing conditions each financial year

A company can be a designated private company in one financial year, and
another year may not meet the conditions to be considered a designated
private company. It is necessary to check that the conditions are met
each financial year that the company is being reviewed, to determine how
the company will be assessed.

Related links

Companies

Accepting and disclosing information regarding trusts and companies

Customer contact regarding trusts and companies program review

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Important screens for private trusts and private companies

Adding shares and securities

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
