
Irregular or intermittent business activity 043-03130080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the assessment of business income
for a customer when they advise they are undertaking a business
enterprise on an irregular or intermittent basis. In this case, the
method of assessment of the current rate of income from the business
will be dependent upon how long the business has been operating and
whether a pattern of business activity has been established.

Reassessment of income

These guidelines apply to all business structures, including businesses
being operated through a private trust or private company. A
reassessment of the income of the business entity can be undertaken at
the request of a customer at any time during the year. This will require
provision of full financial details including profit and loss statement,
balance sheet and evidence of the circumstances that require a review.
The customer's circumstances will then be reviewed based on this
assessment.

If the customer is claiming or receiving JobSeeker Payment or Youth
Allowance (job seeker), qualification is reliant on the customer being
able to satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

Business has been operating for less than 12 months

Where the business has been operating for less than 12 months, because
the customer is starting a new business or has purchased a new business,
an estimate will be required to strike the current rate of assessable
income from the business.

Business has been operating for more than 12 months

Where the business has been operating for longer than a year:

-   And a pattern of business activity can be established; the previous
    financial statements will reflect the irregular nature of the
    business activity and remain the appropriate basis for assessment of
    current income. No adjustment to the current rate of income assessed
    is required during periods when no business activity is undertaken
-   But the current business activity has changed from the previous
    pattern of work, reassessment of the income being maintained will
    need to occur. Therefore, a revised profit and loss statement which
    incorporates the effect of the change to the business and reflects
    the current financial position of the business will need to be
    obtained from the customer

If the customer states that they do not intend continuing the business
in the future, no income is to be maintained.

Seasonal employment

If the nature of a person's employment is seasonal work (including
intermittent work) and there has been a seasonal downturn in business,
the current rate of assessable income from the business is unchanged,
unless there has been a change in circumstances of the business
operations.

Related links

Obtaining an estimate of business income

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

Steps to assess an interim balance sheet

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Business has ceased to operate or has closed

Commencement of a new business or purchase of a business enterprise

Starting a new business

Seasonal downturn in business

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
