
Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS) 043-22032902

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information about the Apprenticeships
Data Management System (ADMS).

ADMS Functionality

The Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS) is the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) application for the submission
and review of claims for the following Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies
(AWS):

-   Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC)
-   Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC), and
-   Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

For further information, see:

-   Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
    Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies
-   Priority Wage Subsidy (PWS)

Australian Apprenticeship Support Network (AASN) providers determine
eligibility for AWS. When an employer becomes eligible, a claim
application is made available to them in ADMS. After answering a short
list of questions and attaching wage and/or training evidence, the
employer can submit their claim.

The ADMS attempts to finalise submitted AWS claim applications using
Single Touch Payroll (STP) to automatically verify evidence provided by
the employer. Optical Character Recognition (OCR) automation is also
used for BAC and CAC claims. If the claim application fails automation,
a work item is allocated to Services Australia staff for review.

.

Obtaining access to ADMS

Staff must register for Employment Security and Access Management (eSAM)
access before requesting access to ADMS. See System access for
authorised users table on the Resources page.

Staff are granted SARW - BAC Admin level access to view claims and
verify evidence attachments. Do not use the Export function in ADMS
displayed to users with this access level.

Staff undertaking AWS work should access ADMS regularly as:

-   ADMS access will be suspended if not used for 40 consecutive days.
    Re-request access to ADMS to remove the suspension
-   eSAM access is removed after 90 days. Make a new access request to
    both eSAM and ADMS, to remove the suspension

Using ADMS

Employers use ADMS to:

-   review pre-populated claim application details and complete required
    questions
-   attach wage and/or training evidence to a claim application
-   submit claim applications
-   receive and view notifications

Services Australia Service Officers use ADMS to:

-   verify wage and/or training evidence attached to a claim
-   return claims to the employer with a request for further
    information, or
-   view claim details to manage employer enquiries

See:

-   Verifying evidence for Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims
-   Employer enquiries about Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

The Resources page contains information on accessing ADMS and claim
status descriptions.

Related links

Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Priority Wage Subsidies (PWS)

Verifying evidence for Apprenticeship Wage Subsidy (AWS) claims

Employer enquiries about Apprenticeship Wage Subsidies (AWS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
