-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding resigning control of a
trust or company and gifting.

On this Page:

Application of deprivation period

On 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
companies and trusts are treated under the Income and Assets Tests.

A customer who is a controller of a private trust or private company and
who relinquishes control of the trust or company after 1 April 2002 will
deprive themselves of an assessable asset and a five-year deprivation
period will apply.

The deprivation provisions will apply even if the customer previously
served a deprivation period arising from the original gift of assets to
the trust.

Note: different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust
(SDT). Gifts to a SDT may be exempt from the deprivation provisions if
the contributor is an immediate family member, of Age Pension age and
the SDT concessional gifting cap is not used. This procedure does not
cover gifting concessions for SDTs.

Pre 1 January 2002 gifting rules

Under pre 1 January 2002 gifting rules, where a customer transferred
assets to a discretionary trust, a gift was generally considered to have
occurred as the assets of a trust were not usually assessed as belonging
to the customer. Similarly, a gift was generally considered to have
occurred when a customer transferred assets to a company or fixed trust
and those assets were not fully assessable to the customer under the net
asset rules.

A customer who was a controller of a private trust or private company
who surrendered control of the trust or company prior to 1 April 2002
would have had any possible deprivation assessed under the rules in
force prior to 1 January 2002.

This concession was announced by the Minister for Family and Community
Services on 20 December 2001. The original date for surrender of control
was 31 December 2001 but a Ministerial extension was granted so
customers had an extra three months to surrender control. This change
relates only to customers surrendering control of private trusts or
private companies, and does not affect the implementation of the new
trust and company rules brought into force on 1 January 2002.

Post 1 January 2002 gifting rules

With the introduction of the new rules, assets transferred to trusts and
companies after 1 January 2002 will not be regarded as having been given
away under the gifting rules provided the assets are attributed to the
customer or their partner.

Individual customers can only gift $10,000 in any one financial year and
$30,000 over five financial years commencing from 1 July 2002. Gifts
made before 1 July 2002 will continue to be assessed under the $10,000
per pension or allowance year provisions.

Note: a partnered couple are considered to be one unit. Where assets are
transferred between the members of a couple, the gifting rules do not
apply. If the couple separates, neither of the customers' deprivation
determination of 1 January 2002 will be reassessed.

Deprivation issues - disposal upon wind up where assets are transferred to other shareholders

Where assets are transferred to shareholders upon wind up:

-   Under the Trusts and Companies rules that took effect from 1 January
    2002, it is possible for a customer to be attributed with 100% of a
    private company (or unit trust), even though that customer may not
    own all the company shares (or unit trusts)
-   This means that there may be a discrepancy between the customer's
    attribution percentage of a company, and the actual legal
    entitlement to the company's assets on windup of a company

Corporation law governs the distributions of company assets on the
windup of a private company. This will generally provide for all company
shareholders (depending on the classes of shares issued) to receive the
assets of a company upon its termination.

Where a 100% attributable stakeholder of a company does not own all the
company shares, and winds the company up, the customer would be obliged
under Corporations law to distribute the company assets (or proceeds
from their sale) to all company shareholders (provided the shares owned
were of a class that entitled the holder to a share of the company
capital on wind up). This will mean that the 100% attributable
stakeholder of the company will not receive all the company proceeds
they had previously been attributed with, and therefore the company
controller's assessable assets will be less as a direct result of the
company's winding up.

This has given rise to a suggestion that the deprivation provisions
would be invoked if a company controller allowed a company they
controlled to be wound up and in the process distributions were made to
minority shareholders. This is because on or after 1 July 2000, all
distributions of capital or profits to shareholders in a company and all
distributions to a beneficiary of a trust are counted as disposals of
company or trust assets (SSA subsections 1208L(8) and (9)).

If the above approach were to apply, customers with a controlling
interest in private companies (while at the same time not owning 100% of
the company shares) would, by simply complying with their legal
obligations, be assessed with gifting if they wound up a company with a
net surplus of assets.

In the light of the above, where a customer who is an attributable
stakeholder in a company or unit trust in which others have a clearly
identifiable legal interest, winds that trust or company up, no
deprivation will be assessed against the controller if the
non-attributable stakeholders receive only the share of the company or
trust assets they would be entitled to under law.

The above determination is arrived at under paragraph 1208L(3)(a) of the
Social Security Act 1991, which provides that "The Secretary may, by
writing … determine that the disposal of a specified asset is exempt
from subsection (1)".

Deprivation issues - distributions to non-controllers

Where distributions are made to non-controllers on the termination of a
discretionary trust, each case will have to be assessed on its merits.
Legal advice may need to be sought.

The above treatment would not apply where customers rearrange their
financial affairs in such a way as to transfer others assets in which
they currently have a legal or equitable interest, and at the same time
or shortly thereafter wind up a company or terminate a trust with the
result that they would avoid application of the deprivation provisions.

For example, a customer who owns 100% of the shares of a private company
and is attributed with 100% control of that company, passes 40% of his
shares to an adult child while retaining the other 60% of the shares and
complete control of the company. In other words no deprivation is
incurred in this transaction. Shortly thereafter the company controller
winds up the company and distributes 40% of the company assets to the
child. While the customer would be observing Corporations law in
transferring 40% of the company assets to their child, it is reasonably
clear in this situation that the customer was seeking to divest
themselves of assets while avoiding the social security deprivation
provisions. In this case, subject to any countervailing factors, the
assessor would not exercise the discretion under paragraph 1208L(3)(a)
of the Social Security Act 1991, to "... determine that the disposal of
a specified asset is exempt from subsection (1)".

Staff should also be aware of the existence of the anti-avoidance
provisions in section 1209D of the Act, which can be applied in
circumstances where customers seek to avoid the application of the
Trusts and Companies rules.

Deprivation issues - minority shareholders and unit holders

Where there is an entity with a minority shareholder or unit holder,
then they would have certain rights to capital upon windup, even when
they have been attributed with nil assets during the time the entity was
trading.

If they do not receive assets in line with those capital rights then
deprivation should be assessed.

The Resources page contains an example of the effect of a customer
surrendering control of a private company or private trust and the
gifting decision.

Related links

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Deprivation effects on Centrelink payments

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Resigning/relinquishing control of a trust or company or beneficial
interest in a trust

Trusts and companies - transitional gifting rule

Trusts and companies assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
