
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information on the special concession available
to some primary producers who own primary production land within a
private trust. Primary producers who meet certain income and asset
requirements, and wish to retire from farming and hand control over to
the next generation, may be allowed to retain limited appointorship, and
not have private trust's farm assets or income attributed to them.

Application of the limited appointorship concession

The limited appointorship powers are:

-   The appointor can have the power to appoint a new trustee upon the
    trustee's death, resignation or legal disablement
-   The appointor can have the power to veto the sale of the primary
    production land

A primary producer is a person whose principal occupation is primary
production.

The concession is limited to primary producers and their partners where
all the following conditions exist:

-   The limited appointor is retiring from primary production operations
-   The limited appointor and their partner own or control net primary
    production assets worth less than the primary production attribution
    threshold. For the primary production attribution threshold, see
    Rates and Thresholds > Primary Production Attribution thresholds.
    This amount relates to the total of a person and their partner's
    personally held primary production income and assets combined with
    the income and assets of the trust being controlled
-   At least 70% of the assets of the trust are primary production
    assets
-   The average adjusted net farm income over the previous 3 years is
    less than the Family Payment threshold, that is, Part A income free
    area. For the Part A income free area, see Rates and Thresholds >
    Primary Production Attribution thresholds
-   A family member (eligible descendant) is taking over the operation
    of the primary production enterprise

An irrevocable clause must be inserted into the trust deed to provide
that:

-   the appointor's power to appoint a new trustee can only be exercised
    upon the trustee's death, resignation or legal disablement, and
-   any power of veto held by the appointor is limited to the power to
    veto the sale of the primary production land

Eligible descendant

The new controller has to be an eligible descendant as defined in
section 17A of the Social Security Act. The new controller will be
attributed with the income and assets of the trust.

Gifting provisions

If the limited appointor gave up full control of a discretionary trust
before 31 March 2002, then the gifting provisions did not apply. If the
limited appointor gave up full control after the 31 March 2002, they
gave away control of an attributable asset and the gifting and
deprivation rules do apply. An extension until 31 March 2002 was granted
by the Minister, for primary producers relinquishing control without the
gifting provisions being applied.

Restrictions on appointor

The limited appointor cannot have any other position in the trust,
including being an income or capital beneficiary.

In addition, neither the limited appointor nor their partner can:

-   be the trustee, or be able to be appointed as trustee
-   have the power to change the trust deed
-   be capital or income beneficiaries of the trust
-   enjoy any direct or indirect benefit from the trust

The person must also make a statutory declaration of their resignation
from the trust, stating they and their partner will not exert any
control over, or benefit in any way from, the trust apart from minor
incidental benefits.

Not enjoying any direct or indirect benefit would preclude the person
with limited appointorship, and their partner, from receiving any
payment or benefit directly or indirectly from the trust, including
wages.

Loans

Arrangements involving loans to the person with limited appointorship,
or their partner, from the trust or the new controller, or the new
controller's partner would also be precluded. There are, however, three
exceptions to this rule:

-   The limited appointor and their partner can retain a life interest
    in their home if it is situated on the primary production property
-   The limited appointor and their partner are allowed some incidental
    fringe benefits, such as farm produce for personal consumption
-   If a 5 year deprivation period applies as a result of the limited
    appointor relinquishing control, the limited appointor and their
    partner can receive up to the current Part A income free area amount
    from the trust during that 5 year period. This could not be paid as
    a distribution from the trust as the limited appointor and their
    partner cannot be potential beneficiaries. For the Part A income
    free area, see Rates and Thresholds - Primary Production Attribution
    thresholds

The actuarial value from a life interest can be coded as other assets.

Related links

Gifting rules for trusts and companies

Resigning/relinquishing control of a trust or company or beneficial
interest in a trust

Rates and Thresholds - Primary Production Attribution thresholds -
Pension

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
