-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Centrelink customers who are involved in a
trust or company may be required to have the trust or company's
financials reviewed.

Service Profiling

Each year, all trusts and companies will be subject to Service Profiling
and a risk rating will be applied. The trust or company's risk rating
will determine whether a program review is required. If a program review
is initiated, it will coincide with the lodgement of the income tax
return (ITR) with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), as advised by
the customer on the Private Company form (MOD PC) or Private Trust form
(MOD PT).

Initial request

An initial request for the current financial statements is sent
automatically to the contact person nominated by the customer on the MOD
PT and MOD PC form. Note: the contact person may be a professional (such
as an accountant or solicitor), or another person such as the trustee of
the trust, director of the company, customer's nominee, or the customer.

The review is needed to determine if the customer's attribution
percentage has changed from the last assessment and to update the income
and assets of the trust or company. A Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)
will complete all initiated program reviews.

Return of tax return and financial statements

It is important that when the tax return and financial statements are
returned that they are scanned onto the company or trust's record, not
the customer's record. This will ensure that the documentation is
automatically transferred to the CAO region code, ensuring there is no
delay with the review being finalised on the Future Activity List (FAL)
screen and preventing the contact officer receiving an unnecessary
additional request.

Second request

If there is no response to the initial request within 35 days, a second
request will automatically be sent to the contact person and, in
addition, a letter will also be sent to each of the current customers
linked to the trust or company record. The letter to the customers will
state that a review is in progress and that the initial request to the
nominated contact person was not responded to.

Third request

If the second request to the nominated contact person is not answered
within 28 days a third request is sent to each of the customers linked
to the trust or company record, stating that a review is still in
progress and the initial and second requests have not been responded to.
This will also advise that the customer's payment will be suspended
within 28 days from the date of the letter if the documentation is not
supplied.

Suspension and cancellation

If no response is received within the next 28 days of the third request
the customer's payments/concessions will be automatically suspended. If
payments/concessions are still suspended after 13 weeks they will be
automatically cancelled.

Note: residential aged care customers will not be cancelled. An activity
will be produced alerting Service Officers to follow-up the return of
the documents requested.

The Resources page contains links to the MOD PC and the MOD PT forms.

Related links

Program, discretion and estimate reviews and reminders for private
trusts and private companies

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
