-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different types of Income Tax Returns (ITRs)
as well as the Notice of Assessment (NOA) for sole traders,
partnerships, companies and trusts.

On this Page:

Business structure

The type of income tax return (ITR) lodged depends upon the type of
business structure:

-   Sole traders - Form I (all sole trader information is recorded with
    personal income details on the Individual tax return)
-   Partnerships - Form P
-   Companies - Form C
-   Trusts - Form T

Lodgement of any of the above tax returns is an indication of the type
of business structure a person is involved in.

Income tax returns may be prepared on the forms provided by the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) or compiled using one of several
computerised taxation programs. Usually where a computerised tax return
has been lodged it will have been prepared by an accountant or tax
agent. The type of tax return can be determined by the heading on an
electronically prepared return or the top left hand corner of the form.

See the Resources page for the Types of Income Tax Return forms table
which details the types of income tax returns and why they are required
by Services Australia.

Notice of assessment (NOA)

The Notice of Assessment (NOA) is issued by the ATO only in respect to
Form I tax returns (that is, to individuals), as a consequence of having
assessed the tax return. It shows the taxable income and the tax
liability as assessed by the ATO. The NOA shows the total taxable income
of an individual and does not itemise all the different sources of
income.

While the NOA is not suitable for assessing income for pension and
allowance purposes, it is still important that a NOA be obtained for
these customers. Confirmation is required that the tax return provided
to Services Australia was the same as that lodged with the ATO.

The Resources page contains a link to the ATO website which contains
more information about the new style NOA and information on Tax Return
Forms and why they are required to be supplied to Services Australia.

Related links

Assets and liabilities of a business

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing sole trader assets

Assessing partnership income

Assessing partnership assets

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
