
Attributable stakeholders for private trusts and private companies 043-04020100

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets do not exceed the
concessional asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only.

This document outlines information on determining who is an attributable
stakeholder of a controlled private trust and a controlled private
company.

Trusts and companies attribution

Where a customer controls or has contributed to a private trust or
private company, the income and assets of that company or trust may be
attributed to the customer when assessing their entitlement to income
support payments. Refer to Attribution for private trusts and private
companies for more information.

Criteria for determining an attributable stakeholder

The Private Trust form (MOD PT) or Private Company form (MOD PC)
contains information that assists in determining whether the customer is
an attributable stakeholder. Refer to Completing the Private Trust
details in the MOD PT or Assessing and coding the Private Company
details from the MOD PC for more information.

The relevant factors stipulated by legislation for making an attribution
decision are:

-   the strength of control available to be exercised (for example,
    whether control is shared)
-   the exercise of control in practice
-   whether any contributions have been made to the affected structure
    and their size in relation to the total assets of the structure
-   the scope for the controller/s to benefit from distributions
-   the history of distributions of capital and income from the
    structure
-   the use and enjoyment of the assets and/or income from the structure
-   any pre-existing or proposed attribution as determined by another
    Commonwealth department or agency (for example, Department of
    Veterans' Affairs)
-   any other factor which, in the opinion of the Secretary, should be
    taken into account

If the customer is an attributable stakeholder of a private trust or
private company, it will be necessary to show how the income and assets
of the trust or company have been apportioned. For example, the
percentage and/or dollar amount and to whom. It may be possible for a
private trust or private company to have the income attributed in
different percentages or dollar amounts than the assets attribution
amounts. Refer to Attribution percentages for more information.

The Control Test and Source Test

Attribution of the income and assets of a private trust and private
company is based on the Control Test and the Source Test. Refer to
Formal control of a private trust, Formal control of a private company,
Informal control test and Source Test for more information on the
application of these tests.

The source test may attribute the assets of a structure to a customer,
if the customer transferred assets to that structure for inadequate
consideration, or if the customer provides services to the structure for
inadequate remuneration.

A source test is justified, as a person transferring assets to a
structure generally does so because the assets will be used:

-   for that person's benefit, or
-   for their family's benefit, for example to shelter them from the
    means test while preserving their full value for the beneficiaries
    of their estate

A customer may pass the source test because they provided their property
or services to a designated private trust after 7:30 pm Australian
Eastern Standard Time (AEST) on 9 May 2000. The trust is therefore a
controlled private trust from the perspective of this person, and the
person is an attributable stakeholder of the trust and may be attributed
with a 100 per cent income and asset attribution percentage.

CAO role and delegation

The attribution decision will be made by a Complex Assessment Officer
(CAO) and will be based on the individual circumstances of each case.

The CAO may decide, after considering section 1207X of the Social
Security Act 1991 and all factors detailed in the disallowable
instrument, entitled Social Security (Attributable Stakeholders and
Attribution Percentages) Principles 2000, that this customer should not
be attributed with the income or assets of the trust.

If the CAO wishes to have the decision to consider the customer an
attributable stakeholder reconsidered, all relevant information and
documents can be collated and a formal submission made to the National
Income and Assets Helpdesk. The Helpdesk may consult with DSS where
required.

Related links

Trusts and companies assessment

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Formal control of a trust

Informal control test

Source test

Attribution percentages

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
