-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the calculation of the gift amount
applicable to a customer who is involved in a trust or company.

Trust and company gifting

Trusts and companies gifting may apply to a customer involved in a trust
or company who transfers or sells assets to an organisation without
receiving adequate consideration. Gifting may also apply if a customer
is attributed control of a trust or company but receives income or
capital distributions below the amount determined by their attribution
percentage.

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT).
Gifts to a SDT may be exempt from the deprivation provisions if the
contributor is an immediate family member, of Age Pension age and the
SDT concessional gifting cap has not been reached. This procedure does
not cover gifting concessions for SDTs.

Circumstances where gifting rules apply

The customer will only have the gifting rules applied where the
customer's gift amount from trusts and companies combined with any other
gifts made personally, exceed the $10,000 allowable gift amount each
income year to a maximum $30,000 disposal limit over a five year rolling
period. Only the gift amounts in excess of the limits are assessed as an
asset and deemed for a period of 5 years.

Note: a partnered couple are considered to be one unit. Where assets are
transferred between the members of a couple, the gifting rules do not
apply. If the couple separates, neither of the customer's deprivation
determination will be reassessed.

Deprivation is based on the balance sheet after adjustments are made for
the current marked value but before any adjustments are made for
non-allowable loans.

Circumstances where gifting rules do not apply

Gifting will not apply in regards to trusts and companies:

-   when the distribution made by the trust or company is to a genuine
    investor
-   for any distributions made by the trust or company for the 1999/2000
    financial year or earlier
-   in respect of any fixed trust set up before 9 May 2000
-   where a customer has been determined to be a full or part
    controller, deprivation does not apply to a controller where the
    shareholders have a legal entitlement to the capital upon wind up
    and they receive their entitlements

The Resources page contains an example of deprivation calculation for
non-allowable loans.

Related links

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Deprivation effects on Centrelink payments

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Trusts and companies - resigning control and gifting

Trusts and companies - transitional gifting rule

Trusts and companies assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
