-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assessing business liabilities secured over both
assessable assets and assets exempt from assessment.

Section 1121 of the Social Security Act 1991

Section 1121 and section 1121A of the Social Security Act 1991 provide
for the deduction of liabilities owed by a person to determine the net
assessable value of an asset. This also applies to assets held within a
business entity.

Section 1121 provides that if there is a charge or encumbrance over a
particular asset of the person, the value of the asset is to be reduced
by the value of that charge or encumbrance. Section 1121 also refers to
the amount of a charge or encumbrance over a particular asset. This
means that, generally, the value of a secured charge or encumbrance must
be deducted from the asset against which it is secured.

Differences between the assessments of liabilities for different business structures

Generally, all liabilities on the balance sheet of a sole trader or
partnership can be deducted from the value of assets (unless it is an
exempt asset) owned by the business to determine the assessable value of
the business, even if the liabilities are secured over non-business
assets as indicated by Guide to the Social Security reference 4.7.1.40.
For private trusts and private companies, liabilities secured against
assets not owned by the trust or company can be deducted in certain
circumstances from the assessable value of the asset of a controller to
the extent the asset owner is a controller of the entity.

The most common type of encumbrance over an asset is a mortgage;
however, any enforceable liability secured over an asset will meet the
requirements of section 1121.

Provision accounts

Provision accounts are listed on a business balance sheet to account for
future amounts that a business will be liable to pay out to employees,
shareholders and/or other parties.

Provisions such as income tax, dividends payable and annual leave are an
allowable liability where a business is legally committed to paying out
the designated amount at a future date.

As sole traders and partnerships do not have shareholders, they do not
pay dividends. As these business structures are not separate from their
owners for taxation purposes, they do not have income tax liabilities.
Income tax is a personal liability and therefore not related directly to
the business. However, sole trader and partnership businesses can have
provision accounts in regards to employees, such as accrued annual
leave.

There will be no liability allowed where the business has no legal
liability to pay out the amounts, for example, long service leave in
respect of employees who have not been employed for 7 years, and bad
debts.

Primary production aggregation

All assets used in primary production and all liabilities relating to
primary production are aggregated (combined) and treated as if they were
one primary production asset and one primary production liability.
Primary producers are allowed to offset the value of all their primary
production liabilities against the value of all their primary production
assets regardless of whether they are held in the person's name or
within a business structure (for example, they are a full or part
controller of a private trust or private company) as designated by
section 1121A of the Social Security Act 1991.

Advances from a national pool for primary producers

Many wheat and barley growers deliver their grain into a national pool
controlled by an organisation (for example, Australian Wheat Board,
Australian Barley Board) which sells the grain on behalf of the
producers.

When the primary producer delivers the grain they can choose to be paid
for it via an advance. If they choose this option the Board estimates
the value of the grain and advances the grower around 80% of the
estimate.

The grower enters into a contract with the Board. This contract is
recognised as a loan contract. It is important to remember the Social
Security Act 1991 definition of a loan is intended to catch all of a
recipient's investments so their asset value may be determined and they
may be deemed. The loan between the Grain Board and the primary producer
only needs to meet the general legal definition of a loan, to allow it
to be assessed as a liability.

For the purpose of assessing a customer's net assets allow the loan
advance, paid by the grain growers board, as a liability.

Other reasons for allowing it are:

-   under primary production aggregation rules liabilities do not need
    to be held against a particular asset to be allowed
-   the advance liability is balanced by various assets such as cash at
    bank, stock, plant and equipment which the primary producer has
    purchased with the advance

Liabilities secured over assets exempt from assessment

Where a liability is secured over an asset exempt from assessment under
the Assets Test, (for example, a customer's principal home), the
provisions of Section 1121(3) of the Social Security Act 1991 overrides
the provisions of Section 1121(1). This means that as the asset against
which the encumbrance is secured is exempt from assessment, no deduction
for the value of the liability can be made (either against the value of
the asset providing security or the value of assets owned by the
business).

Assessors need to be mindful of the security provided for business loans
when assessing liabilities of a business. Where information indicates
the security provided for a business liability may consist of the
customer's principal home, further investigation may be needed. The
security provided for a business liability can be determined from loan
documentation provided by the customer where necessary.

For private trusts and companies, there is also no liability allowed
when the liability is secured against assets not owned by the trust or
company.

Liabilities secured over both assessable assets and assets exempt from assessment

Where a charge or encumbrance is secured over both an assessable asset
and an asset exempt from assessment under the Assets Test, section
1121(4) of the Social Security Act 1991 provides the amount of the
liability is apportioned between the assessable and exempt assets to
calculate the net value of the assessable assets.

The formula for apportionment is:

'amount of the loan x value of the assessable assets / value of all
assets providing security'

This will provide the portion of the loan which can be deducted from the
value of the assessable assets. The amount of the loans for which the
exempt asset provides security cannot be deducted from the value of
assets owned by the business and is disregarded when determining the
customer's total assessable assets.

Interest in business is a deficiency (for sole traders and partnerships)

Where:

-   a customer provides non-business assets as security for business
    liabilities, and
-   the liabilities are deducted from the value of assets owned by the
    business under the modified application of section 1121, and
-   the assessed value of the customer's interest in the business is a
    deficiency, that is, the business has an excess of liabilities over
    assets and in the event of the wind-up of the business the customer
    would not receive any assets and would actually be required to
    contribute more of his own capital to repay the business loans

the amount of the customer's share of the business deficiency can be
offset against the assessable value of the assets providing security for
the business borrowings.

Excluded securities

An excluded security is the amount of a charge or encumbrance that is:

-   a collateral security (fall back security which is provided in
    addition to the principal security)
-   provided for the benefit of a third party

A liability that is an excluded security is not allowed as a deduction
against the value of assets providing security. The most common excluded
security is a charge or encumbrance over an asset of a customer which
relates to a loan given to another person (for example, the customer
provides an asset they own as security for a loan made by a financial
institution to a person other than the customer or their partner).

Assessors need to be mindful of the purpose for which a loan was
obtained when assessing the liabilities of a business. Where information
indicates that a loan has been obtained for the benefit of a person
other than the customer or their partner further investigation may be
needed. Where necessary the purpose for which a loan was obtained can be
determined from loan documentation provided by the customer.

Where more than one asset is provided as security by a customer for
borrowings from a financial institution, it is unusual for the lending
institution to categorise the assets provided as the 'principal'
security or 'collateral' security. Usually, all the assets are required
by the lender as security for the customer's borrowings. In this
situation the total amount of the borrowings would be allowed as a
deduction against the assets providing security.

Unsecured liabilities

The value of any unsecured liabilities listed on the balance sheet is
generally allowed as a deduction from the value of assets owned by the
business. The basis for this approach is that it is assumed that such
liabilities were obtained for business purposes and they can therefore
be taken into account when determining the assessable value of the
business. This applies to all unsecured liabilities detailed on a
business balance sheet, other than a liability that is an excluded
security.

For private trust and private companies, unsecured liabilities, or
liabilities secured by a floating charge over all trust and company
assets, are generally allowed, unless they are loans from controllers or
other third parties. See Assessment of liabilities for trust and
companies.

The Resources page contains examples of apportionment where liabilities
are secured over both assessable assets and assets exempt from
assessment and scenarios showing how the Income and Assets Tests are
applied according to each type of liability.

Related links

Business assets

The balance sheet

The depreciation schedule

Assets and liabilities of a business

Assessment of liabilities for trusts and companies

Primary production aggregation

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Share traders

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessing and recording loans and liabilities for trusts and companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
