-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a Business Details form (MOD F) is used and
what information it requests from customers. It contains information to
help answer customer enquiries about completing the MOD F.

When to use a MOD F

Use a MOD F to obtain information when the customer (or their partner)
who are:

-   Involved in a business as a sole trader, or
-   In a partnership

The information collected with the MOD F allows Services Australia to
assess income and assets of a sole trader or partnership business.

MOD F responses from JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA)
customers can also prompt a discussion about whether they meet the
definition of unemployed. For more information, see Unemployed
eligibility for Jobseeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job
seeker).

Documents required with MOD F

The MOD F asks customers (and/or their partners) to attach documents,
such as:

-   Taxation returns
-   Profit and loss statements
-   Balance sheets, and/or
-   Depreciation schedules

Complex business structure assessments may be referred to the Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO).

Assess and code responses to the MOD F.

The agency will not reimburse the customer for fees charged by their
accountant for providing documents/information.

If the business or partnership holds real estate, the customer (or
partner) needs to complete a Real Estate (MOD R).

Work Bonus

Work Bonus:

-   Includes self-employment income earned through personal exertion
-   Automatically applies the percentage of business income derived from
    personal exertion

Note: for Sole Trader income, the Work Bonus percentage from personal
exertion will default to 100%.

Members of a Partnership need to advise the percentage of their income
from the business that is from personal exertion.

For example, if a customer has net partnership income of $5,000 and
advises that 50% of their partnership income has been earned through
personal exertion, then Work Bonus will be applied to 50% of their
Partnership income (or $2,500).

This applies to customers who are:

-   Of Age Pension age, and
-   Receiving an income support payment other than Parenting Payment
    Single (PPS)

Requirements for completing form

All questions should be answered

All required documents must be provided, such as:

-   Taxation returns
-   Profit and loss statements
-   Balance sheets
-   Depreciation schedules

If income or assets have changed then proof of the change must be
provided, such as

-   Payslips
-   Bank statements

If the customer (or their partner) is involved in more than one business
structure (for example, more than one partnership) a separate MOD F is
required for each business

The module only needs to be signed if returning by post or in person

The Resources page contains links to the Business Details (MOD F), Real
Estate (MOD R) and the Profit and Loss Statement (SU580) forms.

Related links

Assessing and coding the Business Details for sole traders and
partnerships MOD F

Assessment of business structures for Centrelink

Sole traders

Partnerships

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Common financial statements

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
