
Verifying evidence for Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies 043-22032122

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to verify the information in a BAC or CAC
claim where the Apprentice Data Management System (ADMS), could not
finalise the claim through automation.

Verifying evidence to support a BAC or CAC claim

Apprentice Data Management System (ADMS) uses Single Touch Payroll (STP)
or Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to automatically verify BAC and
CAC claims. ADMS uses Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to read the
wage evidence if:

-   STP data is not available, or
-   the declared gross wage amount is higher than the STP calculation

The automation process matches the gross wage amounts and other
information from the employer with:

-   STP data, or
-   uploaded wage evidence

Where ADMS is unable to finalise an application, the claim will be
allocated to a Services Australia Service Officer to verify the attached
evidence.

As training evidence cannot be verified through automation, all claims
with training evidence attached will be allocated to Service Officers to
verify.

Employers are not required to attach training evidence if:

they confirm it has previously been provided, or

if the apprentice's workplace (shown within the claim) is within the
following states and territories:

-   ACT
-   NSW
-   SA
-   TAS
-   Employers in these states are exempt from providing training
    evidence with their claim

Determining what evidence requires verification

Employers may upload a single payroll summary for the claim period or
attach multiple payslips. For each attachment there is a new line for
the employer to declare:

-   date from
-   date to
-   amount

ADMS System messaging in Comments will identify which evidence
attachments require reviewing. All claims with evidence that training
has commenced will allocate to Services Australia to verify.

Rejecting claims

Do not mark claims as Ineligible. Only Technical Peer Support Officers
(TPSO) are to mark claims as Ineligible, where the Employment and
Workplace Relations (DEWR) Apprenticeships Wage Subsidy Escalations
(AWSE) line provides advice to do so.

The Resources page contains Outbound contact protocols, Outbound call
scripts and internet links.

Related links

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
