
Income and expenses of a business 043-03100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on income (revenue) and expenses of a
business. The purpose of this topic is to explain the treatment of
business income and expenses under the social security law.

Social security law definition of income

The social security law has a unique definition of income used in the
determination of claims for pensions and allowances. The intention is
the assessment of income accurately reflects a customer's current
circumstances, and therefore may not take into account past or future
losses or income.

Similarly, social security law uses a different treatment of deductions
than applied under taxation law. Not all deductions that reduce a
business's taxable income are allowable as deductions from income for
social security purposes. Generally, expenses allowed as a deduction
against gross business income are those necessarily incurred in earning
business income.

If a business disposes of an asset, the adjustment for this will appear
on the profit and loss statement. To ensure the statement is a true
reflection of the business's current profit position, a determination
needs to be made as to whether this adjustment is retained or removed.

Income received from a business

Customers can receive income from a business in the form of:

-   a share of the net profit from a sole trader or partnership
-   dividends or distributions of profit made to a customer from a
    company or trust

Net profit for a business is calculated using the formula Net Profit =
Revenue - Expenses.

A business's profit and loss statement is a historical record of revenue
derived during an accounting period and the costs and expenses incurred
in generating this income.

Structures of businesses

Businesses operate under different structures. The 5 types of business
structures are:

-   sole trader
-   partnership
-   company
-   cooperatives
-   trusts

It is necessary to identify the type of business structure through which
a customer undertakes their business activity, as the type of structure
impacts upon the assessment of the business under the income and assets
tests.

Trust and company assessments

All trust and company assessments are done by the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).

Other business structure assessments

For other business structures, if a Service Officer is not sure how to
assess the customer’s business interests from the information provided
they should follow normal escalation processes. Technical Peer Support
(TPS) and /or Service Support Officer (SSO) before referring the case to
a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) for assistance. See Service Officer
role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres, Access
Support Centres (ASC) and Identifying and making suitable referrals to
the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Contents

Business revenue

Business deductions

The profit and loss statement

Balancing adjustment on sale of business assets

Livestock trading account

Income tax returns (ITRs) and the taxation notice of assessment (NOA)

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

How the Goods and Services Tax (GST) affects business income

Related links

Assets and liabilities of a business

Sole traders

Partnerships

Business has been sold

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Assessing income and assets from cooperatives

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Assessment of income from trust and companies

Treatment of lump sums

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
