
Roles within a private trust 043-04020070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the ways and roles in which
a customer can be involved in a private trust.

New rules from 1 January 2002

From 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
trusts are treated under the income and assets tests. If a customer is
involved in a private trust, the income and assets of that trust may be
taken into account (attributed to the customer) when working out their
income support payments or concessions.

Note: different rules and roles apply to an approved Special Disability
Trust (SDT). A SDT's income is exempt from the income test. The SDT's
assets are exempt from the assets test as long as the assets are not
over the concessional asset limit.

Types of roles in a private trust

A customer could have more than one role in the private trust. A
customer's involvement in a private trust can be in any of the following
capacities:

-   Settlor, Creator - a settlor or creator generally contributes an
    amount (usually a nominal amount of $10-$50) to start the trust. The
    settlor may have no further involvement in the trust after it is set
    up. Trusts may be established in a will after death
-   Testator - the maker of a will is called a 'testator'
-   Contributor - a customer who contributes capital to a trust
-   Beneficiary - a beneficiary is a customer or entity capable of
    receiving a benefit from the trust, either by way of income or
    capital distributions
-   Trustee - the trustee holds trust property for the benefit of the
    beneficiaries in accordance with the trust document. The trustee may
    be an individual or a private company
-   Appointor, Principal, Guardian - this customer often has the power
    to appoint or dismiss the trustee, veto the trustee's decisions or
    vary the trust deed
-   Executor, Administrator - the customer who is named in a will as
    having the responsibility of dealing with the property of a deceased
    estate in accordance with the wishes of the testator is called the
    'executor'. Where the deceased person did not make a will (for
    example, died intestate) or did not name an executor in their will,
    the Court will appoint someone to deal with the property of the
    estate
-   Shareholder of a Corporate Trustee - a customer may become a
    shareholder of the corporate trustee in a number of ways - by
    purchasing shares, having shares transferred to them by way of a
    gift from an associate, receiving shares as an inheritance from a
    deceased estate
-   Director of a Corporate Trustee - a customer may become a director
    when the trustee company is first set up, or may be appointed by
    another director or by a vote of shareholders of the trustee company
-   Public Officer - a public officer will only be appointed for a trust
    if there are no Australian resident trustees
-   Employee - an employee may receive remuneration for their personal
    efforts in money or moneys worth, for example, wages, fees,
    commissions, fringe benefits, super contributions. A customer who is
    only an employee, has no other involvement in the trust and is not
    an associate will have their remuneration assessed as an employee
-   Associate - a customer may exert informal control over a trust even
    though they are not an appointor or trustee. For example, an
    accountant, solicitor or other professional may be acting under
    instructions from a customer

Delegation for assessment from 1 January 2002

Note: since 1 January 2002, the assessment of a private trust must be
done by a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

A customer may be involved in a private trust in more than one way. For
example, a customer may be both trustee and beneficiary. The CAO will
need to establish each way in which a customer is involved. This
information is on the Module PT - Private Trust (MOD PT) or Module SDT -
Special Disability Trust (SDT).

Related links

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Trusts and companies assessment

Control tests and attribution for trusts and companies

Formal control of a trust

Informal control test

Source test

Attribution percentages

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
