
Factors to determine self-employment 043-03030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the factors used to decide if a customer is
self-employed or not.

Difference between self-employed and employed

A self-employed customer will be:

-   running a business on their own account
-   bearing the risk of loss
-   investing capital, and
-   dependent upon their clients

An employed customer will be:

-   receiving a wage or salary
-   likely to have some kind of supervision, and
-   integrated into the business they are supplying their services too

There are workers who do not fit either of these two descriptions.

Whether someone is self-employed or not, depends on the:

-   authority over the performance of work
-   how they get paid
-   supply and maintenance of equipment
-   need to work, the hours of work, and
-   whether they get holidays and the deduction of income tax

Determining if a customer is self-employed

Make a decision by weighing up the facts to decide if a customer is
self-employed or not.

See the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) website "Are you in business?"
It is a guide to help work out if some activities count as running a
business. See the Resources page for a link.

Factors to consider

Factors to consider to determine if a customer is running a business
include:

-   Does the activity have a significant commercial purpose or
    character?
-   Is there more than just an intention to engage in business?
-   Is there a purpose of profit as well as a prospect of profit?
-   Is there repetition and regularity in the activity?
-   Is the activity of the same kind and carried on in a similar manner
    to businesses in the industry?
-   Is the activity planned, organised and carried on in a business-like
    manner?
-   What is the size, scale and permanency of the activity?
-   Is the activity better described as a hobby, recreation or sporting
    activity?
-   Does a contract exist to produce results or for labour?
-   Who has the power or right to make decisions?
-   Is the work done for the business or as part of the business?
-   Does the risk of the profit or loss from the work rest with the
    person or the business?
-   Who owns the business premises, tools and equipment?
-   Has the customer received a payment summary?

The Resources page contains the Decision Support Tool. It can be used to
help Service Officers in working out if a customer is self-employed or
an employee.

Related links

Assessing income and assets from child care

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Sole Traders

Partnerships

Treatment of lump sums

Commission sales person considered as employees

Commission sales person considered as self-employed

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
