
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the assets of a business and
the assets owned by customers from their involvement in a business.
Customers can have an interest in one or more businesses operating as a
sole trader, partnership, private company, private trust or cooperative.

Definition of an asset

Section 11 of the Social Security Act 1991 defines asset as 'property'.
Property is not defined in the Act, but has an established common law
meaning - any possession, belongings or property owned solely or partly,
including beneficial interests, and/or debts owed to a person. For
example, when a person sells an asset with the amount to be received
over time as a sale by instalments then the outstanding amount is an
asset.

All assets owned by a customer are treated as assessable assets and
included when calculating the rate of income support payment unless
specifically exempted under a provision of the Act. Section 1118 of the
Social Security Act 1991 provides the details of assets exempted from
assessment. There is no general exemption contained in section 1118 in
regard to business assets.

A customer's interest in a business falls within the definition of asset
and the value of this interest must be taken into account when
determining entitlement to income support payments made by Centrelink.

Differences between business structures

The assets of sole traders and partnerships are viewed as personally
owned while private trusts and private companies are assessed as
separate legal identities. However, with the introduction of the Private
Trusts and Private Companies legislation on 1 January 2002, assets also
include any attributed assets of those entities from the application of
section 1208E of the Social Security Act 1991 where the assets of the
entity are attributed to a customer who is an attributable stakeholder
in a controlled private trust or a controlled private company.

Assets assessed at net market value

Assessable assets are taken into account at their net current market
value. The current market value is the value at which a willing
purchaser and a willing, but not anxious vendor would agree on. The
current market value of an asset can be decreased by the value of an
encumbrance secured against it.

The general principle is to assess the value of a customer's interest in
the net assets remaining in the event of the wind-up of a business. That
is, if the business operations were to cease, assets of the business
were sold and converted to cash and all liabilities repaid, the
assessable asset value of the customer's interest in a business would be
the amount left over which the customer would receive.

This is accomplished by an assessment of the most recent business
balance sheet, with adjustments made to reflect the current market value
of business assets.

The value of a business is based on the information in the balance sheet
and depreciation schedule. The basis for this approach is that the
previous financial results of a business are the most accurate
indication of the assets held by the business the customer has an
interest in. Unless there has been some change in the business, the
balance sheet and depreciation schedule continue to provide a
sufficiently accurate indication of the assets held by the business.
These financial statements, in particular the balance sheet, therefore
represent the best starting point to calculate the current assessable
asset value of a customer's interest in a business.

Exempt assets (principal home)

If included on the balance sheet, the value of a customer's exempt
principal home must be removed when calculating the assessable value of
a sole trader or partnership business entity. Any portion of any
encumbrance secured over a customer's principal home must also be
removed from the balance sheet. Where a customer occupies a house owned
by a private trust or company, the decision on whether that customer is
a homeowner or not depends on whether it can be concluded the person has
a right or interest in their accommodation which provides them with
reasonable security of tenure.

Primary production aggregation

When the customer is involved in primary production activities, the
primary production asset aggregation rules apply.

Valuation of assets

Centrelink may accept the value of some assets recorded on the business
balance sheet, particularly for assets such as petty cash, bank
accounts, and debts owing. Where the balance sheet may not reflect
current market value, the delegate should take all reasonable steps to
ascertain the current market value of the asset.

Under conventional accounting methods, fixed assets such as real estate,
livestock and plant and equipment are recorded at historical cost. This
will usually be the purchase price less amounts claimed as depreciation.
Each item on the balance sheet must be assessed to determine if the
asset value reflects current market value. The balance sheet is adjusted
so the value of assets owned by a business reflects the current market
values.

Real estate must always be assessed at current market value.

Intangible assets (goodwill)

There are many definitions of goodwill, but generally it can be thought
of as the reputation of a business. Goodwill may be included in the
balance sheet of a business if the enterprise undertaken by the business
was purchased as an already operating activity. In this situation the
value of goodwill stated in the business balance sheet will usually
represent the difference between the price paid for the business and the
value of assets owned by the business. Goodwill is therefore an
indication of the profit potential of a business.

Goodwill should be maintained as an asset if it appears in the balance
sheet of a business.

If a customer disagrees with this assessment and is able to provide an
explanation why the value of the business goodwill should be a lower
amount, a reassessment can be made based on the additional information
provided. If an assessor is unsure whether the value for goodwill shown
on a balance sheet should be maintained, advice can be obtained from
their Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).

Business entity accounting convention

Generally, Centrelink uses the business entity accounting convention.
Assets and investments not considered to be related to the principal
function of the business are removed and assessed separately.

Bankruptcy

A charge on an asset under section 189AB of the Bankruptcy Act 1966 is a
'charge or encumbrance' for the purpose of section 1121 of Social
Security Act. When determining the value of a customer's asset it is to
be reduced by the amount of the 'charge or encumbrance' imposed under
the Bankruptcy Act 1966.

Related links

Business liabilities

The balance sheet

The depreciation schedule

Assets and liabilities of a business

Other assets owned by an entity

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Changes to income and assets from a business structure

Assessing income assets from cooperatives

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Sole traders

Partnerships

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Share traders

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
