
Southbound primary producer claim for TFES (P Scheme) 043-21071639

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) only.

This document explains how to assess a Tasmanian Freight Equalisation
Scheme (TFES) primary producer (P Scheme) southbound goods claim.

TFES southbound primary producer claims

Businesses or individuals engaged in agriculture, forestry or fishing in
Tasmania are eligible to claim material inputs, machinery, implements
and equipment for use in that industry.

Claimants must be the end user of the goods shipped.

Domestic Goods – are Australian goods or any goods that have undergone a
manufacturing process on the mainland of Australia before shipping to
Tasmania.

Imported Goods – are goods that are imported and shipped to Tasmania
from a mainland Australian port. Imported goods may be eligible to claim
when there is no Australian equivalent available.

Note: imported goods are claimable from 1 October 2021 for shipments on
or after 1 July 2021.

The business must be an approved primary producer before lodging a claim
for assistance.

Claim receipt

TFES primary producer southbound imported goods claims must be lodged
online by either:

-   Tasmanian Bulk Upload System (TBUS) - the claimant enters the
    shipment information into an Excel template, which is then uploaded
    to the system. The template and instructions are given to the
    business when approved as a TFES claimant
-   Third Party Portal – the claimant enters shipment information
    directly into the CBOS system

Approved TFES claimants get online access when they register.

Claimants use Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) to lodge online
claims.

TFES primary producer southbound domestic goods claims are lodged using
the online methods or TFES- Claim for assistance – domestic goods form
(TAS002) sent by:

-   email
-   post, or
-   fax

Note: if a TFES claimant authorises a claims agent to lodge claims on
their behalf, the agent must lodge claims using one of the online
methods.

Supporting documents

Supporting documents must be lodged with the claim. This includes, but
is not limited to:

-   freight forwarder or shipping company invoices
-   supplier invoices
-   consignment notes
-   tariff concession order (TCO) numbers, or statutory declaration
-   additional letters, emails and documentation
-   Verification of Transport Details – Southbound form (TAS005)

Required documents may vary, depending on the claim type.

Self-assessed claims will not have supporting documents.

The Resources page contains links to forms, templates and various
websites with TFES information.

Related links

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES)

TFES claim types

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES) quality checking

Register a TFES claimant

Update TFES claimant information

Add or update TFES southbound goods and suppliers

Online services for TFES claimant

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
