
Packaged activities 043-04040010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the steps required by Complex Assessment Officers
(CAO) to complete packaged activities. Packaged activities are used to
assist in the initial assessment of the income and assets from a number
of private trusts and/or private companies in a multiple entity
structure.

Packaged activities - description

Packaged activities allow the records of all linked organisations within
a structure to be updated at the same time. The packaged activity allows
for all linked customer records to be assessed once only, even though
information has been coded on a number of screens on 2 or more linked
organisations.

A package consists of at least 2 different activities on 2 different
Customer Reference Numbers (CRN), allowing them to be assessed in 1
action. The footer details only need to be coded once and it is only
necessary to go to the Assessment Results (AR) screen once, but the
circumstance screens on all linked CRNs can be updated and they will all
be assessed.

For trusts and companies, a packaged activity can only be used if 2, or
more organisation CRNs are linked. Customer records cannot be included
in a packaged activity, but the activity itself will reassess all
customers linked to the organisation structure.

When all organisation to organisation and organisation to customer links
have been completed, access the T & C Relationships (TRRL) screen, via
any of the entities' CRNs, to see all interposed entities and Centrelink
customers associated with that structure.

When a packaged activity is finalised, all organisations in the package
will be assessed in the order of attribution. When the last organisation
is reassessed, the updated data will then ripple through to all linked
customers.

Related links

Assessing and recording distribution income

Assessing asset attribution

Assessing attribution income

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies

Attribution for private trusts and private companies

Creating links between organisations for trust and company purposes

Documents required to assess a private company

Documents required to assess a private trust

Multiple entity structures

Packaged review activities

Recording attribution income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
