
Documents required to assess a partnership 043-03120020

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what documents are required to assess the income
and assets from a partnership.

Financial documents

All necessary financial documents should be requested by Service
Officers and forms issued at first contact with a customer. The Service
Officer should explain why these documents are required.

Authorisation of third parties

Customers have to provide authorisation to Services Australia before
their accountant can be contacted directly, and the customer and their
accountant should be advised that the agency has authority under Social
Security Law to collect relevant information, and that the agency will
not meet any costs associated with the provision of this information.

Documents that may be required

The following documents may be required:

Business Details form (MOD F)

This is a Services Australia form, that is completed by the customer,
which:

-   enables identification of the type of business the customer is
    involved in
-   assists in determining eligibility for activity tested payments and
    payments with mutual obligation requirements
-   advises whether the business is continuing to operate

Real Estate form (MOD R) and local council rates notice for each
property owned by partnership.

The MOD R is the Services Australia form which asks questions relating
to the type, ownership and value of real estate assets. The rates notice
has the relevant details of the property identification, for example,
Lot and DP numbers required for a valuation. Note: if the property is
larger than 2 hectares a rural property questionnaire is required for
more details

The MOD R is required to:

-   Gather information necessary for the assessment of the value of a
    property
-   Show if any income is derived from the property (that is, is it
    rented)

Profit and loss statement

Balance sheet

Depreciation schedule

Livestock Trading Account

Income tax returns (ITRs)

The customers ITR and the partnership ITR must be obtained. Although
partnerships lodge tax returns, the partnership itself does not pay any
tax. A partnership ITR shows:

-   The partnership's income from all sources
-   A list of business expenses and deductions, some of which may not be
    allowable under Social Security Law (Note: the income tax return may
    not include sufficient expense details so a profit and loss
    statement will still be required)
-   For multiple properties owned by the partnership – a separate profit
    and loss statement must be provided for each property
-   A Statement of Distribution will generally be attached to the
    partnership ITR which indicates the share of the profit or loss for
    each member of the partnership
-   Show how the profit or loss of a partnership is split amongst the
    partners

Schedules for investment loans and bank accounts

Some business liabilities are not allowed under Social Security Law
depending on what assets they are secured against. Extra details for
certain liabilities may be required to determine what security is
provided for business loans and therefore which liabilities are
allowable as deductions from the assets when calculating the value of
the business. Recent statements may also be required to confirm the
latest balances of specific investments

The following documents should be provided:

-   Statements, etc. in respect of mortgages and loans owed by the
    business
-   Copies of statements of investments and bank accounts

Any Notes to the Accounts

-   Any Notes to the Accounts, if prepared or any other financial
    statements prepared need to be provided. These add extra information
    or explain a particular item on the financial statements. The
    additional information provided will give a better understanding of
    the business and will assist in the asset and income determination
    of the partnership

Partnership agreement

A partnership agreement sets out the rights and interest of each member
of the partnership. A partnership agreement can either be written, oral,
or inferred by the conduct of the members involved

The terms of a written agreement can be varied with the consent of all
the partners and the consent may either be written, oral or inferred

Where a written agreement exists it may specify:

-   The amounts of the business that are held for the partners
-   The interest of a partner in relation to a particular asset
-   The method of distribution of capital upon the wind up of a business

Partnership agreements may vary considerably from very concise details
to a broad statement of the interest of the partners

Where there is no partnership agreement, state partnership acts contain
provisions outlining the rights and interest of each member of the
partnership

When documents are not required

Not all documents are required in all cases, for example:

If a customer advises of the commencement of a business, it is important
to take into account the nature of the business

Accountants for small business enterprises do not always prepare a
balance sheet. Some factors to take into account are:

-   If a customer advises they have a small service type enterprise (for
    example, gardening, cleaning, home maintenance), it is possible that
    a balance sheet will not be prepared
-   Where no balance sheet is prepared or where the current market value
    of the partnership assets and liabilities is different to that shown
    on the latest available balance sheet, the customer should provide a
    list of the type and current value of the business assets and
    liabilities
-   The customer should also be advised to notify immediately if the
    financial position of the business changes

Not all businesses, particularly those conducting a service type
enterprise, will claim a depreciation expense. A depreciation schedule
will not be prepared unless depreciation is claimed as an expense

Rural properties and partnerships

If required, issue a Rural Property Questionnaire (Q454). See process
step 7 in Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing
activity.

In conjunction with the Mod R, the Q454 is for medium to large farm
properties. It collects information to correctly value a property from
the roadside.
Generally, if the property operates as a commercial enterprise, issue a
Mod  R as well as a Q454 questionnaire. A  Q454 is not required for
smaller properties such as hobby farms with minimal farm improvements,
or bush blocks.

A Service Officer assesses partnerships. If a partnership meets the
definition of complex, refer it to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).
For example, partnerships (includes rural) with multiple business
activities that are unrelated (excluding investment income and rental).
See Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).

The Resources page contains a link to the MOD F and MOD R forms.

Related links

Assessing partnership income

Assessing partnership assets

Primary production aggregation for partnerships

How to identify a partnership

The depreciation schedule

The balance sheet

The profit and loss statement

Livestock trading account

Income tax returns (ITRs) and the taxation notice of assessment (NOA)

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
