
Primary production aggregation for private trusts and private companies 043-04100030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on aggregation for private trusts and
private companies involved in primary production. The net primary
production liabilities or assets attributed to a customer will be
aggregated (combined) with any other primary production assets or
liabilities owned by the customer or attributed to the customer from any
other source.

Trusts and companies involved in primary production

From 1 January 2002, private trusts and private companies are assessed
for the income and assets of the entity. The income and assets will be
attributed proportionately to the controller(s) of the entity. If a
customer is the controller, or one of the controllers of an entity that
is carrying out primary production business activities or the entity has
primary production assets used by another business controlled by the
customer, the net primary production assets or liabilities, or a
proportion thereof, of the entity will be attributed to the customer.
For more information, see Assessment of assets for trusts and companies.

If after taking into consideration the primary production assets and
liabilities it is found that the company or trust has net liabilities
rather than net assets, the value of the deficit attributable to the
customer will be accepted as the customer's personal primary production
liability.

Note: adjustments for any market value of assets and any disallowed
liabilities will be made before determining the customer's interest in
the company or trust.

Any liability will be aggregated (combined) with other primary
production liabilities attributed to or owned by the customer. The same
principal applies if there is a net primary production asset
attribution.

Apportionment

Apportionment is used where a loan relates to both primary production
assets and non-primary production assets, for example, the loan has been
obtained to purchase both a farm and the customer's principal home. Only
the portion of the loan relating to the primary production asset is used
in the aggregation calculation.

Where a loan is used to purchase 100% of primary production assets (for
example, used to buy a tractor) and the loan is secured over primary
production and non-primary production assets (for example, the family
home) the liability is still considered to be a 100% primary production
liability.

The Resources page contains links to examples of balance sheet
calculations for a primary production private trust and private company.

Related links

Trusts and companies assessment

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
