
Employer enquiries about Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies 043-22032123

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage contact from employers regarding
Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidy claims.

Employer contact

Services Australia provides an inbound telephony service on behalf of
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment (DESE) for employer
enquiries about their Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) or
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) claims.

Employers can contact the agency via the Apprenticeships Wage Subsidy
(AWS) line. Do not transfer calls to or from the line.

Staff roles and responsibilities

From 11 April 2022, the agency will provide services on behalf of DESE
relating to BAC and CAC claims including employer phone enquiries. See
Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies.

Staff will use the Apprenticeship Data Management System (ADMS) and the
Work Allocation Method to manage employer enquiries.

Refer employers to their Australian Apprenticeship Support Network
(AASN) provider for enquiries about:

-   eligibility for the BAC and CAC wage subsidies
-   advice on BAC registration process
-   general BAC and CAC information
-   claims for wages paid from 5 October 2020 to 31 December 2021

Refer employers in the first instance to the Australian Apprenticeships
website for enquires about:

-   myGov registration and accessing ADMS
-   assistance with BAC or CAC claim navigation in ADMS
-   understanding BAC or CAC payments and calculations

Where employers indicate they would prefer telephony assistance or their
enquiry relates to an appeal or complaint, refer them to the DESE
Student enquiry line (option 3).

Progress of Claim

Employers may contact to enquire about the progress of a submitted BAC
or CAC claim, see Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies.

Determine claim progress by:

-   checking the BAC or CAC claim status, and
-   reviewing the Comments and Service Notes in ADMS

When assisting employers with progress of claim enquiries:

-   record a Service Note, detailing the discussion and any actions in
    ADMS for claims with an Assessment or Returned status
-   do not make updates to the claim status in ADMS, unless directed to
    in the Operational Blueprint

Services Australia Technical Peer Support Officers (TPSO) will manage
claims referred to the DESE AWSE line. Advise employers enquiring on the
progress of these claims that their claim has been escalated for
investigation and will be progressed as soon as possible after
resolution. The DESE AWSE line is for Services Australia TPSOs only, do
not give the number to employers.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Apprenticeships
website with information on Australian Apprenticeship Support Network
(AASN) providers.

Related links

Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and Completing
Apprenticeship Commencements (CAC) wage subsidies

Verifying evidence for Boosting Apprenticeship Commencements (BAC) and
Completing of Apprenticeship Commencement (CAC) wage subsidies

Apprenticeships Data Management System (ADMS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
