-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information relating to gifting and how it is
assessed in relation to trusts and companies.

Special Disability Trust rules

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
contribution to an approved SDT may be exempt from the deprivation
provisions if the total contribution amount to the SDT is below the
concessional gifting cap and certain criteria are met. A separate
procedure covers SDTs.

Attributable income

A customer who is subject to attribution of a trust or company's
attributable income (that is a controller) and who receives income
distributions that are lower than the amount determined by their
attribution percentage, can be considered to have made a gift.

Note: different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust
(SDT). Gifts to a SDT may be exempt from the deprivation provisions if
the contributor is an immediate family member, of Age Pension age and
the SDT concessional gifting cap is not used. This procedure does not
cover gifting concessions for SDTs.

Applying gifting rules

The customer will only have deprivation applied where the customer's
and/or their partner's gift amount from trusts and companies, combined
with any other gifts made by them, exceed the $10,000 allowable gift
amount each income year to a maximum $30,000 disposal limit over a 5
year rolling period. Only the gift amounts in excess of the limits are
assessed as an asset and deemed for a period of 5 years.

Pre 1 January 2002 gifting rules

Under pre 1 January 2002 gifting rules, where a customer transferred
assets to a discretionary trust, a gift was considered to have occurred
as the assets of a trust were not assessed as belonging to the customer.
After 5 years the gift ceased to be assessed, that is the deprivation
period expired. Similarly, a gift was considered to have occurred when a
customer transferred assets to a company or fixed trust and those assets
were not fully assessable to the customer under the net asset rules.

Post 1 January 2002 gifting rules

From 1 January 2002, new rules were implemented for the way private
companies and trusts are treated under the Income and Assets Tests.
Transferring assets to trusts and companies after 1 January 2002 will
not be regarded as gifting provided the assets of the trust or company
are attributed 100 per cent to the customer or their partner.

Transfer of assets

Attributable stakeholder

Where:

-   a customer transfers assets to an entity and they are an
    attributable stakeholder, or
-   as a result of the transfer are subsequently attributed with a share
    of the income and assets,
-   the deprivation provisions will not apply as long as valuable
    consideration has been received

Where valuable consideration has not been received, this is considered a
partial gift.

Note: the attribution percentage may change upon gifting due to the
application of the source test.

Non-attributable stakeholder

The deprivation provisions will apply to the full amount gifted, where:

-   a customer transfers assets to an entity, and
-   they are not an attributable stakeholder at the time of the transfer

If the person subsequently becomes an attributable stakeholder, then the
deprivation period and amount are not changed, unless the attribution
decision takes effect from the date of the disposal or earlier. If this
is the case, the disposal should be reassessed and considered as a
disposal of assets by an attributable stakeholder.

Other considerations

A partnered couple are considered to be 1 unit. Where assets are
transferred between the members of a couple, the gifting rules do not
apply.

Partial gifts

Where the customer or their partner are less than 100 per cent
controllers then a transfer of assets to the entity will result in a
partial gift because they will not have received 'valuable
consideration' based on their attribution percentage. For example, if
the customer transferred $20,000 to an entity they were 50 per cent
controller of, then gifting will apply to $20,000 x 50 per cent =
$10,000. Note: if the customer and/or their partner are 100%
attributable stakeholders, gifting does not apply.

One gift amount is calculated per trust

One gift amount is calculated in regard to income distributions per
trust, company or group of related entities for any 1 customer in
respect of each financial year. The gift amount can only be calculated
when final tax returns or financial statements are available. These
detail the amounts and beneficiaries or shareholders of all
distributions and dividends made by the organisation throughout the
financial year.

Assessment may be required

The Private Company form (MOD PC) or Private Trust form (MOD PT) asks
for details of any gifts made by customers to the trust or company. The
answers provided in these Modules as well as documentation provided by
the customer must be examined to determine if it is necessary to
consider gifting.

If any of the following actions are taken, an assessment may be required
to determine whether or not gifting has occurred:

Action by the entity:

-   Sale of trust or company assets not at arm's length, for example
    sale of real estate to a family member, sale of a business that does
    not include a value for goodwill
-   Issue of more units or shares
-   Waiver, write off, or forgiveness of debts owed to the trust or
    company
-   Distributions to beneficiaries, unit or shareholders who have not
    been assessed as attributable stakeholders or genuine investors
-   Distributions to stakeholders not in proportion to their asset or
    income attribution percentages

Action by the customer:

-   Transfer of assets or income to an entity, for example transfer of
    the customer's home to a trust
-   Sale of assets to a trust or company for less than market value
-   Transfer of units or shares in a trust or company to a family member
-   Sale of trust units not at arm's length
-   Forgiveness of an amount owed to the customer by the trust or
    company
-   Resignation from a trust or company

Gifting will not apply:

-   When the distribution made by the trust or company is to a genuine
    investor
-   For any distributions made by the trust or company prior to 1 July
    2000
-   Where the customer and/or partner are the only attributed
    stakeholders of the entity, any gift (or loan forgiven) between
    themselves and the entity is not deprivation. The customer should
    seek taxation advice before forgiving any loans, as there may be
    taxation implications

The Resources page contains a link to a document of scenarios of pre and
post 1 January 2002 trust and company gifting rules.

Contents

Trusts and companies - calculating a gift amount

Trusts and companies - transitional gifting rule

Trusts and companies - resigning control and gifting

Related links

Deprivation effects on Centrelink payments

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Assessment of trusts and companies

Assessing deprivation/gifting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
