
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help determine whether a customer
is self-employed or an employee and how to assess this when the customer
advises, either verbally or in writing, of an involvement in a business.

Self-employed customer

If a customer indicates that they are self-employed, their Form I
(individual tax return) is obtained. Income details are contained at
item one of the tax return where all payments of salary, wages,
commissions, bonuses, etc., including income from part-time and casual
jobs, from which tax was withheld, are listed. If income is recorded
here, the person may be an employee and not self-employed.

Earnings from commission

Income from commission may be assessed as business income where
allowable deductions can be made, or as employment income. This will
depend on whether the customer can be characterised as an employee or
self-employed. It is sometimes difficult to characterise the employment
relationship of commission sales people because differences between
being self-employed or an employee are not always obvious.

Each employment situation must be assessed to determine if the customer
meets the characteristics of self-employment or employee.

A person employed on a commission basis to sell a product and/or recruit
other commission salespersons is employed under a contract for services
and is self-employed. See Commission sales persons considered as
self-employed.

A person employed on a commission only basis, for example, a real estate
sales person is an employee. See Commission sales persons considered as
employees.

Definition of a self-employed person

A self-employed person may:

-   be a sole trader
-   be in a partnership
-   be involved in a company or trust
-   contract their services or equipment to other people
-   work on a commission basis

Customers who are self-employed may include:

-   child care workers
-   primary producers (including farmers and fishers)
-   market gardeners
-   tradespeople
-   business owners
-   cottage/backyard industries
-   seasonal workers
-   contractors
-   pieceworkers

Assessable income for a business

Under the income test, gross income from salary or wages is maintained
as income. However, if a person is carrying on a business, it is the net
business profit, after allowing expenses incurred in earning revenue
that is assessable as income.

The Resources page contains a link to the Decision Support Tool question
set.

Related links

Steps to making an assessment of a business

Sole traders

Assessing sole trader income

Obtaining an estimate of business income

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assets and liabilities of a business

Factors to determine self-employment

Identifying a package of services for self-employed customers

Identifying a package of services for rural customers

Income and expenses of a business

Initial contact by a farmer planning for retirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
