-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for customers who contact Services
Australia in relation to the Energy Bill Relief Fund.

Energy Bill Relief Fund for households

The Australian Government has partnered with states and territories to
provide electricity bill relief to eligible households through the
Energy Bill Relief Fund to provide support to those who need it most.

For eligible households, this temporary measure will see rebates applied
to electricity bills.

Services Australia will act as an initial point of contact to collect
and share consent for Centrelink customers not currently eligible for
state or territory rebates. Services Australia will then share the
consent with the customer’s electricity retailer. The role of the
electricity retailer is to check eligibility and apply the rebate.

Services Australia's role

Services Australia will send a letter to Centrelink customers in
September 2023.

This letter will invite customers to give consent through their
Centrelink online account by completing the Energy Bill Relief Consent
workflow. Centrelink will then share this consent with the customer’s
electricity retailer.

It is the role of the electricity retailer to check customer eligibility
through Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) and apply the rebate to
electricity bills.

Services Australia does not determine:

-   eligibility
-   the rebate amount
-   the rebate frequency

If customers do not want to provide their consent to Services Australia,
they can contact their electricity retailer directly.

To help with customer enquiries on sharing their information with
electricity retailers, see the Resources page for a link to Centrelink
Confirmation eServices (CCeS).

Eligibility criteria

States and territories determine the eligibility, frequency and amount
of the rebate. Customers should be directed to www.energy.gov.au to
obtain rebate amounts and timing.

Retailers in Western Australia and Queensland will automatically apply
rebates to eligible households.

See the Resources page for a link to the energy.gov.au website.

The customer must:

-   be the primary electricity account holder or named on the account
-   hold an eligible concession card or receive an eligible payment

These payments include (but are not limited to):

-   Health Care Card (including Low Income Health Care Card)
-   Pensioner Concession Card
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card
-   Certain Department of Veterans’ Affairs concession cards
-   Family Tax Benefit (A and/or B)
-   Carer Allowance

For a full list of eligible cards and payments, see the Resources page
for a link to the energy.gov.au website.

Customers can only get:

-   one rebate per household, even if there is more than one eligible
    person living there
-   rebate for their principal place of residence

Energy Bill Relief Consent

Centrelink customers who may be eligible will receive correspondence
inviting them to provide consent through their Centrelink online account
by completing the Energy Bill Relief Consent workflow.

The Energy Bill Relief Consent workflow provides customers an
alternative option for Services Australia to collect their consent on
behalf of their electricity retailer.

Service Officers should tell customers that by providing their consent
to Services Australia, it allows their electricity retailer to confirm
their eligibility for the rebate.

In Western Australia or Queensland:

-   Customers do not need to complete the Energy Bill Relief Consent
    workflow
-   Retailers will automatically apply rebates to eligible households

A customer can withdraw consent at any time using the Energy Bill Relief
Consent workflow or by contacting their electricity retailer.

The Resources page contains FAQs, contact details and links to Services
Australia and external websites.

Related links

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Customer consent for Centrelink Confirmation eService (CCeS)

Disclosing information to third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
