
Formal control of a private trust 043-04030010

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets are not over the concessional
asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines an overview of formal control of a private trust.
Information about who controls a trust is used by Services Australia in
making the attribution decision.

On this Page:

Formal control

Formal control of a private trust is evident by the power to:

-   appoint or dismiss the trustee
-   vary or veto the trustee's decisions
-   change the trust deed
-   these powers are known as the appointorship powers. The
    individual(s) or entity that holds this role is called the
    'appointor', but may also be known by another name within the Trust
    Deed, for example, Principal or Guardian

Appointor

The appointor of the trust will usually be the person (or persons) who
exercise formal control of the trust.

If no appointor is mentioned in the trust deed then usually the trustee
will have the power to appoint a successor, and hence be the controller
of the trust.

Unit holders in a fixed trust may hold voting rights to exercise these
powers, including the appointment and removal of trustees.

The factors to consider when establishing control for purposes of
attribution percentages for any stakeholder are as follows:

-   If there is a sole appointor, attribution will generally be made to
    that appointor
-   If the appointor is a professional, attribution will generally be
    made to the person or persons instructing the professional in
    relation to the affairs of the trust. If the professional is
    receiving instructions from an entity, attribution will be made to
    the controller of that entity either directly or via an interposed
    entity
-   If there is no appointor, attribution may be made to the trustee of
    the trust. If the trustee is a company, attribution of the trust
    assets would generally be to the person who controls the company
    either directly or via an interposed entity
-   If there are multiple appointors/trustees, but one appointor/trustee
    clearly directs the exercise of the appointer's/trustees' power,
    attribution will be made to that appointor/trustee
-   If there are multiple appointors/trustees, but they include a
    partnered couple acting as appointors/trustees who can jointly
    exercise control, attribution may be made to the members of that
    couple
-   In any other circumstances where there are multiple
    appointors/trustees, attribution may be made amongst those
    stakeholders who jointly exercise control. Attribution will be made
    in proportion to the capacity of those stakeholders to exercise
    control

Related links

Controlled private trusts

Informal control test

Attributable stakeholders for private trusts

Attribution percentages

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
