
Special Disability Trust (SDT) 043-04070000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on Special Disability Trusts (SDT).

SDT definition and purpose

An SDT is a private trust established for a sole beneficiary, who has a
severe disability or medical condition, generally by the parent/s or a
close relative for the future care and accommodation needs of the
beneficiary. An SDT may be exempt from the Income and Assets Tests.

The contributor may also be exempt from the deprivation provisions if
all of the following are met:

-   they are of Age Pension age. Note: if the customer or partner is in
    receipt of a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Age Service
    Pension the Age Pension age is different for the partner because age
    qualification for DVA Age Service Pension is 5 years earlier
-   they are in receipt of an income support payment or a DVA Age
    Service Pension
-   they are an immediate family member or a certain close relative
-   the SDT funds do not exceed the concessional gifting cap

The SDT is to allow immediate family members and certain close relatives
to make provision for the future care and accommodation for their
children with a severe disability or medical condition. An immediate
family member and close relative include natural parents, step-parents,
adoptive parents, grandparents, legal guardian for SDT purposes and
sibling for SDT purposes. It does not include foster parents,
step-grandparents, aunts, uncles, partners, children or in-laws.

For the private trust to be considered an SDT it must be created for the
exclusive benefit of a sole beneficiary with a severe disability or
medical condition, who is assessed as meeting specified medical and work
capacity qualifications. The sole beneficiary does not have to claim or
be in receipt of a social security pension or benefit. Distributions are
not to be made to the beneficiary or any other person. The trust is to
be used to pay primarily for accommodation and reasonable disability
related costs incurred by or on behalf of the sole beneficiary of the
SDT.

Requirements of an SDT

An SDT must meet the following requirements:

-   be 'protective' in nature
-   have only 1 principal beneficiary (the person for whom the trust is
    established)
-   the beneficiary must meet the eligibility criteria
-   provide primarily for the accommodation and care needs of the
    principal beneficiary
-   have a trust deed containing the clauses set out in the model trust
    deed
-   have a professional trustee, or alternatively have more than 1
    trustee
-   comply with the investment restrictions
-   provide annual financial statements and statutory declarations, and
-   conduct independent audits when required

The sole beneficiary of the SDT must meet the definition of a person
with a severe disability or medical condition for SDT purposes to access
SDT concessional arrangements.

Gifting to an SDT

Anyone can gift to the complying trust although income support customers
must meet certain conditions to qualify for an exemption from the
deprivation provisions. The exception is the beneficiary, that is the
person with a disability, and their partner. Contributions by the
beneficiary and their partner will be allowed only when funded by a
bequest or superannuation death benefit within 3 years of receipt of the
bequest or superannuation death benefit.

In certain circumstances, the requirement to transfer within the last 3
years may be waived under Section 1209U of the Social Security Act 1991
and in accordance with Part 3 of the Social Security (Special Disability
Trust) Guidelines where:

-   transfer of the asset to the trust was delayed as a result of court
    proceedings relating to the asset, or
-   assets were previously transferred to a trust intended to be a
    Special Disability Trust, or
-   intention was to transfer the assets within the allowable 3 year
    timeframe, and
-   contravention of paragraph 1209R(1)(b) did not involve fraudulent
    conduct

These waivers need to be referred to the Level 3 Policy Helpdesk for
approval.

Assets and income test

The complying SDT is exempt from the Assets Test for the beneficiary and
the controllers of the trust if the funds are below the concessional
asset limit. If the asset value of the trust is over the concessional
asset limit, the amount above will be included in the means test
assessment for the beneficiary of the SDT.

If the asset value of the SDT funds increases, that is, due to
investments or extra donations and the value is over the concessional
asset limit, these additional funds are assessable assets for the
beneficiary.

If the beneficiary's principal home is part of the trust it is an exempt
asset for the beneficiary and does not count towards the trust's
assessable assets.

Any income earned by the SDT is not assessable under the Income Test for
the beneficiary.

Deprivation provisions

The following are subject to the deprivation provisions:

-   gifts taking the SDT funds above the concessional gifting cap
-   gifts made prior to 20 September 2006 for 5 years from the date of
    gift
-   gifts made by customers under Age Pension age

Age pension age customers can contribute to an SDT and be exempt from
the deprivation provisions provided the SDT is for their child,
grandchild or sibling and the total SDT concessions applied funds do not
exceed the concessional gifting cap.

Escalation to a SDT Complex Assessment Officer

An escalation to a SDT Complex Assessment Officer may be required where
the customer requires further information, or to expedite an assessment
for a Special Disability Trust. Refer to the Process tab for the steps
required, before sending a Fast Note. Select Auto Text option > CAO
Complex Assessment > Request for CAO action > CAO Special Disability
Trust.

The Resources page contains links to forms and publications, intranet
links and information for customers on the Service Australia website.

Contents

Claiming and processing a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Cessation of a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Coding a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Review of a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
