
Informal control test 043-04030030

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT). A
SDT's income is exempt from the Income Test. The SDT's assets are exempt
from the assets test as long as the assets are not over the concessional
asset limit. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines information about how informal control of a trust
or company is established. Information about who has informal control of
a trust or company is used by Services Australia in making the
attribution decision.

On this Page:

Exercising informal control

Informal control can be exercised via:

-   a scheme
-   an associate
-   'use and enjoyment of assets'

A scheme

A customer may be capable under a scheme of gaining control. A scheme
means:

-   any agreement, arrangement, understanding, promise or undertaking,
    whether express or implied and whether enforceable or not, or
    intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings, or
-   any scheme, plan, proposal, action, course of action or course of
    conduct, whether there are two or more parties or only one party
    involved

Schemes may include:

-   a customer holding a signed but undated letter of resignation from a
    trustee, which can be dated and put into effect at any future time
    and revert control of the trust to a customer, or
-   a signed but undated transfer of shares from a private company so
    that control can revert to the customer

An Associate

A person may have the use and enjoyment of assets but apparently pass
control to an associate. An associate is defined in section 1207C of the
Social Security Act 1991 and includes:

-   a relative of the individual
-   an entity that acts in accordance with the wishes of the individual
-   a business partner or the partner or child of a business partner
-   a trustee of a trust where the individual, or another entity that is
    an associate of the individual, benefits under the trust

Note: if a person can show that a genuine gift or a genuine loan has
been made, the associates rule will not apply. Nor will the associate
rule apply if an income support recipient genuinely resigns their
involvement in a trust or company.

Use and enjoyment of assets

If a customer has the use and enjoyment of assets of a private trust or
private company, but not formal control, then attribution can be made to
the customer. This is a discretionary decision and would be invoked in
determining control of a private trust or private company in cases where
there is a blatant attempt to use and enjoy assets while giving away
formal control to avoid being attributed with the private trust or
private company assets.

Related links

Trusts

Controlled private companies

Controlled private trusts

Formal control of a company

Attribution percentages

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
