
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines the review process for when a customer directly
linked to an organisation dies. The death of a customer directly linked
to an organisation will prompt a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) to
review the entity's record. A Special Disability Trust (SDT) is treated
differently on the death of the principal beneficiary or the death of a
contributor. This procedure does not cover SDTs.

Bereavement review period

Where there is a surviving partner receiving payment, no action will be
taken to update any income, assets or liabilities of the organisation
until the end of the bereavement review period which is 16 weeks, unless
the surviving partner advises of changes during that time. This is to
allow time for the deceased partner's estate to be finalised.

Role of the CAO

A Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will attempt to determine who will
take the organisational position of the deceased customer (for example,
director, trustee) and the effect on the entity and linked customers. If
the appropriate information is not supplied after the first contact by a
CAO, all customers linked to the entity are sent a reminder letter.

Delays in estate being finalised

Disregard any share in a deceased estate until it is received or is able
to be received.

Generally, the grant of probate and the finalising of the estate will
occur within 12 months of the date of death.

The bereavement review can be extended for up to 2 years from the date
of partner's death to allow for delays in the granting of probate and
disputes in finalising the estate.

If the deceased partner's estate has not been finalised within 2 years,
update the surviving partner record based on the income and assets the
customer owns at that time. The customer will need to advise of any
further transfers from the estate when it is finalised under the general
notification provisions.

Note: the deceased's involvement in the entity can be updated before the
bereavement review is finalised. See Process for further details.

Related links

Creating links from organisations to customers for trust and company
purposes

Cessation of a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Bereavement reviews

Interest in an estate

Attribution for private trusts and private companies

Aged care means assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
