
Assessing partnership income 043-03120050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing income from a
partnership.

Definition of a partnership

A partnership is 2 or more people who own a business in common, with the
aim of making a profit. A partnership agreement may be oral or written.

The partnership is not a separate legal entity, which means that
although the partnership lodges a tax return, the profit or income is
assessable for the individual partners. The business may be run in the:

-   owners' names, or
-   under a registered business name

Each partner:

-   has equity in the business assets and receives a portion of the
    profits
-   is liable for all business debts

For a customer involved in a partnership, the assessable income is the
customer's portion of the assessable profit of the partnership. The
assessable profit is the net amount, after the allowable costs of
running the business have been deducted from the gross profit, but
before income tax. The customer's share of the profit can be further
reduced by allowable business deductions claimed by the customer on
their personal income tax return.

Income of a partnership

When assessing the income of a partnership business, there are some
points to note:

If the shares and/or managed investments are:

-   held in the name of 1 of the partners, they are regarded as that
    partner's personal investment
-   owned jointly, the proportion of the investments owned by the
    customer is regarded as the customer's personal investment
-   held by the customer, they are to be directly recorded as assessable
    assets on the customer's record

Note: where a customer is a member of a partnership in which the only
income produced is derived from interest or dividends on investments,
the customer is not considered to be a person who carries on a business.
However, if a customer is a member of a partnership which undertakes
business as an investment trader, buying and selling shares, the
customer will be regarded as a person who carries on a business. The
profit earned from this activity will be regarded as business income and
assessed accordingly

-   Loans made by partners to the partnership are not regarded as loans.
    They are regarded as an injection of capital into the partnership.
    The amount of such loans should be added back to the partner's value
    of share in the partnership for Assets Test purposes. No deeming is
    applied
-   Drawings are not assessable income. They are withdrawals of capital
-   When a partner receives a salary or wage, this amount is added to
    that partner's share of the profit to determine their income from
    the business. If the partnership has made a loss, the partner's
    share of the loss can be offset against any salary or wage paid to
    them
-   When a partnership runs more than 1 business activity within the
    partnership, a loss on 1 activity cannot be offset against the
    profit from another activity unless the businesses are necessarily
    related. If that is case profit and losses can be offset between
    businesses
-   Where a customer is a member of a partnership in which the only
    income produced is derived from renting, letting or leasing real
    estate, the customer is not considered to be a person who carries on
    a business. However, if the customer is a member of a partnership
    which undertakes business as a Property developer, they are
    considered to be carrying on a business, therefore income from this
    source can be offset by losses from a necessarily related business
-   Losses from previous years cannot be offset against current year's
    profits.
-   A customer may claim further deductions on their personal income tax
    return against their share of the partnership income. If these
    deductions are allowable, they can be used to reduce the customer’s
    assessable partnership income.

Service Officers and Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) must use the
correct date of event for business income and assets.

Sole trader's and partnership's income from investments, loans, drawings
and salaries is covered in another procedure.

Profit from a partnership is ordinary income; it is not employment
income. It is used when calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The
customer is unable to deplete their Working Credit balance to offset
this income unless they are also paid employment income from an employer
and their income is more than their applicable income free area. Note:
if the customer is receiving a 'wage' from a partnership business, the
customer cannot deplete their Working Credit balance to offset the wages
as the 'wage' is added to their portion of partnership profits.

The Resources page contains links to the Business Details (MOD F).

Related links

Address recording for real estate

Assessing partnership details

The balance sheet

Business deductions

Business has been sold

Business has ceased to operate or has closed

Common financial statements

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Partnerships

Sole traders

Share traders

The profit and loss statement

Steps to assess an interim profit and loss statement

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
