-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to be considered for the assessment
of partnerships involved in primary production. The aggregation
(combining) of a customer's primary production assets allows primary
producers to offset the value of all their primary production
liabilities against the value of all their primary production assets.

On this Page:

Assets and liabilities of partnerships

The main difference between a partnership and a sole trader business is
that the customer has a part interest, but not the sole interest, in the
assets of the business. The interest is reflected in the customer's
equity of the partnership's funds. Centrelink adjusts the balance sheet
in the same way for the normal assessment of a partnership, the
exception being all the primary production assets and all the
liabilities are aggregated. For more information, see Assessing
partnership assets.

Capital accounts

A customer's share of primary production assets or liabilities is
determined on the basis of the adjusted balance of their capital
account. The capital account is adjusted to include the current market
value of assets and to disallow liabilities not allowed under the Social
Security Act 1991. This means that if the customer's capital account
shows a positive value, then that value is an assessable primary
production asset. If the customer's adjusted capital account shows a
negative value (deficit), then that value is an assessable primary
production liability.

Aggregation

The customer's share of the net primary production assets or liabilities
of the partnership must be aggregated (combined) with any other primary
production assets or primary production liabilities attributable to the
customer, for example, those owned personally outside the partnership,
from another partnership, a private trust or private company.

Where a loan is used to purchase 100% of primary production assets (for
example, used to buy a tractor) and the loan is secured over primary
production and non-primary production assets (for example, the family
home) the liability is still considered to be a 100% primary production
liability. It is the purpose of a loan rather than the security
arrangement that determines whether a liability is to be regarded as a
primary production liability and therefore part of the aggregation
calculation.

Apportionment

Apportionment is used where a loan relates to both primary production
assets and non-primary production assets. An example is, the loan was
obtained to purchase a farm and the customer's principal home. Only the
portion of the loan relating to the primary production asset is used in
the aggregation calculation.

Refer partnership aggregation assessments to a Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO) to do,
see  Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).

The Resources page contains a link to four examples of calculations for
a primary production partnership and apportionment.

Related links

Partnerships

Primary production aggregation

Assessing partnership assets

Assessing partnership income

The balance sheet

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Assessing house and curtilage

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
