
Assessing sole trader assets 043-03110060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on a sole trader. A sole trader is an
individual running a business owned by one person. This procedure
explains how to assess sole trader assets.

Sole trader assets assessment under social security law

Most payments made under the Social Security Act 1991 are subject to a
means test. A means test includes an Assets Test. The assets of a sole
trader business are assessable assets of the owner. The amount to be
taken into account for Assets Test purposes is the current market value
of the assets, less the allowable business liabilities (debts) listed on
the business's balance sheet.

When assessing the assets of a sole trader business, there are some
points to note:

-   Debts secured against a principal residence are not allowable
    liabilities unless they were borrowed for primary production
    purposes (for example, to provide funding for a farming business
    rather than purchasing a farm which includes a customer's home)
-   Current market value of assets should be used which won't always be
    the value on the balance sheet
-   Some customers use their sole trader business as a structure to buy
    and sell shares and other investments. Not all of these sole traders
    will be considered to be carrying on a business, as this
    determination is based on the frequency and objective of the share
    trading
-   Financial assets on the business balance sheet, except for the
    principal business bank account are considered a customer's personal
    assets. These should be recorded separately on SVS, SIS or MIS with
    income from them assessed under the deeming provisions. Sole trader
    businesses are not legally required to produce a balance sheet for
    the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), so a list of assets and
    liabilities for the business should be requested

Date of event

Service Officers and Complex Assessment Officers (CAOs) must use the
correct date of event (DOV) for business income and assets.

The Resources page contains links to the Real Estate Details (MOD R) and
Business Details (MOD F) forms.

Related links

Sole traders

Partnerships

Documents required to assess a sole trader business

Common financial statements

Assessing and coding the Business details for sole traders and
partnerships Mod F

Business has ceased to operate or has closed

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Assessing sole trader income

Address recording for real estate

The balance sheet

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Managed investments - adding a new investment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
