
Resigning/relinquishing control of a trust or company or beneficial interest in a trust 043-04030080

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust (SDT).
This procedure does not cover SDTs.

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document outlines how if a controller resigns control of a private
trust or private company they will be treated in a manner comparable to
other people who gift or relinquish personally held assets.

Taxation

It is important that customers who are controllers of a private trust or
private company seek independent advice about the possible taxation
implications of relinquishing control of a private trust or private
company.

New controller

If the new controller is an associate, the associate rule will not
apply. That is, the old controller will not be held to be in control
simply by operation of the Associate rule.

Genuine resignation from a private trust or private company

A genuine resignation from a private trust is generally accepted as
having occurred where both the controller and their partner do all of
the following:

-   relinquish all formal roles and control in respect of the trust
-   relinquish all beneficial interest in the trust, and
-   make a written declaration that they will and have not exerted any
    control over, or benefit in any way from the trust since
    relinquishing control
-   if the trustee of a trust is a company, the person or their partner
    must also relinquish all formal roles and control in respect of the
    company. This means they must relinquish all shares and
    directorships in the company, and make a written declaration that
    they will and have not exerted any control over, or benefit in any
    way from, the company since relinquishing control

A genuine resignation from a private company will generally be accepted
as having occurred where the controller and their partner, (if the
partner is involved in the private company) do all of the following:

-   relinquish all formal roles and control in the private company
    (directorships and office holder positions such as secretary)
-   relinquish all shares in the private company (sold or transferred
    all their shares), and
-   make a written declaration that they will and have not exerted any
    control over, or benefited in any way from the private company since
    relinquishing control

The date of event will be when the controller and their partner have
satisfied the first two requirements as long as their written
declaration covers the period from this date.

Relinquishing all formal roles and control

For a trust, this means resigning as the appointor and/or trustee of the
trust by amending the trust deed. It also includes transferring all
trust property into the new trustee’s name. The customer also needs to
relinquish all beneficial interest.

For a company, this means relinquishing all shares in the company and
resigning from all Officeholder positions including Director.

Relinquishing beneficial interest in a private trust

Relinquishing beneficial interest by either a non-controller (that is, a
beneficiary only) or a controller, can be done by either:

-   amending the trust deed to remove the person and their partner as
    beneficiaries of the trust, or
-   creating a separate deed to renounce the beneficial interest of the
    person and their partner in the trust

Note: some trust deed amendments must be stamped by the relevant state
authority. Where stamping is required, the customer must provide a
stamped copy of the amendment to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO).
Where the amendment does not need to be stamped, the customer must
provide a copy of the amendment to the CAO, plus a letter from the
solicitor stating the solicitor arranged the amendments and stamping was
not required

Acceptable wording for a deed to relinquish beneficial interest

I (name of the beneficiary) renounce my entitlements to any further
benefits from the (name of trust), whether those benefits be income or
capital or any other nature. I request that the trustee of (name of
trust) recognise my request that I receive no further benefit from the
(name of trust) and furthermore recognise this renunciation of my
beneficial interest in the (name of trust) as irrevocable.

Signed sealed and delivered

(Signature of beneficiary)

(Signature of trustee(s)), and

(Signature of witnesses for both the beneficiary and the trustee(s))

Note: if the customer would like a copy of the wording, issue a copy of
the Social Security Guide 4.12.9.10 Resignations from a Controlled
Private Trust or Controlled Private Company On or After 01/01/2002. See
the References page for a link. This can be issued with either a Q999 or
Request for Information (RFI) letter.

Make a written declaration (required for private trusts and private
companies)

The final requirement in order for a genuine resignation from a private
trust or private company to generally be accepted is for the controller
and their partner, to make a written declaration that they will not
exert any control over, or benefit in any way from the private trust or
private company. Acceptable wording for the written declaration is:

I/We (name/name of partner) of (address) declare that I/we have and will
not exert any control over or benefit directly or indirectly in any way
from (name of trust or company) since relinquishing control.

(Signature/s)

Gifting provisions

If the controller gave up control of a discretionary trust before 1
January 2002, the gifting provisions do not apply. If the controller
gave up control after the new rules were implemented on 1 January 2002,
they have given away control of an attributable asset and the gifting
and deprivation rules apply. The gifting amount will be the net value of
the trust. See Trusts and companies - calculating a gift amount >
Resources.

An extension until 31 March 2002 was granted by the Minister for
customers relinquishing control without the gifting provisions being
applied.

Mortgages and resignations

If a stakeholder who holds a mortgage over an asset of the entity
resigns, then the mortgage documents should be examined to determine the
conditions of the mortgage, and whether the stakeholder has genuinely
relinquished control of the entity or whether they are still able to
exercise some informal control through holding this mortgage.

Distributions

If the customer received a distribution before surrendering control,
then that distribution is still assessed for 52 weeks under section 1073
of the Social Security Act 1991.

If the last distribution amount was zero and the customer has received
the final distribution, enter 'Y' for the distribution being ceased. The
procedure Assessing and recording distribution income contains further
information.

Where a genuine resignation may not be accepted

Services Australia must be satisfied that the person and/or their
partner is not exercising any control over, or receiving a direct or
indirect benefit from, the private trust or private company. Where a
person or their partner continues to exert control over, or receive a
benefit from, a private trust or private company it will not be accepted
that control has been relinquished.

Examples of situations that may indicate continued control and/or
benefit include:

-   arrangements involving the 'leaseback' of trust or company assets
-   ongoing use and enjoyment of trust or company assets
-   participation in business partnerships that involve the use of trust
    or company assets
-   large loans owed by the trust or company to the person or their
    partner
-   any other scheme or arrangement that provides continued control

Where the person's home is owned by the trust or company, then only the
creation/retention of a life interest in the home is permitted.

The Resources page contains scenarios of a customer resigning control of
a trust or company after 1  January  2002.

Related links

Gifting rules for trusts and companies

Trusts and companies - resigning control and gifting

Limited appointorship concession

Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Assessing and recording distribution income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
