-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about the Goods and Services Tax
(GST). The GST is a broad-based tax of 10 per cent on most goods and
services. This procedure outlines the assessment business income under
the GST.

On this Page:

Australian Business Number (ABN)

The Australian Business Number (ABN) is the identifier for all business
dealings with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and for future
dealings with other government departments. All businesses with an
annual turnover of $75,000 or more must register for the GST and will
need an ABN to do this. Businesses with a lower annual turnover may
choose not to register for the GST.

Business Activity Statements (BAS) are not to be used to assess income
for Centrelink payments; income tax returns are still to be provided.

GST refunds

GST refunds from the ATO are not to be treated as income as they are
reimbursements of money that has been paid to the ATO by the business
and is already being assessed as part of the business income. Where GST
costs cannot be claimed back as input tax credits they will be allowed
as a business deduction.

Any GST that is paid to the ATO is not a business deduction, but any
amount that is forwarded to the ATO is not included in the customer's
gross income assessment. Allowable business deductions should not
include any amounts for which the customer receives an input tax credit
or refund from the ATO.

When a customer is not registered in the GST system, they do not pay any
GST to the ATO and do not receive any tax credits. If a customer is
self-employed in a business that is not GST registered, the assessment
of income rules have not changed.

The Resources page contains examples of how business income is assessed,
and a link to the ATO website for information on the Australian business
number.

Related links

Business deductions

Sole traders

Partnerships

Income and expenses of a business

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
