
Livestock trading account 043-03070050

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The trading account of a business details the calculation of gross
profit after taking into account the cost to the business of the stock
or goods that have been sold. Primary producers in particular, use a
livestock trading account to calculate the value of livestock produced
and sold.

On this Page:

Business practice

Most primary production businesses do not prepare a separate livestock
trading account, but incorporate the calculation of gross profit within
the profit and loss statement.

The valuation of closing stock in a livestock trading account can be
made at cost, market value or replacement value and is therefore not
always an accurate indication of the assessable value of this asset. The
closing stock value will be the value that appears as an asset on the
Balance Sheet.

Valuing of livestock trading accounts

Valuations of businesses that are run via a private trust or private
company are done by the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) however, in
simple sole trader and partnership businesses, the Service Officer can
complete the assessment. If real estate and non-current assets such as
plant / machinery and office equipment need to be valued by an approved
valuer, the decision is made after discussion with the CAO or the
Valuation Helpdesk. Generally, the book value will be accepted, unless
the value is significant or there is reason to believe that the market
value will be substantially higher and bring the assets value to within
$20,000 of the asset impact level, for example, where the historical
cost value has been significantly depreciated but market value may have
depreciated less substantially.

Recording the value of assets

In most cases, Centrelink accepts the value of assets recorded on the
business balance sheet and trading account. It is necessary to assess
each item individually on the balance sheet and trading account and make
a judgement if the asset value recorded is reasonable. Where necessary,
the balance sheet must be adjusted and the value of assets owned by a
business reassessed to reflect current market values.

The livestock trading account can be used to help determine whether
livestock are recorded at cost or market value on the Balance Sheet.
This can be done by using the total sale proceeds and dividing by number
of stock sold to determine the average sale price per head and comparing
this with the average value of the closing stock on hand. The Resources
page includes an example of a Livestock trading account and how the
average sale price and closing stock value are calculated. If the
livestock are not recorded at market value, the customer should be asked
to provide an estimate of their current market value.

Where a customer's estimate of the value of assets seems unreasonable,
contact the Valuations Helpdesk to discuss if a valuation is required
before the claim/update is finalised. Where valuation of plant and
equipment is required by the valuer, a copy of the depreciation schedule
should be provided to the valuer. If the valuation of livestock is
required, the livestock trading account and details provided by the
customer about the type, number and condition of stock should be
provided to the valuations helpdesk.

Subsequent valuations provided by the approved valuer can be used to
calculate and/or reassess the value of a business.

The Resources page contains a link to an example of a livestock trading
account.

Related links

Business assets

The balance sheet

Steps to assess an interim balance sheet

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Valuation of real estate and other assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
