
Primary production aggregation 043-04100000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about primary production aggregation.

Aggregation rules

Primary production assessments are subject to the aggregation rules. All
assets used in primary production and all liabilities relating to
primary production are aggregated (combined) and treated as if they were
one primary production asset and one primary production liability.
Primary producers are able to offset the value of all their primary
production liabilities against the value of all their primary production
assets.

Primary production assets

A primary production asset is any asset that is used in the carrying on
of the primary production enterprise. It includes any land (excluding
any non-assessable homes), machinery, plant or equipment, and stock,
etc. used in the business.

For an asset to be regarded as a customer's primary production asset,
that asset must be used for the purpose of carrying out primary
production. Some assets may be used for both primary production purposes
and non-primary production purposes. The decision on whether an asset is
primary production or non-primary production must be based on the
evidence and should take into account the degree of use for each
purpose, whether it is essential to one or the other purpose and the
purpose for which it was purchased.

For example, machinery may appear on the balance sheet of the customer's
non-primary production business (for example, contract fencing). If the
customer demonstrates that it is used extensively in conducting the
person's primary production business and there are only occasional
fencing contracts, then the asset may be regarded as a primary
production asset in these circumstances.

Aggregation applies no matter how the primary production asset is held.
For example, a negative amount attributed via an entity could be used to
offset primary production assets held personally.

Primary production liabilities

A primary production liability is any liability of the customer that has
been obtained for the purposes of running the primary production
business. Only the customer's liabilities and assets relating to primary
production are taken into account.

For example, a bank loan to a third party, secured by a customer's
personal primary production asset, is not a primary production liability
of the customer (because it is a liability that is the third party's
responsibility). Where a business structure is involved, a loan borrowed
on behalf of the primary production business and secured against the
customer's farm property will be classed as a primary production
liability. The customer's share of that liability will be assessed when
calculating the customer's aggregated interest in primary production
enterprises.

Note: loans can be regarded as reducing the value of an asset where
there is evidence that the loan was obtained to buy that asset. For
example, a customer has an unsecured personal loan which was provided
for the purpose of purchasing primary production machinery.

Private Trust and Private Company primary production liabilities

An entity primary production liability may be secured against assets not
owned by that entity. These assets may be primary or non-primary
production related. Where this occurs, the total value of the entity
primary production liability is to be recorded on the entity record and
documented.

Provided that the entity liability is coded with a primary production
percentage on the Trust/Company Liabilities (TRLD) screen, and the other
non-entity asset types are recorded correctly on the customer record,
aggregation should automatically occur for all primary production
assets.

Calculation of the primary production aggregated asset value

-   Add together the value of the customer's primary production assets
-   Add together the value of the customer's primary production
    liabilities
-   Take away the total primary production liabilities from the total
    primary production assets
-   If the total value, from all sources and business structures, of all
    primary production assets less all primary production liabilities
    equals less than zero for a customer, then it is given a value of
    zero
-   The value of the customer's primary production net assets is added
    to the customer's other (non-primary production) assessable assets
    to obtain the total value of the customer's assessable assets for
    the application of the assets test

The customer does not need to be the primary producer to offset the
value of all their primary production liabilities against the value of
all their primary production assets. The primary producer can be:

-   the customer, or
-   a family member of a primary producer, and
-   they have primary production assets and primary production
    liabilities, in their own right

Advances from a national pool for primary producers

Many wheat and barley growers deliver their grain into a national pool
controlled by an organisation (for example, Australian Wheat Board,
Australian Barley Board) which sells the grain on behalf of the
producers.

When a primary producer delivers the grain he can choose to be paid for
it via an advance. If he chooses this option the Board estimates the
value of the grain and advances the grower around 80% of the estimate.

The grower enters into a contract with the Board. This contract is
recognised as a loan contract. The loan between the Grain Board and the
primary producer only needs to meet the general legal definition of a
loan, to allow it to be assessed as a liability.

For the purpose of assessing a customer's net assets allow the loan
advance, paid by the grain growers board, as a liability.

Other reasons for allowing it are:

-   Under primary production aggregation rules liabilities do not need
    to be held against a particular asset to be allowed
-   The advance liability is balanced by various assets such as cash at
    bank, stock, plant and equipment which the primary producer has
    purchased with the advance

Apportionment

Apportionment is used where a loan relates to both primary production
assets and non-primary production assets, for example, the loan has been
obtained to purchase both a farm and the customer's principal home. Only
the portion of the loan relating to the primary production asset is used
in the aggregation calculation.

Only liabilities and encumbrances secured against (or unsecured ones
which have a clear link to) the mixed assets are to be apportioned on
the basis of relative value of the exempt and non-exempt asset values.

Where a loan is used to purchase 100% of primary production assets (for
example, used to buy a tractor) and the loan is secured over primary
production and non-primary production assets (for example, the family
home) the liability is still considered to be a 100 per cent primary
production liability under section 1121A of the Social Security Act
1991.

Note: all trust and company aggregation cases must be referred to the
CAO for an attribution assessment to be done.

Apportionment of home property and primary production

Exempt house and curtilage cannot be considered to be an asset used in
the carrying on of primary production. Accordingly, if part of the
primary producer's liability relates to that house and curtilage, that
portion of the liability should be excluded from the total liability.
This division of liability between non-assessable home property and
business property is apportionment.

Note: apportionment might sometimes not apply, depending on the purpose
of the borrowings/liability. Section 1121A of the Social Security Act
1991 only allows liabilities, considered by the Secretary to be primary
production liabilities, to be deducted from farm assets. Examples of
allowable primary production liabilities might include borrowings to
purchase additional primary production land, to purchase primary
production plant and equipment, to build structures used for primary
production purposes, to repair or maintain primary production plant,
machinery, structures, etc. The circumstances of each case is to be
taken on its merits, however, in most primary production situations
where borrowings are secured by the farm property, including the house
and curtilage, apportionment will be applied.

In most normal farming situations, the liability should be apportioned
as follows:

Assume that the value of the whole primary production property owned by
the person is $200,000, the value of the house and curtilage is $50,000,
and there is a mortgage of $50,000 over the whole property

The calculation is:

-   Value of total property ($200,000) less value of house and curtilage
    ($50,000) equals the Gross value of primary production asset
    ($150,000)
-   Proportion of $50,000 encumbrance attributable to the primary
    production asset = ($150,000 x $50,000) ÷ $200,000 = $37,500
-   Therefore, net primary production assets (to be aggregated with
    other primary production assets and liabilities, if applicable) are
    $150,000 less $37,500 = $112,500

Note: farming properties are often over several titles and it is
possible that funds are borrowed against property that does not include
the house and curtilage. The individual titles and securities should be
confirmed before apportioning any secured debts. Separate valuations by
an approved professional valuer might be required in some cases.

In any case where there is a request that the whole of a loan secured by
property including an exempt asset (for example, house and curtilage)
should be allowed as a primary production liability, refer the details
to the CAO. The CAO may contact the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for
assistance.

Contents

Primary production aggregation for sole traders

Primary production aggregation for partnerships

Primary production aggregation for private trusts and private companies

Related links

Assessing and recording loans and liabilities for trusts and companies

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessment of assets for trusts and companies

Customer's principal residence owned by a private trust or private
company - determining home ownership

Home property adjustment amount and apportionment calculations on entity
owned residences

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Trusts and companies - concessions and exceptions

Assessment of trusts and companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
