
Northbound domestic goods claim assessment for TFES 043-21042807

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in the Tasmanian Transport Programs (TTP) only.

This document explains how to assess a Tasmanian Freight Equalisation
Scheme (TFES) northbound domestic goods claim.

TFES northbound domestic goods claims

A person or business may be eligible for assistance when they ship goods
from Tasmania for permanent use or sale on the mainland of Australia.
This includes goods shipped from King Island or the Furneaux Group to
mainland Australia.

Claim receipt and allocation

TFES northbound domestic claims are lodged by either:

a Claim for assistance – domestic goods form (TAS002) manual claim form
and sent by:

-   email
-   post, or
-   fax

Online lodgement (for registered claimants) using Centrelink Business
Online Services (CBOS). Using either:

-   Tasmanian Bulk Upload System (TBUS) - the claimant enters the
    shipment information into an excel spreadsheet template, which is
    then uploaded to the system. The template and instructions are given
    to the business when approved as a TFES claimant
-   Third Party Portal – the claimant enters shipment information
    directly into the CBOS system

Note: if a TFES claimant authorises a claims agent to lodge claims on
their behalf, the agent must lodge claims using one of the online
methods.

Supporting documents

Supporting documents must be lodged with the claim. This includes, but
is not limited to:

-   freight forwarder or shipping company invoices
-   supplier invoices
-   consignment notes
-   additional emails
-   letters or contracts

Required documents vary, depending on the claim type.

Self-assessed claims will not have supporting documents.

The Resources page contains a link to forms, user guides, Services
Australia website and external websites.

Related links

Northbound other markets claim assessment for TFES

Register a claim for a TFES claimant

TFES claim types

TFES payment process

Update TFES claimant information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
