
Portability of Add-ons 061-01070000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an overview of the portability rules of add-ons
for Centrelink payments.

On this Page:

Eligibility

Customers who are eligible for a Centrelink payment (such as Age
Pension, JobSeeker Payment (JSP)) are often also eligible to additional
amounts referred to as add-on payments or supplementary payments.

Add-on payments can continue during an overseas absence outside
Australia, but there are many factors influencing whether add-on
payments can be paid and for how long.

Payments considered add-ons

Payments that are considered add-ons are:

-   Carer Supplement (CS)
-   Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)
-   Energy Supplement, referred to as quarterly supplement for
    Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders
-   Incentive Allowance (IA)
-   Pension Supplement
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Quarterly supplement
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL)
-   Utilities Allowance (UA)

Basic rules

-   Add-on payments are generally not portable if the customer ceases to
    reside in Australia. Payments can only be made during temporary
    absences from Australia (the exceptions are outlined below)
-   Carer supplement is payable to a customer outside Australia provided
    they qualify for an instalment of a qualifying payment in respect of
    a period that includes 1 July
-   Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP) is a one-off payment paid
    to a customer entitled to Carer Allowance (for a child), providing
    payment is made for a period that includes 1 July
-   Energy Supplement paid fortnightly is payable for 6 weeks from the
    date of departure
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance and Incentive Allowance are portable for 6
    weeks, or up to 26 weeks if the primary payment is portable
    indefinitely
-   Pension Supplement (for a temporary departure) is payable for 6
    weeks from the date of departure. If the customer is still outside
    of Australia after 6 weeks, Pension Supplement Basic Amount will be
    paid indefinitely if the customer's income support payment is
    payable
-   Pension Supplement (for a customer who has ceased residing in
    Australia), will be paid indefinitely as the Pension Supplement
    Basic Amount if the customer's income support payment is payable
-   Pensioner Education Supplement is payable for 6 weeks from the date
    of departure if the primary payment is payable
-   Quarterly supplement is payable to a Commonwealth Seniors Health
    Care Card (CSHC) holder temporarily outside Australia if the test
    day falls within 6 weeks of the date of departure
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA) is payable for 8 weeks from the date the
    customer left the remote area, whether that is to go overseas or
    not. For example, if a customer leaves a remote area, spends 3 weeks
    with their child in Sydney and then goes overseas, RAA would be
    payable for 5 weeks after departure from Australia
-   Rent Assistance (RA) is portable for the same period that the main
    payment is portable if that is portable for a limited period,
    generally a maximum of 6 weeks for Parenting Payment, Youth
    Allowance (student) for example. If the main payment continues to be
    payable overseas for longer than 6 weeks because of approved study,
    RA also remains payable for as long as the main payment continues.
    This will also apply if the payment continues because the customer
    has been granted an extension of portability for a limited
    portability payment
-   RA is portable for up to 26 weeks for a temporary absence if the
    main payment is portable indefinitely (Age Pension or Disability
    Support Pension (DSP) assessed under certain provisions).
    Portability extension provisions cannot apply where the main payment
    is portable indefinitely
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL) is paid to a person on the test date
    provided they have not been absent for more than 6 weeks
-   Utilities Allowance is payable to a customer temporarily outside
    Australia if the test day falls within 6 weeks of the date of
    departure from Australia

None of these payments will continue if the main payment ceases to be
payable or CSHC is cancelled.

To retain payment during an absence outside Australia, the customer must
remain qualified for both the main payment and the add-on. For example,
a customer must continue receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and continue
paying rent while they are away for RA to continue.

Impact of portability savings

Add-on payments are not payable to any customer paid under the pre 1
July 2004 portability rules, whether in or outside Australia. This is
because the customer must be living outside Australia to retain this
savings provision. If they return to Australia on or after 1 July 2004
for residence they will lose their saved status.

Add-on payments are also not payable from departure to customers who are
leaving Australia to live in another country or paid under the pre 20
September 2000 portability rules. Add-on payments may be portable for a
customer paid under an International Agreement depending on the terms of
the relevant Agreement.

Duration of payments

Most payments (other than Age Pension and Disability Support Pension
(DSP) assessed as having no future work capacity or paid under the 1
July 2004 savings provisions will cease to be payable outside Australia
after 6 weeks (28 days for DSP). Some payments (such as JSP) are only
payable for a specific negotiated period which may be any length of time
up to a maximum of 6 weeks (28 days for DSP). Therefore, add-on payments
will also cease after 6 weeks absence from Australia, or the end of the
specific negotiated period. Customers receiving one of the longer term
portable payments (such as Age Pension) may continue receiving RA and IA
for 26 weeks.

If a customer is granted a discretionary extension, add-on payments
other than Pension Supplement and Energy Supplement, TAL and UA if
absence exceeds 6 weeks, will also continue while the customer continues
to be qualified for the payment.

If a customer's payment continues to be payable for longer than 6 weeks
because they are either studying an approved course outside Australia or
attending a training camp with the Australian Defence Force Reserves,
their add-on payments will also continue to be paid.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services when a
Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of
the payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless whether
the customer contacted or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers should
advise of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the [] Travelling outside of Australia service within their
Centrelink online account. If a customer's circumstances are more
complex they will be prompted to contact the agency. The Services
Australia website lists situations when customers must advise they are
leaving or returning to Australia.

Temporary return to Australia

If a customer is residing outside Australia and temporarily returns to
Australia for a holiday, the customer is not entitled to any concession
card or CES, Pension Supplement, RA, or RAA. UA can be paid to a
customer who is temporarily in Australia on a UA test day.

TAL can be paid if a customer is physically in Australia if they are an
Australian telephone subscriber. Note: it is unlikely, but not
impossible, for a customer temporarily in Australia to be a telephone
subscriber.

Contents

Incentive Allowance (IA) overseas absences

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) overseas absences

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) overseas absences

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Quarterly supplement overseas absences

Rent Assistance (RA) portability

Remote Area Allowance (RAA) overseas absences

Telephone Allowance (TAL) overseas absences

Utilities Allowance (UA) overseas absences

Related links

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Carer Supplement

Discretion to extend portability period

Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Health Care Card (HCC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Pension Supplement

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Portability of payments

Portability of pensions and payments paid under International Agreements

Portability of concession cards

Quarterly supplement

Returning to Australia

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
