
Portability of payments paid under International Agreements 061-01090000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the manual coding required for portability
decisions for payments made under International Agreements.

International Social Security Agreements

Australia has social security agreements with a number of countries.
Agreements generally allow customers to claim and continue to receive
certain payments when they move between countries.

International Services (CIS) is responsible for all agreement
portability decisions and coding.

Portability Script - Departure and Return

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns is to be used to
initially assess the customer's entitlement to payment while they are
outside Australia. The portability script will guide service centre and
Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to CIS.

The Portability Script cannot generally be used for agreement
portability and most cases must be assessed and coded manually by CIS.
The one exception to this is for departures from Australia for customers
paid by virtue of the Social Security Agreement with New Zealand. For
these customers the Portability Script - Departures and Returns may be
used.

Portability under agreements

Payments made under an agreement are only payable outside Australia if
the agreement allows. Some agreements may deem the partner of a person
paid under an agreement to also be considered to be paid under that
agreement.

Most agreements have rules that are specific to that agreement only. For
detailed information on each individual agreement, including portability
rules, refer to the relevant agreement file.

Note: the Agreement with the United Kingdom was terminated with effect
from 1 March 2001.

Generally, payments made under an agreement are payable indefinitely in
Australia and the agreement country, that is, for temporary or permanent
absences. Many agreements may allow portability to a third country for
the same period as a person departing Australia on the same payment
under normal portability rules.

Rate of payment

As with portability, the rate of payment is subject to the rules of the
agreement. Generally, a direct deduction rate is paid in Australia and a
proportional rate is paid outside Australia. Many agreements also have a
clause which allows the rate the person is receiving to continue for the
first 26 weeks of their absence from, or return to Australia if the
movement is temporary.

Agreement with New Zealand

The Agreement with New Zealand may affect the rate of Age Pension,
Disability Support Pension or Carer Payment where the customer goes to
New Zealand regardless of whether they are autonomously qualified or
paid under another agreement.

Transfer to autonomous

Customers paid under an agreement who return to Australia can only
transfer to autonomous if they are an Australian resident. Customers who
transfer to autonomous may be affected by former resident provisions if
they leave Australia within 2 years of again becoming an Australian
resident.

The Resources page contains a link to the International Services (CIS)
and International Programme homepages.

Related links

Portability of payments

Transfers to international social security agreements

International Social Security Agreements

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
