-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedure to assist Service Officers
determine if the customer's payment can continue while they are outside
Australia, for what length of time and the rate payable during any
absence.

Portability Script - Departures and Returns

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns helps Service Officers
collect relevant information from the customer and assesses their
entitlement to payment while outside Australia.

The script will:

-   code the departure information onto the customer's record
-   provide information about the possible effect on their entitlement
    while outside Australia, and
-   issue a letter, if requested

Use of the Portability Script

Use of the Portability Script when a customer advises of an absence from
Australia is mandatory.

The exception is when:

-   the script is temporarily unavailable and interview cannot be
    deferred, or
-   a Service Officer must make a manual assessment

If a customer notifies of an absence after they have departed,
portability must still be assessed using the Portability Script.

The script cannot be used for child only absences or Child Care Subsidy,
ABSTUDY, Farm Household Allowance, Double Orphan Pension or non-income
tested Pensioner Concession Card holders.

The script can record a child's departure from Australia if the child is
leaving with the parent. However, if the child is travelling outside
Australia alone, record the departure manually. See Family assistance
and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going overseas for more
details.

The Portability Script assesses a customer's portability. It does not
assess if they will retain qualification for their payment. The Service
Officer must update any changes in qualification or payability not
related to portability separately to running the script. Examples of
other changes, which, while related to the person's absence, are not
strictly portability issues, include:

-   a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer is going to another
    country to work full-time
-   a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer is leaving Australia to
    become a member of a couple
-   an Age Pension customer has sold their home in Australia
-   a Carer Payment (CP) customer is going to New Zealand temporarily
    and from that date, the person who they usually care for will be
    looked after indefinitely by another family member

The script will ask the Service Officer if any other changes have
occurred that will change the person's ongoing entitlement. This
question will allow the Service Officer to record any additional changes
at this point such as those listed above. While the script will
incorporate any such changes into the portability advice it gives, it
will only record the details in a document - it will not code the
non-portability changes.

Note: there is a known problem with coding when using the script for ‘no
work capacity’ (NWC) approved cases where the Customer Advised Travel
Details (RSCD) screen has previously been keyed with ‘NWC’. The script
tries to add a new entry of ‘NWC’ when it is already recorded. This
error does not prevent a user from using the script, but does result in
a script error and staff need to delete the new entry of ‘NWC’ on RSCD
in order for the script to progress.

Consequential reviews

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will identify numerous
consequential reviews that may be required because of the overseas
departure and return.

Only the following consequential reviews need to be selected when
identified during the portability interview:

Departure reviews:

-   Respite Care or Carer/Caree Portability Review
-   Return of outstanding SU19 forms
-   Review Apprentice/Trainee Status
-   Review Participation Agreement
-   Review Student Status
-   Section 24 Review
-   Vacation of Home Property Review

Return reviews:

-   Agreement Payment check
-   Code return to Aus
-   Participation Requirements Review
-   Section 24 Review
-   SHC (Commonwealth Seniors Health Card) Reissue
-   Transfer from I Environment
-   Vacation of Home Property Review

Note: selecting any other consequential review type will generate an
unnecessary work item in Workload Manager (WLM).

Where the Service Officer has the appropriate skills, they are required
to complete applicable consequential reviews with the customer after
finalising the Portability Script - Departures and Returns. The
Resources page contains information to assist Service Officers in
completing the consequential reviews.

Use of the Portability Script for hypothetical cases

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns, accurately guides
decisions about portability, and can be used for hypothetical cases
where a person wants information about the effect on their payments
before making a decision to travel outside Australia. While the script
will provide accurate information to them, the information about payment
for a hypothetical situation is not a decision and therefore cannot be
appealed.

Do not issue a portability assessment letter to a customer if they are
not definitely leaving Australia as their departure date may change and
this can affect their payment. If the letter is issued, they may believe
the same changes will apply to a different date of departure. If they
require further information, refer them to the website. The Resources
page has a link.

Restoration of payment on return to Australia

If a customer or child remains outside Australia after their payment has
stopped for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, their payment can be
restored automatically or manually if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. When Home
Affairs advise of departure/return information, the portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the person notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure and arrival provided by
Home Affairs. If the customer is adversely affected, they can advise an
alternative date. This most often happens if a customer passes through
Australian customs on one day, but the flight leaves the next day.
Services Australia must consider applying the alternative date if it is
reasonable and results in a beneficial outcome for the customer. In many
cases, customers do not need to advise Services Australia they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations when they should advise of a departure
before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, they can notify of their departure from Australia via
the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If their circumstances are more complex, the system
prompts them to contact Services Australia.

Services Australia website lists situations when customers must advise
they have returned to Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Change in circumstances

Customers leaving Australia are still required to notify any other
changes to their circumstances that would normally affect their payment
or concession card.

Depending on the event, they may be able to notify the change [] online.
See the Change of circumstances procedure for the relevant payment or
concession card type.

The Resources page contains information about consequential reviews and
the details a customer travelling outside Australia would need to
provide to Services Australia, other than details about their trip. It
also contains links to relevant forms and links to the Services
Australia website for information about payments while outside Australia
and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
medicine. Centrelink International Services (CIS) - contact details for
staff are also available on this page.

Related links

For specific payment information, see Leaving Australia and portability
of payments

Portability of add-ons

Portability of concession cards

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Discretion to extend portability period

Recording and correcting employment income details

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Former resident provisions

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Returning to Australia

Student studying outside Australia

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

Transfers to international social security agreements

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
