
Return to Australia coding for dependent children 061-03030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a customer needs to advise of a return to
Australia of a dependent child or children, the action to be taken by a
Service Officer in a service centre or Smart Centre, and the effect on a
customer's payments when the customer's child/ren return to Australia.

On this Page:

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The portability
of the payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of
whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs
datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations where customers should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

Immigration Datalink

If the customer and/or child has an active immigration datalink, their
return date will generally be automatically updated when they return to
Australia.

For those customers or children who do not have an active immigration
datalink, the date they returned to Australia will need to be manually
recorded.

If the customer advises a change to the date of return to Australia for
their children, the change will need to be manually recorded.

Departure not recorded

If the customer did not advise of their child/ren's departure and the
departure has not been recorded (that is, via the immigration datalink),
the departure coding must be done before the return to Australia can be
assessed and recorded. The Portability Script - Departures and Returns
cannot be used for child only absences from Australia or for CCS, FHA,
DOP or ABSTUDY.

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
contact details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at
every contact, and updated if required.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a child remains outside Australia after payment has stopped for a
portability related reason, continuation of payment on their return to
Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be automatically or
manually restored if they return to Australia within 13 weeks of their
payment stopping.

Concession cards

Auto-issued concession cards that list dependent children are portable
for up to 6 weeks provided the main payment is portable for this period.
If the customer has been outside Australia for longer than the maximum
portability period, the concession card is automatically reinstated when
the customer returns to Australia and the payment has been restored.

Customers will need to reclaim a Low Income Health Care Card if:

-   it has been cancelled because the customer has been outside
    Australia for more than the maximum portability period
-   it was issued for a child only and the concession has been cancelled
    because the child was outside Australia for more than 6 weeks

Multiple absences from Australia - residence

If the child repeatedly goes overseas for long periods with short
returns to renew their portability, it may indicate that the child is
actually residing overseas.

If a customer's child ceases to reside in Australia, or the customer's
ongoing care for the child becomes an issue, payments for children such
as Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS) can be
affected. A child must remain an Australian resident or be living with a
customer to continue to be a dependent child.

Doubt over Australian residence or child in care

If the Service Officer is not satisfied that the child is continuing to
reside in Australia or be in care, payment should be cancelled
immediately from the date that the child ceased to reside in Australia
or be in care.

If an absence, or multiple absences with short returns to Australia
between the absences, exceeds approximately 3 years, continuing
Australian residence is questionable.

If a customer whose payment has been suspended or cancelled because
their child has had multiple absences and then returns to Australia,
ensure that the child/ren is/are still residing in Australia or still in
the customer’s care before the customer's payment is restored or
re-granted.

If the payment is restored or re-granted, any future absences should be
checked very carefully before making the portability decision to ensure
that the child is still residing in Australia.

Multiple absences from Australia-return rules

If the last qualifying child of a Parenting Payment customer has been
outside Australia for longer than 6 weeks, the child must remain in
Australia for at least 6 weeks before Parenting Payment is again
portable.

If a customer's child has been outside Australia for longer than 6 weeks
from their original date of departure, they must remain in Australia for
at least 6 weeks before they can be considered an eligible child for
portability purposes. If these children remain in Australia for less
than 6 weeks, they are taken not to have returned to Australia for the
purpose of future payability outside Australia.

The Resources page contains a link to the online version of the Claim
for a Health Care Card (SS050).

Related links

Return to Australia

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre Call
staff for non-pension payments and cards

Portability of concession cards

Portability of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
