
Cancelling a trip outside Australia or changing the departure date 061-03040010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to be followed Service Officers
when a customer has advised of an actual change to their overseas travel
plans and may be used to adjust travel plans for any payment type.

On this Page:

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia. See the Resources
page.

Changes to date of departure

If a customer changes the date that they are planning to leave
Australia, this can affect their entitlement to a payment or concession
card. For examples of how these changes can affect, see Changing details
of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia.

Related links

Changing details of a child's travel to or from Australia

Changing the reason for leaving Australia or the length of an approved
absence

Changing the return date for an absence from Australia

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff

Return To Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of payments

Returning to Australia

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Discretion to extend portability period

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
