
Recording or changing details of a child's travel to or from Australia 061-03040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a child's travel to and from Australia can
affect a person's payability, and how to record the child's travel or
make changes. This procedure is to be used by Service Officers when a
customer has advised of a change to their child/ren's travel to and/or
from Australia. It is also to be used when a customer advises their
child/ren will be travelling overseas without the customer.

On this Page:

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer or a dependent child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex they will
be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia. See the Resources
page.

Changes in a child's travel details

If a customer changes the date that their child will be leaving
Australia, this can affect entitlement to payments and/or concession
cards - in some cases a child needs to have returned to Australia for
more than 6 weeks before payment for the child can be made overseas
again (or paid at a higher rate in the case of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)).

If a customer changes the date that their child/ren are returning to
Australia, the Service Officer must check whether payment can continue
for the additional time and if payable, whether the rate of payment will
change.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot be used to change
a child's date of departure or return to Australia. Coding and
assessment must be done manually.

When a child's travel must be coded manually

If the customer is also travelling, the Portability Script - Departures
and Returns can be used to initially record the details of a customer
and child's overseas travel, even if they are travelling on different
dates.

The script cannot be used to record a child's travel if the customer is
not also travelling.

Determining how the child's travel affects the customer

A child's absence can affect a customer's family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payment, or their income support payment as a
principal carer. The absence can also affect a carer's entitlement to
Carer Allowance and/or Carer Payment, as well as entitlement to a
child's Foster Child Health Care Card or Low Income Health Care Card.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot be used at any
time to assess the effect of a child's travel on the customer's payment
or concession card.

To determine the impact of a child's travel on the customer's payment,
refer to the procedure for the relevant payment type. These procedures
are listed in the related links for Coding departures and returns for
customers leaving Australia.

See also Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) interaction of
portability and temporary cessation of care (respite) rules.

The Resources page contains a link to Payments whilst outside Australia
on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Cancelling a trip outside Australia or changing the departure date

Changing the reason for leaving Australia or the length of an approved
absence

Changing the return date for an absence from Australia

Return To Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return To Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Return to Australia coding for dependent children

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Portability of payments

Returning to Australia

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Discretion to extend portability period

View/Update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
