-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a non-pension customer and/or concession
card holder needs to advise of a return to Australia, the action to be
taken by Service Officers in a service centre or Smart Centre, and the
effect on a customer's payments when they return to Australia.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia
through the Immigration Datalink. The portability of the payment is
automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether the customer
notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities
should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Immigration Datalink. If adversely affected, the customer can provide
evidence of alternative dates. Services Australia should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In most cases, customers do not need to advise Services Australia they
are leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary
absence. However, there are situations when customers should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

Immigration Datalink

If the customer and/or child has an active immigration link, their
return date will generally be automatically updated when they return to
Australia.

For those customers or children who do not have an active immigration
link, manually record the date they returned to Australia.

Portability Script

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot process a return
in all cases (for example, customer returning to Australia to live,
after living in another country). If the script cannot complete the
assessment or coding, it will advise this and create a review for manual
follow-up of the activity where required. In these cases, manually
action the return to Australia. Follow the procedures relevant to the
payment type.

Contact details and change in circumstances

The following customer details must be checked at every contact and
updated if required:

-   address (including postal address)
-   telephone contact details (including mobile phone numbers)

Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves via IVR, address
details do not need to be confirmed.

If a customer has a change in circumstances on their return, for
example, begins to pay rent, or resumes part time work, they must still
contact Services Australia within 14 days as usual.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

Note: if the customer is receiving Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
in addition to their primary payment, PES will suspend (EPF/SUS) if the
primary payment suspends. PES cannot be restored if there is a gap in
entitlement, the customer will need to reclaim PES. PES may need to be
cancelled to allow restoration of the primary payment (if applicable).
See Cancellation of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY
PES.

A customer may need to attend an appointment at their local service
centre on their return to Australia if they are subject to mutual
obligation requirements. Customers with reporting requirements are
re-profiled as a notification reporter during a period of absence from
Australia. Upon return to Australia, their reporting requirements are
again automatically re-profiled.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Customers cannot have their PPL period or DAP period restored on their
return if:

-   it cancelled when they departed Australia or while overseas because
    they are the holder of a visa subclass 309, 785, 790 or 820 and they
    did not go overseas for an approved reason, or they exceeded the
    agreed period for the approved reason, or
-   they are the holder of a temporary visa subclass 060, 070, 449, 786
    or 787

For DAP, this will result in the cancelation of their payment. This is
even if they did not receive the maximum DAP period for their child.

If the PPL child was born or adopted:

-   on or after 1 July 2020, their PPL period will be cancelled and any
    remaining days in the PPL period after the cancellation date will
    not be payable. They may be eligible for Flexible PPL days if they
    return to Australia and meet residence requirements within 2 years
    of the child’s date of birth or adoption.
-   before 1 July 2020, this will result in the cancellation of their
    payment. This is even if they did not receive the maximum 18 week
    PPL period for their child

For more details, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Special Benefit (SpB)

A customer receiving SpB should contact Services Australia on their
return to Australia if their payment stopped while they were overseas
and has not been automatically restored.

If the customer’s payment has:

-   suspended because they were outside Australia and has not been
    automatically restored on return, restore it manually if they remain
    qualified. Arrears are not payable for the period between the end of
    the maximum portability period and their return to Australia
-   cancelled, they will need to lodge a new claim. Holders of
    Provisional Partner Visas 309 and 820 who are required to re-claim
    cannot be exempt from the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period
    (NARWP) as a family member of an Australian Citizen or a permanent
    resident who has resided continuously in Australia for 2 years

Portability of concession cards

Concession cards are portable for temporary absences from Australia up
to 6 weeks (19 weeks for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card) from
departure, subject to continued eligibility. This includes non-income
tested Pensioner Concession Cards.

If a Pension Concession Card (PCC) or automatically issued Health Care
Card (HCC) customer returns to Australia:

-   before the end of the portability period and entitlement has
    continued throughout the period of absence, the original card
    remains current and a new card is not required
-   after the portability period has ended and their associated payment
    is current or restored, a new card will be issued

Customers whose Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC), ex Carer Allowance Health Care Card (EHC) or Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST) concession card has been cancelled cannot
have their card restored at all. These customers will need to reclaim.

Holders of Commonwealth Seniors Health Cards who return to Australia
after their card has cancelled may be able to undertake a verbal reclaim
in certain cases.

For more information, see Related links.

If a customer is not residing in Australia they are not entitled to any
add-ons including concession cards if they return to Australia
temporarily, unless they are paid under the Agreement with New Zealand.

Multiple absences from Australia - residence

If the customer is repeatedly absent from Australia for long periods
with short returns to renew their portability, it may indicate that they
are actually residing overseas.

For non-pension payments, the customer must remain an Australian
resident to remain qualified. The Service Officer must be satisfied of
this each time a customer leaves Australia, or payment should be
cancelled immediately on departure. If an absence, or a period of
multiple absences with short returns to Australia between the absences,
exceeds approximately 3 years, continuing Australian residence is
questionable.

If a customer whose payment has been suspended or cancelled returns to
Australia after multiple absences, ensure they are still a resident of
Australia before their payment is restored or re-granted. If payment is
restored or re-granted, any future absences should be checked very
carefully before making the portability decision to ensure that they
customer is still an Australian resident.

Most customers do not have to remain in Australia for any minimum period
before payment is portable again and, if the customer is paid a
proportional rate, their rate will increase from the date of their
return to Australia. However, some payments are affected by return rules
and other payments may be affected by former resident rules.

Customers who cease to be Australian residents and lose entitlement to
Centrelink administered payments will need to return to reside in
Australia before they can lodge a proper claim for payment. They will
need to be assessed as an Australian resident to qualify for payment.

Multiple absences from Australia - return rules

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
is receiving one of these payments:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Paid Parental Leave (PPL)
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

A customer must generally remain in Australia for at least 6 weeks
before these payments are portable again if:

-   these payments ceased to be payable or reduced for portability
    reasons as they were outside Australia for more than 6 weeks, and
-   they have returned to Australia and resumed payment

The exact rules vary according to which payment(s) the customer
receives.

A customer who is planning on returning to Australia and going overseas
again must contact Services Australia before they return to Australia.
The Service Officer can then advise them what effect any return to
Australia may have on their future payments if they travel outside
Australia again.

Multiple absences from Australia - approved study

The 6 week return rule on payments allowing extended portability for
approved study means there is no interruption of the portability period
where:

-   the customer has an approved overseas study absence granted, and
-   the customer returns to Australia for up to 6 weeks

There is no requirement to make a new decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australians Overseas website,
contact details for Centrelink International Services (CIS) and a link
to the CIS intranet page.

Related links

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return to Australia coding for dependent children

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Health Care Cards for foster children

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Portability of concession cards

Portability of Payments

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

Restoration of payments

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
