
Former resident provisions 061-01060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to determine whether a customer is
subject to special rules called former resident provisions when they
depart Australia. It also explains action to be taken by the Service
Officer and the customer before departure.

Former resident

A former resident is a customer who:

-   returns to Australia to live after a period of residence in another
    country, and
-   is granted (or transfers from assessment under an international
    agreement) an affected pension payment under domestic qualification
    rules

These customers are affected by the former resident provisions if they
leave Australia within 2 years of resuming Australian residence.

Payments affected by former resident provisions

The Australian Social Security system is based on residence in Australia
and a customer's need for income support. These provisions prevent a
person returning to Australia to gain access to an Australian pension
which might be payable outside Australia indefinitely and return
overseas immediately afterwards.

The payments affected are:

-   Age Pension, and
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Generally, if a person is granted or transferred to Age Pension or DSP,
payment cannot be made for any absence overseas that starts within 2
years of the date they return to take up residence in Australia. Normal
portability rules apply after the customer has resided in Australia for
2 years.

There is no discretion for unforeseen circumstances.

International agreements and former resident provisions

From 1 January 2014 customers who are paid:

-   under an international agreement, and
-   transfer to an autonomous payment when they return to live in
    Australia

are assessed as a former resident if they leave Australia again in 2
years of returning to live. This applies even if their payment type does
not change on transfer. Note: the customer can be transferred back to
the agreement if they are returning to an agreement country during their
2 year wait.

Customers who are granted a payment, and continue to be paid under an
international agreement are not affected by former resident provisions.

Customers not subject to former resident provisions

Customers who have been overseas long term while receiving DSP and
return to Australia and transfer to Age Pension while in Australia, will
not be subject to the former resident provisions even if they leave
Australia in 2 years of returning. The normal portability rules will
apply to any such absence.

Some customers who would otherwise not be payable because of the former
resident provisions may be able to get payment under an international
agreement if:

-   they are going to an agreement country, and
-   they qualify under that agreement, and
-   the payment is portable under that agreement

Exception to former resident provisions

Customers who are receiving financial assistance under the Medical
Treatment Overseas Program (MTOP), either because they are receiving
treatment or are accompanying such a person, are not affected by former
resident provisions for the period MTOP assistance is payable.

Portability Script - Departures and Returns

These rules are fully covered by the Portability Script - Departures and
Returns. Use this procedure when the:

-   script is not working, or
-   customer wants an explanation of the rules.

The Resources page contains information about circumstances where
customers are not subject to former resident provisions, information
about former residents who may qualify for payment under an
international agreement, a link to information about travelling overseas
with Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicine and contact details
for Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Age Pension customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Returning to Australia

View/Update overseas travel online

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
