
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether quarterly supplement is payable to a
grandfathered Energy Supplement customer while they are overseas and for
how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by a Service Officer
and the customer on their departure from Australia.

Leaving to live in another country

The quarterly supplement is not payable to people who are not Australian
residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country, the
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and quarterly supplement are
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia. Any payment
accrued between the last test day and the date of departure will be
automatically calculated and paid on the date of departure.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
CSHC during any temporary returns to Australia.

Temporary absence

The Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) quarterly supplement can be
paid to a customer who is temporarily absent from Australia if they are
the holder of a CSHC, are grandfathered for Energy Supplement and the
test day falls within 6 weeks of the date of departure. Any payment
accrued from the last test day up to 6 weeks after departure will be
paid out 6 weeks after departure.

Quarterly supplement test days are 20 March, 20 June, 20 September and
20 December each year.

For more information about grandfathering for Energy Supplement, see
Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders.

Restoration on return to Australia

If a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holder's temporary absence
was for more than 6 weeks but less than 19 weeks, the quarterly
supplement will automatically start to accrue from the date the customer
returns to Australia.

If an overseas absence was for more than 19 weeks, the CSHC will cancel
and the customer must reapply for a CSHC on their return to Australia.
Cancellation of the CSHC will result in the loss of Energy Supplement
grandfathering.

To re-apply for the CSHC, if the CSHC has been cancelled for more than:

-   13 weeks but less than 26 weeks, a re-claim form can be lodged
-   26 weeks, the customer will have to complete a new claim for the
    CSHC after they have returned to Australia

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the customer notified or not. Note: do not cancel Department of Home
Affairs datalink activities.

In most cases customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations when customers should advise of
a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned
to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex they will
be prompted to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia, see Resources.

Portability interview

Portability of the quarterly supplement will be automatically assessed
as long as the departure details are recorded correctly for the
customer. Use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns if
available, to assess portability of the CSHC as this will record the
departure and correctly assess entitlement.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
more information about payments while outside Australia.

Related links

Quarterly supplement

Portability of concession cards

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Travelling outside of Australia details online

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
