
Discretion to extend portability period 061-01050000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedure for a Service Officer to follow to
decide if a customer is eligible for a discretionary portability
extension. If a customer or child is outside Australia and is unable to
return to Australia because of unforeseen circumstances, they may be
able to continue to receive payment for a specific period. This is known
as a discretionary portability extension.

Discretionary portability extension

A discretionary decision can only be granted when the customer is still
qualified for their payment.

It is important to ensure that correct information is given to the
customer regarding a potential discretionary portability extension. Not
providing the information or giving incorrect information can be
financially damaging to the customer and may lead to a claim under the
Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration (CDDA)
scheme. Certain Service Officers in Centrelink International Services
(CIS) are the only staff with the delegation to make portability
extension decisions.

If a person receiving a payment under the New Zealand 10 year residence
exemption has a break in entitlement, their payment cannot be restored
at all.

When a customer or their nominee or agent, contacts Services Australia
about extending their period of portability, ensure current contact
details are recorded.

Discretionary portability extension changes – 1 July 2021

Age Pension, and Disability Support Pension (DSP) in some limited
circumstances, may be paid indefinitely outside Australia, however after
26 weeks, the rate is generally paid according to the person’s
Australian Working Life Residence (WLR). This is known as a proportional
rate. See Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional
rate.

From 1 July 2021, portability extensions of the non-proportional rate
overseas are available for:

-   Age Pension (including when paid by virtue of the New Zealand (NZ)
    Agreement), and
-   DSP (for customers whose DSP is portable indefinitely overseas)

Age Pension and DSP customers may be eligible for an extension of the
non-proportional rate for longer than 26 weeks overseas when they cannot
return to Australia due to unforeseen circumstances, such as a natural
disaster or serious illness of the customer or family member.

Age Pension paid by virtue of the NZ Agreement has limited portability.
A customer receiving Age Pension by virtue of the NZ Agreement may also
be considered for a portability extension if they are in a third country
and unable to return to New Zealand or Australia after 26 weeks.

A new extension reason of ‘public health crisis affecting Australia or
the country in which the person is located or both’ is available for Age
Pension and some DSP recipients only. This reason only applies to
pensioners with unlimited portability who are prevented from returning
to Australia by a public health crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic.

Request for extension prior to departure

To qualify for an extension of payment, the unforeseen circumstance
preventing the return to Australia must generally have occurred after
departure but before payment has stopped or proportionalised (for
customers with unlimited portability). If the customer has not left
Australia, they are unable to request an extension of payment unless it
is a request for:

-   financial assistance under the Medical Treatment Overseas Program
    (MTOP)
-   financial assistance under the MTOP to accompany a person receiving
    treatment
-   continued receipt of certain payments for a customer who has been
    deployed overseas as a member of the Defence Forces or Australian
    Federal Police (International Deployment Group) for peacekeeping
    purposes.
    Note: this provision can only apply under limited and specific
    circumstances. This is the only extension reason that applies to
    Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   continued receipt of DSP for a customer who has been assessed as
    severely disabled and is substantially dependent on and living with
    a family member who has been temporarily posted outside Australia
    for work

Portability extension assessments

Centrelink International Services (CIS) is responsible for all decisions
to grant or reject a request for a discretionary extension. If a
customer is receiving a restricted portability payment and they have
been granted portability for an approved reason for less than the
maximum portability period, then an additional period of restricted
portability should be considered before considering an extension. See
Resources for an example of when this can be applied.

Payments that may be extended

Only some payments with a period of limited portability may be extended.
These payments are:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Austudy
-   Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) (carer only)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) (where not entitled to indefinite
    portability)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) (customer only)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Rent Assistance (RA), Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA), Telephone
    Allowance (TAL), Incentive Allowance (IA) and Pension Supplement
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) (all components), Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
    (only CCS customer absences can be extended) and Double Orphan
    Pension (DOP) for both customer and child, with a limit of up to 3
    years
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) (only if the
    customer is deployed outside Australia with either the Defence Force
    or with the Australian Federal Police)

Note: DSP paid by virtue of the New Zealand (NZ) Agreement is only
portable for a maximum of 28 days in a rolling 12 month period. See New
Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information.

The following payments may continue to be paid the non-proportional rate
after 26 weeks in certain circumstances:

-   Age Pension, including those paid by virtue of the NZ Agreement
-   DSP (where entitled to indefinite portability)

Payments and concessions that cannot be extended

It is not possible to extend portability under discretionary extension
provisions for the following payments and/or circumstances:

-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), Utilities Allowance (UA) and
    Energy Supplement (ES)
-   Pension Supplement (although the Basic component is portable
    indefinitely and can continue if the main payment is extended)
-   the inside-Australia rate of a Transitional pension
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Health Care Card (HCC)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) paid under the 2017 Social Security
    Agreement with New Zealand

Extension conditions for limited portability payments

An extension can only apply if a payment was payable outside Australia
from departure. If the payment was not portable at all and then the
customer suffered an emergency preventing return to Australia, payment
would not resume.

The discretion to extend the limited portability period applies only if
the:

-   customer is receiving a payment which can be extended, and
-   portability of the payment has or will soon expire, and
-   customer is outside Australia, and
-   customer cannot return to Australia before the limited portability
    period ends, and
-   customer had intended to return within the portability period, and
-   customer is unable to return because of a specified extreme event or
    emergency situation that occurred during the limited portability
    period and prevents their planned return within that period

Extension conditions for unlimited portability payments

An extension to the non-proportional rate of Age Pension or Disability
Support Pension (DSP) after 26 weeks can only apply if:

-   customer is receiving Age Pension or DSP which is portable longer
    than 26 weeks, and
-   payment has or will soon reduce to a proportional rate (or add-on
    payments, such as Rent Assistance (RA), will cease to be payable),
    and
-   customer is outside Australia (and New Zealand, if paid by virtue of
    the New Zealand Agreement), and
-   customer cannot return to Australia (or New Zealand if paid by
    virtue of the New Zealand Agreement) before 26 weeks, and
-   customer had intended to return before the rate proportionalised,
    and
-   customer cannot return because of a specified extreme event or
    emergency situation that occurred during the initial 26 week period
    and prevents their planned return within that period

Discretionary portability extensions for children

Discretionary portability extensions can only be applied to extend the
portability period of a child attracting a payment or benefit under the
Family Assistance Act, excluding Child Care Subsidy. Portability
extensions cannot be applied to extend the portability period of a child
who is attracting a payment or benefit under the Social Security or Paid
Parental Leave Acts.

Discretionary portability extension for Age Pension

From 1 July 2021, legislation allows for a discretionary portability
extension to be considered for customers receiving Age Pension, when
they are unable to return to Australia within 26 weeks due to certain
circumstances. This allows the customer to remain overseas without their
payment rate being affected by Working Life Residence (WLR) rules. The
customer may be entitled to keep receiving add-on payments such as Rent
Assistance, Incentive Allowance and Pharmaceutical Allowance where the
main payment can be extended.

Age Pension customers paid by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement, may
also be considered for a portability rate extension if they are in a
third country and unable to return to New Zealand or Australia after 26
weeks.

Discretionary portability extension for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

A discretionary portability extension may apply where a DSP customer:

-   has limited portability, or
-   has unlimited portability and will be paid a proportional rate after
    26 weeks

Where a customer has unlimited portability, regardless of whether they
proportionalise or not, they may be entitled to add-on payments such as
Rent Assistance, Incentive Allowance and Pharmaceutical Allowance for
longer than 26 weeks overseas.

If an autonomous DSP customer who is in an Agreement country that covers
DSP has a request for a discretionary extension rejected, they can ask
for a decision to be made as to whether they satisfy the severely
disabled requirements using the agreement. If they are severely
disabled, they can be considered for transfer to the agreement, as long
as they meet any other agreement scope limitations. See International
Social Security Agreements.

Note: it may take some time to obtain necessary medical information and
payment would cease pending determination of their qualification.

Discretionary extension for saved DSP and Age Pension customers in Australia

A discretionary extension may also apply to customers affected by the 20
September 2000 or 1 July 2014 portability savings provisions, where they
return to Australia, and are unable to depart within 26 weeks.

For more information, see:

-   Customers assessed under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life
    Residence (AWLR) rules
-   Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Discretionary portability extensions due to Coronavirus (COVID-19)

A portability extension may be approved for customers who are unable to
return to Australia due to COVID-19.

Due to global disruption to many services, a high level of discretion
should be used when considering evidence to support a portability
extension due to the impact of COVID-19.

When considering evidence, take into account information publicly
available via:

-   media
-   Australian and overseas government websites, and
-   travel providers

This information can be used to confirm and verify the statements
provided by a customer are credible.

Customers impacted by COVID-19 travel restrictions are assessed on a
case-by-case basis.

Reason for extension - limited portability payments, DSP and Age Pension

Payment portability periods may be extended under section 1218C Social
Security Act (SSA), 54(1) Farm Household Support Act 2014 (s54), ABSTUDY
Policy Manual or sections 24(7) and 85EE (3) Family Assistance Act (FAA)
due to:

-   a serious accident involving the person or a family member of the
    person
-   an illness of the person, or a family member of the person, which is
    serious
-   the hospitalisation of the person or a family member of the person
-   the death of a family member of the person
-   the person's involvement in custody proceedings in the country in
    which the person is located
-   a legal requirement for the person to remain outside Australia in
    connection with criminal proceedings (other than criminal
    proceedings in respect of a crime alleged to have been committed by
    the person)
-   robbery or serious crime committed against the person or a family
    member of the person
-   a natural disaster in the country in which the person is located
-   political or social unrest in the country in which the person is
    located
-   industrial action in the country in which the person is located
-   a war in the country in which the person is located

For Age Pension and DSP (with unlimited portability) customers, their
non-proportional rate may be extended under the Social Security Act
(SSA) sections 1220A, 1218AB and 1218AAA for the above reasons, and also
for:

-   a public health crisis affecting Australia or the country that the
    person intends to return to, or both

For limited portability payments, the relevant event must have occurred
or begun during the period of approved absence to determine a longer
period. For Age Pension and DSP (with unlimited portability) customers,
the relevant event must have occurred or begun during the first 26 weeks
of the absence.

If the relevant event is political or social unrest, industrial action
or war, then the payment recipient must not be willingly involved or a
willing participant.

Note: if paid DSP by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement, no extension
is possible.

Reason for extension - Medical Treatment Overseas Program (MTOP)

MTOP is administered by the Department of Health and Aged Care.
Approvals under MTOP for life saving medical treatment are granted to
the patient and generally one accompanying caregiver. Services Australia
customers who receive approval to travel under MTOP, may be portable for
the length of the treatment.

Payment portability periods may be extended under section 1218D Social
Security Act (SSA), section 54(1) (b) Farm Household Support Act 2014 or
sections 24(9) and 85EE (5) Family Assistance Act (FAA) for:

-   a customer or child who is receiving financial assistance under the
    MTOP to receive medical treatment
-   a customer or child who is receiving financial assistance under the
    MTOP to accompany such a person

Reason for extension - Defence personnel or peacekeepers

Payment portability periods may be extended under sections 24(10) and
85EE(6) Family Assistance Act (FAA) and section 46(4) Paid Parental
Leave Act for up to 3 years for a Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care
Subsidy (CCS), Parental Leave Pay (PPL), and Dad And Partner (DAP) pay
or Double Orphan Pension (DOP) customer if they are:

-   a member of the Defence Forces who is deployed overseas, or
-   a member or special member of the Australian Federal Police deployed
    overseas for peacekeeping or capacity building purposes, or
-   a protective services officer under the Australian Federal Police
    Act deployed overseas for peacekeeping or capacity building purposes

Reason for extension - DSP family member posted overseas

Payment portability periods may be extended under section 1218AB Social
Security Act (SSA) for the period of a family member's overseas posting
for a DSP customer if they are:

-   severely disabled, and
-   substantially dependent on the family member, and
-   living with the family member during the absence from Australia, and
-   the family member has been posted outside Australia for work

Note: immediately before the period of absence, the family member of the
DSP customer must be working in Australia for the same employer who
posted them outside Australia. They must continue working for the same
employer during their absence in order for the DSP customer to continue
to be eligible under this provision

This extension only applies for temporary absences from Australia and
does not apply to DSP if paid by virtue of the New Zealand Agreement.

Duration of extension

An extension must be to a specific date. For income support payments,
there is no limit on the period, but it should be the minimum time
before the customer expects to be able to return to Australia and should
generally not exceed 3 months.

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) (parent
overseas), Parental Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) and
Double Orphan Pension (DOP), the maximum extension period is 3 years.

For CCS there is no child only portability. Where a child is overseas
with the parent, an extension may be considered. However, when a child
has not attended child care for a continuous period of 14 weeks,
enrolment in child care will be automatically ceased. Extensions do not
override this. Any amounts paid since the child last attended child care
will be recovered from the service. Consider the interaction of any
possible extension and the entitlement to CCS. If the child will return
to care before the 14 weeks are up an extension will be beneficial. If
the child will not attend for a continuous period of 14 weeks, any
extension will be recovered from the service who may pass the costs to
the customer. An extension of CCS cannot go beyond a total of 14 weeks
absence from care. The 14 week non-attendance period may have started
before the child left Australia. See Absences for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

A person receiving payment under the New Zealand 10 year residence
exemption can only receive the payment for a maximum period of 6 months.
If a person paid under this exemption is assessed as qualifying for a
portability extension, the extension cannot take the payment beyond the
6 months total period of payment.

If the customer is still unable to return before the agreed end date of
the extension, they can request a further extension.

What happens at the end of the extension period?

-   If a person remains outside Australia after the end of their
    extension period and their payment ceases, the payment (excluding
    CCS) can be restored if they return to Australia within 13 weeks of
    their payment ceasing. However, if the person was receiving a
    Transitional rate of pension they will lose entitlement to that rate
    and will be paid under the new rules upon restoration
-   If a recipient is receiving Age Pension or DSP and has indefinite
    portability, their payment will reduce (proportionalise) based on
    their Australian Working Life Residence (WLR) and/or will lose
    entitlement to pension supplements or add-ons, e.g. Rent Assistance,
    Incentive Allowance or Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   If a CCS customer remains outside of Australia after the end of
    their extension period, their CCS will decrease to a zero rate. Once
    the customer returns to Australia, their CCS entitlement will
    reassess. Where a child has no CCS entitlement for 52 consecutive
    weeks, CCS will cancel with status reason N52. The customer would
    need to lodge a new claim for any child where the CCS has cancelled

The Resources page contains examples of situations where an extension of
portability may or may not be granted and a link to additional
information on the Centrelink International Services (CIS) homepage. It
also includes contact details for CIS and the Families and Child Care
Business Process Branch.

Related links

Working Life Residence (WLR)

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Absences for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACSS)

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers assessed under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life
Residence (AWLR) rules

Incentive Allowance (IA) overseas absences

Rent Assistance (RA) portability

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) overseas absences

Former resident provisions

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
