
Restricted portability assessment procedure for Centrelink International Services Staff 061-01110050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document details how Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff
determine if a customer in receipt of a payment which allows travel for
an approved reason is payable while they are outside Australia and for
how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by the Service
Officer and the customer.

Approved temporary absence portability reasons

Some payments can be payable outside Australia for specific reasons.
Approval of portability for these reasons is limited to CIS. These
approved reasons fall into 2 distinct categories with different periods
of payment depending on the type.

Approved temporary absence reasons are:

-   to attend an acute family crisis (AFC)
-   for humanitarian reasons (HUM)
-   to receive medical treatment not available in Australia (MED)

Required duration absence reasons are:

-   to attend a training camp with the Australian Defence Force Reserves
    (MIL)
-   to undertake overseas study that is part of a full-time Australian
    course (Overseas Full Time Study (OFS)). For more information, see
    Student studying outside Australia

A customer travelling for an approved temporary absence may be paid for
the period required to deal with the reason for absence which will
generally be no longer than two to three weeks. Payments can be portable
for up to six weeks (four weeks maximum for DSP). A customer travelling
for a required duration absence may be paid for as long as the
circumstances require.

Initially, the Service Officer in the Smart Centre or service centre
will assess whether the customer has one of the approved reasons for
travelling outside Australia. If approval is a possibility, the case
must be referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS). CIS staff
will decide whether the customer's situation fits within the strict
guidelines and whether the verification of the reason for the absence is
acceptable.

Note: CIS are not responsible for assessing Overseas Full-time Study
(OFS) for student payments such as Youth Allowance, Austudy and ABSTUDY.

Payments portable for an approved reason

Not all payments are portable for an approved reason. Similarly, the
payments portable for an approved reason vary according to the reason
for travel.

For a summary of which type of absence may apply to which payment, see
the Portability table on the Resources page.

DSP customer paid under an international agreement travelling to a third country

If a DSP customer is paid by virtue of an international agreement and
they travel outside the agreement country, the agreement might impose
its own portability rules or it may refer to autonomous portability
rules.

If an agreement refers to autonomous rules, any DSP customer who is paid
by virtue of that agreement and who leaves the agreement country for a
third country will be subject to the same time limits as an autonomous
DSP customer departing Australia.

This means that third country portability will generally be limited to
28 days in a rolling 12 month period, but also that third country
portability may be granted if travelling for an approved temporary
absence reason of up to 28 days. For further information, see
Portability of payments paid under international agreements.

Acceptable proof of the absence

If the customer is travelling for an approved reason the Service Officer
in Centrelink International Services (CIS) will determine whether the
payment can continue prior to acceptable proof of the absence being
received. In most cases, CIS will advise the customer an assessment will
occur once evidence has been provided.

Payment may be considered prior to evidence being received in the
following circumstances:

-   customer is travelling due to the recent death of a family member
-   reason for travel would clearly meet grounds for payment and
    customer would be placed in significant hardship with suspension of
    payment. Note: these cases must be discussed with a Service Support
    Officer before approval

If approval has been made before receipt of evidence, the customer will
be required to provide supporting documentation on their return. If the
documentation is not acceptable or not provided, a debt will be raised.

In all other cases, for both approved temporary absence reasons and
required duration absence reasons, acceptable proof of the absence
should be provided prior to approving payment. This is to prevent
unnecessary overpayments being raised due to unacceptable evidence being
provided.

Where pre-approval has not been granted, payment will be stopped from
the date of departure, unless the customer is receiving a limited
portability payment and still has a period of general portability
available. Once acceptable proof of the absence has been provided, an
assessment will be made and arrears issued to the customer if eligible.

Unable to return to Australia

If the customer is granted portability for an approved reason and is
unable to return to Australia by the approved end date, they should
contact Centrelink International Services (CIS) or their payment will
stop.

If more time overseas is required, the circumstances can be discussed to
determine if the approved reason may be extended.

If, however, the customer is unable to return to Australia for a reason
other than an approved reason (for example, they are hospitalised
themselves), or they are still required overseas at the end of the
maximum portability period, Services Australia has the discretion to
extend the period of portability under certain circumstances.

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, their payment can be
restored if they return to Australia within 13 weeks of their payment
stopping.

Portability interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia. If the
script is available, coding the absence from Australia should be done
using the script.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason for travel. The Portability Script
will guide service centre and Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to
refer to CIS.

Designated Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff have the
delegation to approve and record payment overseas for an approved
reason.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day (for example,
airline crew) this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

The Resources page contains contact details, Services Australia website
links and a table of which payments can be granted portability for an
approved reason.

Related links

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance

Discretion to extend the portability period

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Leaving Australia

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Portability of Add-ons

Portability of payments

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Returning to Australia

Student studying outside Australia

Translation of documents

View/Update overseas travel online

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
