-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether a customer needs to
advise a return to Australia. It also provides the action to be taken
and whether that action is to be taken by a Service Officer in a service
centre or Smart Centre, or by a Service Officer in International
Services (CIS).

On this Page:

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The portability
of the payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of
whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs
datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency should consider
applying the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a
beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases customers do not need to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations where customers should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from, and
return to, Australia via the Travelling outside of Australia service
within their Centrelink online account. Where a customer's circumstances
are more complex they will be prompted to contact the agency.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

If the customer or child has an active immigration datalink, their
return date will generally be automatically updated when they return to
Australia.

For those customers and children who do not have an active immigration
datalink, the date they returned to Australia will need to be manually
recorded.

Departure not recorded

If the customer did not advise of their departure and the absence has
not been recorded by the datalink, the Portability Script - Departures
and Returns must be run and the departure coded, before the return to
Australia can be assessed and recorded.

Portability script

If the Portability Script - Departures and Returns is available, the
return part of the script should be used to ensure any action other than
recording the return is recorded. This is to assist the Service Officer
to correctly assess the customer's ongoing entitlement and record the
return details on the customer's record.

The portability script cannot be used for:

-   child only absences
-   CCS, FHA, DOP or ABSTUDY, and
-   customers paid under any International Agreement except NZ

If the script is not successful, the procedures relevant to the payment
type should be followed to manually action the return to Australia.

Customer's personal details

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

If a customer has a change in circumstances on their return (for
example, begin to pay rent, resume part time work), they must still
contact Services Australia within 14 days as usual.

If the customer advises a change to the date of return to Australia, the
change will need to be manually recorded.

Portability 'savings' status

These cases are assessed by staff in CIS.

If a customer who holds a portability 'savings' (grandfathered) status
returns to Australia they will be at risk of losing that status. Ensure
customers are given information so they understand the potential
consequences of a return to Australia. If they lose the savings then any
further absence from Australia must be assessed using the rules current
at that date of departure.

Portability 'savings' (grandfathering) rules apply to the following
customers:

-   assessed under the 20 September 2000 portability rules
-   assessed under the 1 July 2004 portability rules
-   assessed under the 1 July 2014 rules

Restoration of payment

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

Concession card entitlement

For temporary absences, concession cards are generally portable for up
to 6 weeks from departure, subject to continued eligibility.
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) however, have a 19 week
portability period. If a current concession card holder returns to
Australia before the end of their allowable portability period and
entitlement has continued throughout the period of absence, a new card
does not need to be issued as a result of the return.

If a customer is not a resident of Australia they are not entitled to
any add-ons including concession cards if they return to Australia
temporarily, unless they are paid under the Agreement with New Zealand.

Multiple absences from Australia - residence

If the person repeatedly goes outside Australia for long periods with
short returns to renew their portability, it may indicate that the
person is actually residing outside Australia. In many cases, the person
must remain a resident of Australia to remain qualified. For these
payments, the Service Officer must be satisfied that the person remains
an Australian resident each time they leave Australia.

-   If the Service Officer is not satisfied that the person is
    continuing to reside in Australia, a payment which requires the
    person to remain a resident of Australia should be cancelled
    immediately on departure. Where an absence, or multiple absences
    with short returns to Australia between the absences, exceeds
    approximately 3 years in length, continuing Australian residence is
    questionable
-   If a person whose payment has been suspended or cancelled returns to
    Australia after multiple absences, the Service Officer should ensure
    that they are still a resident of Australia before their payment is
    restored or re-granted

Most customers do not have to remain in Australia for any minimum period
of time before payment is portable again and, where the customer is paid
a proportional rate, their rate will increase from the date of their
return to Australia. However, some payments are affected by return rules
and other payments may be affected by former resident rules.

Customers who cease to be Australian residents and lose entitlement to
Centrelink administered payments will need to return to reside in
Australia before they can lodge a proper claim for payment. They will
need to be assessed as an Australian resident to qualify for payment.

Multiple absences from Australia - return rules

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the person
is receiving one of these payments:

-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Pension Education Supplement (PES)
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

If these payment(s) have ceased to be payable and/or the customers were
overseas for more than 6 weeks and they return to Australia, they must
generally remain in Australia for at least 6 weeks before these payments
are portable again. The exact rules vary according to which payment(s)
the customer receives.

It is very important that a customer who is planning on returning to
Australia and then going outside Australia again contacts Services
Australia before their return to Australia. The Service Officer can then
advise them what effect any return to Australia may have on their future
payments if they travel outside Australia again.

If a CIS customer returns to Australia, the return action must be done
by CIS, even if the customer has returned to live. If the customer
contacts a service centre in person, the information should be taken by
the Service Officer and forwarded to CIS.

Multiple absences from Australia - approved study

The 6 week return rule for customers on payments allowing extended
portability for approved study means that where a customer has been
granted an approved overseas study absence, a brief return to Australia
(up to 6 weeks) does not interrupt the portability period for the course
of study overseas. No new decision would be required.

Multiple absences from Australia - former residents

Returning to Australia may affect subsequent portability if the customer
has returned to live in Australia and then claimed or transferred to one
of these payments:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)

If these customers leave Australia within 2 years of their return for
residence their payments are unlikely to be portable at all.

It is very important that a customer who is planning to leave Australia
within 2 years of a return for residence (and subsequent grant /
transfer to one of these payments) contacts Services Australia before
leaving. The Service Officer can then advise them what effect the
departure may have on their future payments if they travel outside
Australia.

The Resources page contains a link to the Payments while outside
Australia website, Contact details for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) and a link to the International Services Intranet page.

Contents

Return to Australia procedures for Centrelink International Services
(CIS) staff

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre Call
staff for non-pension payments and cards

Return to Australia coding for dependent children

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
