
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about significant changes to the
Australian Working Life Residence (AWLR) laws governing the rate of
Centrelink payments paid outside Australia from 1 July 2014. These
changes apply to customers paid under either domestic or international
agreement portability assessments.

On this Page:

Customers who are 'saved' (grandfathered) under the pre 1 July 2014 rules

Special 'savings' provisions apply to customers who were either:

-   Outside Australia immediately before 1 July 2014. This special
    provision will continue to apply as long as the person remains
    outside Australia, unless they return to Australia for a period of
    26 weeks or more, or
-   Inside Australia temporarily. Customers who normally reside outside
    of Australia and were in Australia temporarily when the rules
    changed. This special provision will continue to apply as long as
    the person left Australia on or before 29 December 2014, unless they
    return to Australia for a period of 26 weeks or more

These customers are able to continue to receive payment under the same
conditions that they were subject to on their last departure before 1
July 2014.

Returning to Australia and impact on 'saved' status

A customer who is covered by this 'savings' provision can return to
Australia for a visit and then return overseas an unlimited number of
times without losing their 'savings' provision as long as they do not
remain in Australia for 26 weeks or more in a single visit.

In other words, if a customer covered by this 'savings' provision
returns to Australia for 26 weeks or more on or after 1 July 2014, they
will lose their 'savings' provision. If they then decide to return
overseas, they will be subject to the portability rules that apply at
the time.

It is important that customers currently covered by this 'savings'
provision contact Centrelink International Services (CIS) if they plan
to return to Australia. CIS will ensure the customer is given accurate
information about the possible effect on their payment if they decide to
return.

This 'savings' provision is also applicable to many customers paid under
an international agreement as the portability rate provisions for these
customers have also changed.

Additional 'savings' provision for customers receiving a Comparison Rate

An additional 'savings' provision also applies for customers receiving a
Comparison Rate under an international agreement who were inside
Australia on 1 July 2014.These customers are able to continue to receive
payment under the same conditions that they were subject to immediately
before 1 July 2014.

These customers will cease to receive the benefit of this 'savings'
provision if they:

-   leave Australia, (either temporarily or permanently) or
-   move to an 'inside Australia' (direct deduction) rate, or
-   move to an autonomous assessment, or
-   cease to be entitled to payment

Customers receiving a Comparison Rate and saved from 1 July 2014 changes
will have the comparison assessment coded manually on the Residence
Savings (RSS) screen.

Payment types eligible for the pre 1 July 2014 savings provisions

The savings provisions may apply to all customers receiving the
following payments:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Carer Payment (CP)

Note:

-   Wife Pension (WP) and Widow B Pension (WidB) customers who
    transferred to Age Pension on 20 March 2020 retained their savings
    provisions
-   Bereavement Allowance (BVA) was eligible for the pre 1 July 2014
    ‘savings’ provisions. BVA ceased in March 2020. As BVA was not an
    ongoing payment, and customers were not transferred to another
    payment, there are no longer any BVA customers with the 1 July 2014
    ‘savings’ provisions

The savings provisions can only be utilised by customers payable outside
Australia indefinitely under either domestic or international agreement
assessment, except for the New Zealand Agreement. All other payments
have limited portability under existing portability legislation.

Under the existing portability rules there were a number of exemptions
from being paid a proportional rate of pension. Most of these exemptions
were removed with the change in law in September 2000 (for example, an
Age Pension customer granted before 2 July 1986). However, customer
protections under the 20 September 2000 provisions will continue to
apply.

Portability rate rules

Customers who are payable outside Australia indefinitely, are usually
paid at a proportional rate after 26 weeks absence from Australia,
although some international agreements may apply proportionality at a
different point in time. Residence in Australia between 16 years and Age
Pension age is used to determine a person's Working Life Residence
(WLR). Note: customers receiving Age Pension, DSP and CP travelling to
New Zealand are paid under special rules using their working age
residence. These special rules remain unchanged from 1 July 2014.

Customers who departed Australia before 1 July 2014, or are 'saved' from
the 1 July 2014 AWLR changes can generally continue to receive the
maximum means tested rate of pension if they have 300 months (25 years)
or more AWLR.

From 1 July 2014, the maximum means tested rate of payment requires a
person to have 420 months (35 years) or more AWLR with the following
exceptions.

If the customer is paid using the agreement with Greece the maximum WLR
is:

-   300 months (25 years) for customers who were Australian residents at
    the commencement of the agreement, or
-   528 months (44 years) for customers who were not Australian
    residents at the commencement of the agreement

If the customer is paid using the agreement with the Republic of North
Macedonia, the maximum WLR is:

-   420 months (35 years) for customer who were Australian residents at
    the commencement of the agreement, (300 months (25 years) if 'saved'
    under the 1 July 2014 portability provisions), or
-   528 months (44 years) for customers who were not Australian
    residents at the commencement of the agreement

Payment specific rules

From 1 July 2014, customers paid Age Pension or DSP under an
international agreement ceased to be able to use their partner's AWLR,
unless 'saved' from the 1 July 2014 portability rate changes.

Customers in receipt of CP or WP under an international agreement prior
to 1 July 2014 were able to commence using their own AWLR from that
date, if favourable to do so. Customers granted or who transfer to a
payment under an international agreement after this date will use their
own AWLR, unless 'saved' from the 1 July 2014 AWLR changes.

From 1 July 2014, customers granted or who transfer to PPS under an
international agreement as a widowed person will continue to be paid a
rate using their deceased partner's AWLR.

Wife Pension (WP) or Widow B Pension (WidB) customers who transferred to
Age Pension on 20 March 2020 retained their ‘savings’ provisions. These
customers will continue to be paid a rate using their deceased partner’s
AWLR.

Letter to be issued

Any customer returning to Australia must have a 'Client has returned/is
returning from overseas. Call in to office' (XOB005) letter issued. This
letter has an option available to ensure that Centrelink correctly
advises of any disadvantage (loss of 'saved' status) caused by the
customer remaining in Australia for more than 26 weeks.

Discretionary portability extension changes – 1 July 2021

Age Pension or Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers who:

-   reside outside Australia, and
-   are temporarily in Australia saved under the 1 July 2014 portability
    'savings' provisions, and
-   are unable to depart due to unforeseen circumstances,
-   may be considered for an extension of their portability savings
    period and retain their 'savings' provisions after 26 weeks.

Discretionary decision

It is very important to ensure that correct information is given to the
customer about a potential discretionary portability savings extension.
Not providing the information or giving incorrect information can be
financially damaging to the customer and may lead to a claim under the
Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration (CDDA)
scheme. There are only certain staff at Centrelink International
Services (CIS) with the appropriate delegation who can make this
decision.

When a customer or their nominee or agent contact Services Australia
about extending their portability savings period, ensure that current
contact details are recorded.

Request for extension prior to departure

To qualify for an extension of the portability savings period beyond 26
weeks, the unforeseen circumstance preventing the departure from
Australia must generally have occurred since their return, but before
the customer has lost the portability savings at 26 weeks. If the
customer has not returned to Australia, they are unable to request an
extension.

Portability extension assessments

Centrelink International Services (CIS) is responsible for all decisions
to grant or reject an application for a discretionary extension.

Extension conditions for Age Pension and DSP with portability savings

The discretion to extend the portability savings period so the customer
does not lose their portability savings after being in Australia for
more than 26 weeks, applies only if the:

-   customer is receiving Age Pension or Disability Support Pension
    (DSP), and
-   customer is residing in another country, and
-   is saved under the 1 July 2014 portability 'savings' provisions, and
-   customer is in Australia temporarily, and
-   customer cannot leave within 26 weeks of return, and
-   customer is not able to leave because of a specified extreme event
    or emergency situation that occurred during the limited portability
    period and prevents their planned departure within that period

Note: a discretionary decision cannot be considered for customers
'saved' under the 1 July 2014 portability savings provisions who
permanently reside in Australia.

Reason for extension - specific to Age Pension and DSP customers who reside outside Australia and are temporarily in Australia

The portability savings period may be extended under Item 6 of Schedule
4 of the Social Services and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2014 or
Subclause 128(1) of Schedule 1A of the Social Security Act, due to:

-   a serious accident involving the person or a family member of the
    person
-   an illness of the person or a family member of the person, which is
    serious
-   the hospitalisation of the person or a family member of the person
-   the death of a family member of the person
-   the person's involvement in custody proceedings in Australia
-   a legal requirement for the person to remain inside Australia in
    connection with criminal proceedings (other than criminal
    proceedings in respect of a crime alleged to have been committed by
    the person)
-   robbery or serious crime committed against the person or a family
    member of the person
-   a natural disaster in Australia
-   a public health crisis affecting Australia

The relevant event must have occurred or begun during the first 26 weeks
inside Australia.

Duration of extension

An extension must be to a specific date. There is no limit on the
period, but it should be the minimum time before the customer expects to
be able to depart Australia and should generally not exceed 3 months.

If the customer is still unable to depart by the agreed end date of the
extension, they can request a further extension. Even if the situation
is not expected to change for a known period, for example 6 months, the
extension should be reviewed regularly to ensure that nothing has
changed.

What happens at the end of the extension period?

If a person remains inside Australia after the end of their extension
period:

-   their portability savings will cease, and
-   they will be assessed under current portability rules when they
    depart Australia

If a customer wants to be assessed for a portability extension, refer
them to Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Age Pension customer going overseas

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Carer Payment (CP) customer going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

Returning to Australia

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers overseas on 1 July 2004

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Transfers to international social security agreements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
