
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reasons why the notification of a change to
travel details is required and guides Service Officers to the procedures
to be followed when a customer advises of a change.

Notification of intended departure or return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise Services Australia if
they are leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a
temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact Services Australia.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving or returning to Australia. See the Resources
page.

Changes to travel details advised

If a customer changes the date that they are planning to leave
Australia, it can affect their entitlement to a payment or concession
card. For instance, if a customer receiving a restricted portability
payment has an approved reason for the absence and leaves more than 3
days before or after they initially advised, any specific negotiated
period of portability approved will cease to apply on departure.
Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers may continue to be paid on
departure but their payment will cease at the end of their 4th week in a
rolling 12 month period. Therefore, it is essential that a customer
advises of any change in their departure details prior to travel if they
wish to be paid during the absence.

If a customer changes the date they are planning to return to Australia,
their payment can generally be restored as long as they return to
Australia within 13 weeks of their payment ceasing. However, if the
customer was receiving a transitional rate of payment they will lose
entitlement to this rate and will be paid under the new rules upon
restoration.

Role of International Services (CIS)

Where a customer is disputing travel dates provided by Department of
Home Affairs, refer the inconsistencies to Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

The Resources page contains examples of how changing travel details can
affect a customer's entitlement to payment.

Contents

Cancelling a trip outside Australia or changing the departure date

Recording or changing details of a child's travel to or from Australia

Changing the reason for leaving Australia or the length of an approved
absence

Changing the return date for an absence from Australia

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Portability of payments

Returning to Australia

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Discretion to extend portability period

View/update overseas travel online

Actioning immigration datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
