
Rent Assistance (RA) portability 061-01070040

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether Rent Assistance (RA) is
payable to a customer while they are overseas and for how long. It also
explains the action to be taken by the Service Officer and the customer
before their departure from Australia.

On this Page:

Temporary absence

Rent Assistance is portable for temporary absences, according to the
maximum portability period of the payment with which the RA is paid, in
the following circumstances:

-   If the main payment is portable indefinitely, RA is portable for a
    maximum of 26 weeks for a temporary absence. Payments that are
    indefinitely portable are Age Pension and Disability Support Pension
    (DSP) (in some situations). If the Age Pension or DSP customer is
    payable after 26 weeks because of discretionary extension
    provisions, RA can continue as long as the extension applies. See
    Discretion to extend portability period
-   Customers going overseas to study part of their Australian course
    overseas (DSP, Carer Payment, Widow Allowance, Parenting Payment,
    Youth Allowance, Austudy or Partner Allowance) are payable for the
    period of time they are studying overseas. RA is also portable
    during these defined periods of overseas study. The maximum 26 week
    limit does not apply and RA is portable throughout. Note: RA only
    applies to paying rent in Australia so cannot apply to the overseas
    residence
-   If the main payment is portable for a limited period, RA is portable
    for the same period that the payment is portable. In most cases,
    this is a maximum of 6 weeks for a temporary absence. If the
    portability period of the customer's main payment is shorter, RA
    will also cease. If the payment is being continued longer than 6
    weeks for the purposes of overseas study or to attend a Defence
    Forces Reserve Service training camp, RA will continue until the
    main payment stops. RA will also remain portable for the duration of
    a portability extension when one is applied to the main payment
-   If the main payment is Family Tax Benefit, RA is portable for 6
    weeks unless there is another main payment that allows RA
    portability beyond 6 weeks (for example indefinitely portable DSP)
-   RA only remains payable if the customer continues to pay rent on
    their principal place of residence in Australia whilst they are
    overseas. Rent needs to be verified for RA to continue. A customer
    should be asked about continuing payment of rent if they intend to
    be overseas for more than a few weeks

RA is not portable if the customer is paid under the 1 July 2004
portability provisions or the pre 20 September 2000 portability rules.

Leaving to live in another country

RA is not payable to people who are not Australian residents.

If a customer leaves Australia to live in another country RA is
cancelled from the date the customer leaves Australia.

A customer who has stopped living in Australia will not be able to claim
RA during any temporary returns to Australia.

Restoration of payment

Where a customer's main payment is suspended or cancelled due to a
departure overseas, RA ceases to be payable as well. If the customer's
payment is either automatically or manually restored on their return to
Australia, RA will generally also be restored.

RA qualification

For RA qualification, a customer must reside in the principal home in
Australia. The amount of RA payable will depend on whether the customer
is paying rent, lodgings, or board and lodgings, the amount paid, the
customer's age, and if they are sharing their accommodation.

The customer must have proof of the type and amount of payment made for
their accommodation, for example, verification by way of lease agreement
or a Rent Certificate form. RA is payable if the rent paid is in excess
of the minimum threshold amount.

Rent review

If a rent review is due before departure, the customer must ensure that
the Rent Certificate form or Rent Declaration is completed and returned
before departure.

If a rent review is due during the customer's absence, the customer must
be advised. If the departure date is less than 14 days from date of
notification, the customer should attend their service centre to collect
a Rent Certificate form, which must be completed before departure. The
Resources page has links to these forms

If the review falls due in the week before return, the customer may deal
with it after they have returned.

If the customer does not have the time to complete either the Rent
Certificate or the Rent Declaration form (for example, they may be
ringing from the airport):

-   They should be advised to expect the form to be sent from Services
    Australia. It will go to the address they have chosen for
    correspondence while they are overseas
-   The customer must make arrangements to action the form and return it
    to Services Australia
-   If not actioned, the customer will be cancelled and will need to
    reapply for RA on their return to Australia

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The portability of the
payment is automatically assessed by the system, regardless of whether
the customer notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink
activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency.

The Resources page links to the Services Australia website for
information about payments while outside Australia, travelling overseas
with medicines. It also has links to the Rent Certificate and Rent
Declaration forms.

Related links

Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Discretion to extend portability period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
