-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to claim a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC). Customers or their correspondence nominees can claim
online, with help from a Service Officer, using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) or by a paper claim form.

Eligibility and when to claim

A person may qualify for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card on the day
they submit or lodge a claim if they:

-   have reached Age Pension age, and
-   meet Australian residence, and
-   not in receipt of a precluding Centrelink/DVA payment (see the
    Resources page for a link to Services Australia website for Income
    support payments and DVA payments), and
-   provide a Tax File Number (TFN) or been granted an exemption from
    supplying a TFN, and
-   meet identity confirmation requirements, and
-   meet income test requirements. See the Resources for link to
    Services Australia website for Income test for Commonwealth Seniors
    Health Card

For details about payments and services available, see

-   Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire
-   Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
    Card (CSHC)

Customer contacts to claim

If a customer or their correspondence nominee contacts to claim
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card:

Online claim

[] Service Officers should offer the customer or their correspondence
nominee an online claim first. Explain the benefits of claiming online,
such as:

-   help with applying for the right entitlement through streaming
    questions and early warnings to establish eligibility
-   less information for them to provide, as details from their
    Centrelink record will be pre-populated into the online claim
-   monitoring the progress of their claim through their Centrelink
    online account, myGov or Express Plus Centrelink mobile apps

Assisted customer claims

If the customer or their correspondence nominee declines the online
claim offer, Service Officers can use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to
collect the required claim information . This can be done over the phone
or face-to-face.

If both members of a couple wish to claim and require an ACC, this will
need to be completed on both records.

To submit a claim, they must:

-   Answer all mandatory questions
-   Provide all required documents
-   Verify their identity if there is no Identify Confirmation (ICI)
    recorded
-   Accept a verbal declaration

Exceptions apply for some vulnerable customers.

If a customer/nominee declines to make a verbal declaration, invite the
customer/nominee to log on to their online services, accept the
declaration and submit their claim. If the customer/nominee fails to
submit their claim, the claim will expire after 13 weeks.

Paper claim form

If the customer or their correspondence nominee is unable or unwilling
to claim online or use ACC, run the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)
workflow. This will send out a pre-populated SA443 Claim for
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card. If both members of a couple want to
claim a CSHC, run FCSO for both members of the couple.

Customers and their correspondence nominees may download and complete an
SA296 Claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card from the Services
Australia website. See the Resources page for a link. Note: the SA296
claim form, can be used to claim for both customer and partner if
eligible.

Reclaims

If the customer's CSHC has been cancelled for:

-   less than 13 weeks (with the exception of cancelled due to income).
    The customer may be able to have their CSHC restored
-   less than 26 weeks the customer can complete a re-claim or [] a full
    new claim
-   more than 26 weeks will need to have a full new claim. See the
    Process page for information on how to assist a person to claim a
    CSHC

For previous CSHC claimants who were SHC-NOI (non-income tested) see
Non-income tested (NOI) Concession cards for more information.

A change in a customer's circumstance may include, but not limited to
their relationship status, income, address or telephone number. If a
customer reclaim includes any changes see Changes in a customer's
circumstances and effect on concession card entitlement.

Portability cancellation

Customers may be able to re-claim verbally to have their CSHC restored
if all of the below conditions are met:

-   the CSHC cancels due to a temporary departure overseas
-   they have returned to Australia and contact within 13 weeks of the
    cancellation
-   they have previously provided income details from their TNA for
    either of the previous 2 years, or they are ‘not required to lodge’
    an income tax return, and
-   any account based income streams owned, have been coded on the SUPS
    (Pensions /Annuities) screen

The Resources page contains links to forms, the Services Australia
website and factsheets. It also contains the verbal declaration script
to read to the customer and the privacy notice for CSHC customers.

Contents

Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
re-claims) after a portability cancellation

Related links

Eligibility for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Tax File Number (TFN) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

How users create a myGov account and link services

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
