
Assessing transfers to Age Pension 065-03030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess transfers to Age Pension when the
customer has completed the transfer process online or lodged a Transfer
to Age Pension (SA383) form.

Eligible customers

13 weeks before they reach Age Pension age, eligible customers are
invited to submit the [] online transfer to Age Pension or return the
SA383 form depending on their channel choice.

Identified Indigenous customers may be eligible for an automatic
transfer. However, if they submit an online transfer, or via the
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow or lodge an SA383 it must be
processed.

If the customer does not submit the transfer online, via ACC or return
the completed SA383, their (and their partner's) payment may be
suspended or cancelled from the date they turn Age Pension age.

For more information about this process, see Transfer to Age Pension.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process some transfers automatically if they meet these
criteria:

-   Identity is confirmed
-   Residency requirements met
-   Tax file number recorded
-   Employment status requirements met
-   No superannuation
-   No change in known relationship details
-   No change in known children details
-   Homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent
-   No documentation is lodged with the transfer

If a claim meets the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) current customers

Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) will cease on 1 January
2022. Customers will need to transfer to Age Pension to continue
receiving payment after this date.

-   Customers that have already turned Age Pension age and are
    residentially qualified should transfer to Age Pension as soon as
    possible. Staff must complete Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) at first
    point of contact for these customers
-   Customers receiving WA or PA immediately before reaching Age Pension
    age are exempt from the residence requirements for Age Pension
-   Current WA customers that will not have 10 years qualifying
    Australian residence for Age Pension on 1 January 2022, will have a
    residency exemption coded on the Additional Residence Details (ARD)
    screen as part of their claim/transfer to allow transfer to Age
    Pension on that date

Processing transfers

If the customer indicates in the online transfer or the SA383 that they
want to transfer to Age Pension or stay on their current payment, check
if this will disadvantage the customer. See Resources for Advantages of
transferring to Age Pension versus current payment.

If a Service Officer determines the customer would be significantly
disadvantaged by transferring to Age Pension, the customer should be
contacted to discuss staying on their current payment.

If an online transfer, ACC or SA383 is lodged, the transfer is processed
in Process Direct or Customer First. Online transfers to Age Pension are
no longer actioned in Customer First due to a system limitation.

Backdating provisions

If an online transfer or SA383 form is lodged within 13 weeks of turning
Age Pension age and the transfer provisions apply, the date of effect
may be backdated up to the later of:

-   13 weeks before the date of the decision to transfer
-   the date the person qualified for Age Pension

The References page contains more information on backdating provisions
(section 12, deemed claim in certain cases).

Employment income

If the customer or their partner has employment income, the coding needs
to be checked to ensure it is correct.

When an income support customer reaches Age Pension age, they are no
longer entitled to receive the benefits of the Working Credit
initiatives.

If they receive a pension, they may be entitled to the Work Bonus.
Customers paid under the transitional rules are not entitled to the Work
Bonus, but the Work Bonus will still be used in the comparison
calculations and partners may still benefit by the reduction in total
income.

Customers with employment income may be required to report two weekly.
See Recording and correcting employment income details.

Residence checks

The Service Officer must also check that the customer satisfies the
residence assessment requirements for Age Pension. If any further forms
or modules are required, they will need to be issued to the customer.

If a customer will satisfy the Age Pension 10 years qualifying residence
period within either 13 weeks of turning Age Pension age or submitting
the claim, then their application to transfer should not be rejected.

Note: customers receiving Widow Allowance (WA) or Partner Allowance (PA)
immediately before reaching Age Pension age, or customers receiving Wife
Pension (WP) on 19 March 2020 meet the residence requirements for Age
Pension.

Deceased customers

The system generated grant and reject letters for deceased customers are
not addressed correctly, and contain text that is inappropriate to send
to a deceased estate. The grant or rejection letter must be addressed
to:

-   the 'Executor of the Estate' (if applicable), or
-   the 'Estate of the Late <customer's name>'

The Resources page contains an example of appropriate letters to send.

Urgent transfers to Age Pension

Care is to be taken to ensure transfers from customers who will soon
lose qualification of their existing payment (for example JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)) are processed as a priority and at the earliest touch
point to avoid placing the customer in financial hardship. This includes
Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) customers as their
payments will cease on 1 January 2022.

If staff who do not have the appropriate Transfer to Age Pension skill
tags encounter urgent transfer to Age Pension where a customer is in
hardship, or payment was cancelled, or is unable to complete the
transfer and requires urgent processing, create a Fast Note.

-   for Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), select Auto Text >
    Older Australians > Claims > Age Transfer Online Urgent processing
    request
-   for SA383, select Auto Text > Older Australians > Claims > Age
    Transfer SA383 Urgent processing request

Leave Fast Note DOC open. This will ensure that the transfer is
correctly prioritised for allocation.

The Resources page contains information on the advantages of
transferring to Age Pension versus staying on the customer's current
payment, warnings and alerts for online transfers, a link to mySupport
and example text for a manual letter for a deceased customer.

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing permanent blindness

Assessing superannuation

Residence assessment for customer claiming Age Pension

Claiming Age Pension

Transfer to Age Pension

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Qualification for Age Pension

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Reporting requirements for pensioners of Age Pension age who have
employment income

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
