
Advances in the Aged Care Management Payments System (ACMPS) 065-18112907

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about processing advances in the Aged
Care Management Payments System (ACMPS).

Advances in ACMPS

An advance is a payment calculated on an aged care service's entitlement
for the period 2 months before the advance month. It is pro-rated for
the number of calendar days in the advance month.

There are 2 types of advances:

Automated advances (automatically generated by ACMPS)

-   Bulk Auto Advances
-   Adhoc Auto Advances

Manual advances

Note: for home care services, advanced payments ceased on 1 February
2021 so January 2021 was the last month for an advance payment to be
paid. No advances are paid from the February 2021 claim month. See Home
Care Packages program for more information about the cessation of home
care advances.

Service Officers can use ACMPS to search for historical advances prior
to the February 2021 claim month or for home care services with an
advance in place.

Automated advance

The Bulk Auto Advance process allows the automatic calculation of
advances for a claim month for all eligible services.

This monthly process calculates and records the amount of the advance
payment for a single claim month for services.

Bulk Auto Advances are calculated on the last business day of each month
and approved on the first business day of the following claim month.
This is to calculate an advance for all eligible services on a service
by service basis (that is the actual advance is calculated separately
for each eligible service based on service specific data). The advance
is automatically calculated based on the claim month 2 months before the
advance month.

If the Bulk Auto Advance for a service cannot be calculated and
processed, it can be paid later as part of the Adhoc Auto Advance
process. This process is applied if a service is not up to date in their
claiming cycle at the time the Bulk Auto Advance takes place.

Note: for home care Adhoc Auto Advances will continue to be paid for
services who are not up to date with their claims, up until they have
received their January 2021 advance.

Manual advance

A manual advance is an amount that is calculated manually.

Manual advances can be paid:

-   to a service for various reasons on a case by case basis
-   only after being approved by authorised users - Team Leaders and
    above have the authority to approve advances

Note: for home care, Service Officers will continue to be able to create
manual advances for services who are not up to date with their claims,
up to (including) the January 2021 claim month.

Suspend an advance

An advance may be suspended when:

-   formal notification is received from the Department of Health and
    Aged Care that an aged care service is closing or its ownership is
    being transferred to another approved provider
-   an aged service is in the hands of a receiver
-   an aged care service requests an advance suspension to be in place

The suspension is to minimise/avoid the overpayment of subsidy which
could result in a debt.

Note: while home care advances ceased after the January 2021 claim
month, Service Officers can still search for home care services with an
advance suspension in place.

Unsuspend an advance

An advance suspension is lifted when:

-   Application to add or change Approved Care Service’s bank details
    (AC015) has been received from the new provider
-   the sanction period has ended
-   requested by the flexible care service (this is only applicable if
    the service had originally requested the advance suspension to be in
    place and there are no sanctions currently imposed on the service)

Note:

-   Only Subject Matter Experts (SME) and Team Leaders have the
    authority to lift advance suspensions
-   While home care advances ceased after January 2021 claim month,
    Service Officers can still search for home care services with an
    advance suspension in place

Delete advance payments

An advance should be deleted if a service is no longer entitled to the
advance. Only Subject Matter Experts (SME) and Team Leaders from the
Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied Health Branch) have the
authority to delete advances.

Note: approved transactions cannot be deleted.

Unpaid advances (Bulk Auto and Adhoc Auto)

Service Officers can view the reasons why an advance cannot be paid to a
service. This process notifies a user that an advance payment requires
investigation.

Note: only Bulk Auto and Adhoc Auto advances can be investigated.

Approve advances

Advances created for a service must be approved for the payment to be
processed.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Aged Care.

Related links

Advances in the System for the Payment of Aged Care Residential Care
(SPARC)

Home Care Packages program

Reports in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
