
This document outlines information relating to the Pension Bonus Scheme
(PBS).

PBS closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014

The Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) closed to new registrations from 1 July
2014. Service officers must not register customers in the PBS unless the
customer reached Age Pension qualification age before 20 September 2009
and lodged or can be deemed to have lodged an application to register
before 1 July 2014.

Qualification for Pension Bonus Payment

To be eligible for a Pension Bonus, a customer must satisfy all of the
following:

-   be a registered member of the scheme
-   have accrued at least one full 12 months bonus period
-   have not already received a pension bonus under either the Social
    Security or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) schemes
-   have not received Age Pension
-   have not at any time after qualifying for Age Pension received an
    income support payment from Social Security (other than Carer
    Payment), or a DVA Service Pension (other than a Carer Service
    Pension), or a DVA Veteran Payment, or a DVA income support
    supplement (other than a Carer Income Support Supplement (ISS))
-   be qualified to receive Age Pension without the aid of an
    international agreement
-   claim the Pension Bonus within the required time limit
-   at time of claim a person must also lodge a claim for Age Pension

The claim for Pension Bonus is part of the Age Pension claim form. If
the claim for Age Pension is rejected, the claim for Pension Bonus is
taken to have been withdrawn.

Accruing and non- accruing membership of (PBS)

In order to maintain membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS), once
registered a person must meet the requirements of either accruing and
meeting the work test or non-accruing membership.

To meet the work test for a full year bonus period, members of the
scheme must engage in gainful work for at least 960 hours during the
period. At least 640 of these 960 hours must be worked in Australia. The
work test is flexible. The minimum accrual period is 12 months. See
Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS).

During a non-accruing period a registered Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)
member retains membership of the scheme but does not accrue bonus
periods. The time spent in a non-accruing period is not counted as time
that the person deferred claiming Age Pension.

See Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) for more
information including changes affecting non-accruing members from 20
September 2009.

Return and processing of Pension Bonus letters

Annual reminder letters

PBS annual reminder letters are sent every year to remind customers that
they are members of the PBS and to encourage customers to request an
Evidentiary Certificate. PBS annual reminder letters also mention the
lodgement time for claiming the Pension Bonus, the work test, and the
possible entitlement to a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

Customers registered for PBS have no notification requirements. The PBS
annual reminder letters encourage customers to advise of any change of
address.

Eligibility for PBTP

A customer who has received a Pension Bonus payment may be entitled to a
Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP) if their Age Pension entitlement
increases within the 13 weeks after grant of Age Pension and the
increase is due to a reduction in the assessment of their income or
assets.

Contents

Calculating a Pension Bonus

Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP)

Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

Return and processing of Pension Bonus letters

Raising Pension Bonus (PBS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
