
Rejecting a claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06030040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when to reject a claim for Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC).

Rejecting claims

A customer who has lodged a claim for CSHC will not be eligible for a
CSHC if they do not meet the basic qualification or means test
provisions for CSHC or if they may have failed to comply with a customer
obligation. In these circumstances, claims must be rejected.

Note: Online claims submitted prior to 13 October 2018 and all paper
claims are not subject to Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) rules.

CSHC and Tax File Numbers

All new CSHC claimants and their partners are required to provide a Tax
File Number (TFN), or be granted a TFN exemption. If no TFN or exemption
is provided then the CSHC claim will be rejected.

Coding rejection reasons

Some rejection reasons can be coded manually and others will be
automatic. Automatic rejections will occur when all of the customer's
information is updated on the correct screens and the new claim is
processed. This is the preferred option. This will make it easier, if
the customer should contact the agency about the decision, as all the
information is available to see without the need for the file at the
first contact.

Coding income details

Customers who are rejected due to an estimate of current year income
being over the income limits cannot lodge another claim using Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) from a previous financial year. Customer must
provide a revised estimate for the current financial year and details of
why their estimate has changed. Service Officers are not obliged to
accept a revised estimate if reasons and amount of reduction do not seem
reasonable.

Customers who are required to lodge a tax return but are unable to
provide income details from either of the previous two financial years
because the customer has not yet lodged their tax return with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO), are not permitted to use an estimate
of their income. The customers claim for CSHC must be manually rejected.

The only exception to this is where the customer can provide
verification from the ATO that they have been granted a lodgement
extension no older than two years previous to the current financial year
and which has not expired. Customers who have been granted an ATO
lodgement extension must provide documents to support what their ATI is
likely to be for either of the previous two financial years. An estimate
for the current financial year cannot be used.

Coding relationship details

When coding a claim for CSHC the correct relationship status must be
coded for customers so that any future entitlements of quarterly
supplement will be paid at the correct rate (partnered or single).

Unfavourable Decision

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, such as a rejection, a
Decision Maker (DM) must provide the customer with an explanation of the
decision and an opportunity to provide more details or evidence relevant
to the decision. The DM must also advise the customer of their review
and appeal rights. This includes unfavourable decisions made by Service
Officers within Smart Centres.

If a DM is not speaking with a customer at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 genuine attempts to contact a
customer prior to finalising an unfavourable decision.

Note: where the customer has intentionally provided inappropriate
documentation to allow their claim to be submitted under Circumstance
Change Monitor (CCM), for example a bank statement has been requested
but the customer has uploaded a blank sheet of paper, the CSHC claim
must be rejected FSD with no request for information or documentation
requests to be issued.

Related links

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Withdrawal of claims

Making an unfavourable decision

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new
claims

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
