
Emergency events and aged care service providers 065-13130000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about preparing for an emergency
event in aged care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Emergency events

Emergency events (for example natural disasters, pandemics or epidemics)
can result in an aged care service being evacuated and relocating care
recipients. In some cases, permanent residential aged care recipients
can take temporary leave from a residential aged care service during an
emergency. If an emergency happens, the government will decide the:

-   area of impact
-   scope of the emergency, and
-   duration

Emergency planning is a requirement for aged care services. Preparing
for emergencies help lessen their impacts on an aged care service’s
ability to provide care for care recipients. This includes, but is not
limited to:

-   liaising with local emergency services to determine the seriousness
    of the situation and risk level to the aged care service and care
    recipients
-   ensuring that authorised aged care personnel regularly monitor
    emergency broadcasts and media for warnings and advice during any
    period of risk
-   continuing to deliver appropriate care, which may require sourcing
    additional staff or volunteers
-   keeping care recipients, family and staff informed during any
    emergency situation
-   liaising with local agencies providing recovery and other relevant
    services
-   emergency leave provisions

Emergency leave provisions allow permanent residential care recipients
to use leave during the emergency period without affecting their social
leave. Care recipients receiving care in other aged care types (such as
home care, flexible care and respite care) cannot use the emergency
leave provision. Emergency leave provisions can only be used during the
emergency leave period.

The Process page contains steps on how to register emergency leave
details.

The Resources page contains a table detailing the emergency leave period
announced by the Government.

Contacting the Department of Health in emergency situations

Approved providers should contact the Department of Health via the
emergency contact number.

Emergency information required for the Department of Health may include:

-   general emergency management matters, including internal/external
    emergency details
-   if an evacuation or relocation of care recipients is required
-   access to accommodation information

The Department of Health state and territory staff work in partnership
with local stakeholders to ensure services provided are responsive to
local needs and conditions. Service Officers should direct queries on
responsive action to the Department of Health.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Health - contact
details for state and territory offices.

State Emergency Services

Additional advice and assistance during an emergency can be obtained
through local emergency services or state fire authority.

The Resources page contains a link to contacts for local emergency
services.

Evacuation procedures for aged care services

The approved provider must notify the Department of Health state office
that the evacuation has occurred. The evacuation will be monitored by
that office until the service returns to normal operations.

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Health - contact
details for state and territory offices and contacts for local emergency
services.

Contents

Aged care COVID-19 support supplement for residential aged care services

Related links

Manage aged care recipient details

Non-claimable leave for permanent residential aged care recipients

Residential care monthly claim form

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
