
Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06010010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for a re-claim of the Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

On this Page:

Re-claim of CSHC

A CSHC re-claim is an abbreviated version of the full claim completed
where the card has been cancelled for less than 26 weeks. A CSHC
re-claim is made by completing the:

-   customised Claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA443)
-   Re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card claim (SA296A)

Note: where customers are eligible to re-claim they may prefer to
complete a full new CSHC claim via online or assisted customer claim
channels.

See Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

CSHC cancelled for less than 13 weeks

A re-claim is not necessary if:

-   cancelled less than 13 weeks (with the exception of cancellation due
    to income)
-   the card could be restored

See Restoration of Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

CSHC cancelled for more than 26 weeks

[] If the customer’s CSHC has been cancelled for more than 26 weeks a
full new claim is required.

See Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

Portability cancellations and verbal re-claims of CSHC

Customers who leave Australia temporarily retain entitlement to a CSHC
for the maximum portability period of 19 weeks from departure. After
this their CSHC will automatically cancel with reason 019 (overseas more
than 19 weeks). Customers may complete a verbal re-claim for CSHC upon
their return if they contact within 13 weeks of cancellation and meet
all of the criteria.

Customers whose CSHC has been cancelled 019 for more than 13 weeks, or
do not meet the criteria will need to complete either a re-claim or full
new claim.

If the customer does reclaim CSHC on their return to Australia, the CSHC
date of claim will be automatically taken as the immigration advised
date of return when:

-   the customer lodges a CSHC re-claim within 14 days of the date of
    return to Australia, and
-   the date of return is less than 26 weeks since their CSHC
    cancellation date

This will apply to CSHC online claims, customised claims, paper claims,
and verbal re-claims. Customers whose CSHC has been cancelled for more
than 26 weeks must complete a full new claim.

Note: the verbal claim for a CSHC is a re-claim and not a restoration of
CSHC entitlement.

Entitlement to a CSHC when a customer goes overseas is covered by the
portability rules for concession cards including information on
permanent absences and when the customer returns before the end of the
portability period.

Entitlement to energy supplement when a customer goes overseas is
covered by the rules for energy supplement overseas absences.

The Resources page contains links to the Re-claim for a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (SA296A) and the Claim for a Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (SA443).

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Eligibility for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Re-claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) (including verbal
reclaims) after a portability cancellation

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Quarterly Supplement

Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Completing a re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Portability of concession cards

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
