
Aged Care fees and payments – annual and lifetime caps 065-19103046

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of annual and lifetime caps and how
these apply to aged care fees.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Annual and lifetime caps

From 1 July 2014 the caps were introduced to limit how much a person
pays in:

-   means tested care fees (MTCF) for residential care, and
-   income tested care fees (ITCF) for home care

Care recipients will still have to pay the basic daily fee (BDF) and any
accommodation payments. Annual and lifetime caps are subject to
indexation.

Care recipients who were in residential care or receiving a home care
package prior to 1 July 2014 continue to pay fees under their existing
arrangements. The exception to this is when they have moved to another
aged care service and opted in to the post 1 July 2014 means assessment
scheme. See Aged Care means assessment for more information.

For current caps and fees, see the Resources page for a link to the
Department of Health and Aged Care's Schedule of Fees and Charges.

Annual caps

An annual cap is the maximum amount of the means tested care fees (MTCF)
for residential care or the income tested care fees (ITCF) for home care
that a care recipient can be asked to pay over 12 months. The 12 month
calculation period:

-   commences from the date the care recipient first entered aged care
    (either home care or permanent residential care), or
-   recommences on the anniversary of the first date aged care was
    received, even if the care type has changed or there has been a
    break in care, and
-   includes any pre-entry leave for permanent residential care

Once a care recipient reaches their annual cap they do not pay any more
MTCF/ITCF until the anniversary of their start date is reached. Their
service provider will receive full care subsidies from the Australian
Government for their care.

The annual cap amount is indexed on 20 March and 20 September each year
and:

-   resets on each anniversary of a care recipient’s start date
-   is applied based on the effective cap amount at the date it is
    reached
-   remains in place even if a care recipient changes providers or
    services of the same care type

If the care recipient changes care type:

-   the accrual of fees will carry over and
-   the new cap amount becomes applicable to the new entry

Example 1:

-   the care recipient reaches the annual cap while in home care
-   the care recipient then moves to residential care within 12 months
    of commencing home care
-   as the residential annual cap is higher, the care recipient will
    recommence paying their MTCF until the residential cap amount is
    reached

Example 2

-   the care recipient reaches the annual cap while in residential care
-   the care recipient then moves to home care within 12 months of
    commencing residential care
-   as the annual cap amount for residential care is higher, the home
    care annual cap will apply to the new entry
-   the care recipient will not have to pay their ITCF until the
    anniversary date is reached

Example 3

-   the care recipient pays their MTCF while in residential care
-   the care recipient then moves to home care within 12 months of
    commencing residential care
-   the care recipient’s accrual of MTCF is below the residential annual
    cap but is higher than the home care annual cap
-   the home care annual cap will apply to the new entry and the care
    recipient will not have to pay their ITCF until the anniversary date
    is reached

Once a care recipient reaches their annual cap, they do not pay any more
MTCF/ITCF until the anniversary of their start date is reached. Their
service provider will receive full care subsidies from the Australian
Government for their care.

Care recipients will still have to pay the basic daily fee (BDF) and
where applicable, any accommodation payments.

When the service provider lodges their claim and it is approved, this
will calculate the annual caps reached in that month. When this happens:

-   an annual cap letter is issued to the care recipient, nominee (where
    relevant) and the service provider
-   Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) and ACMPS will display an annual cap
    date and show that the MTCF/ITCF has been reduced to $0 until their
    anniversary date
-   any refund owing to the care recipient is calculated during the next
    Quarterly Review

Lifetime caps

A care recipient's means tested care fees (MTCF) or income tested care
fees (ITCF) continue to accrue for any period in care. Once a care
recipient reaches their lifetime cap they will not have to pay any
MTCF/ITCF for the remainder of their time in care. This is regardless of
the care type.

When the service provider lodges their claim and it is approved, this
calculates their lifetime caps reached in that claim month. When this
happens:

-   a lifetime cap letter is issued to the care recipient, nominee
    (where relevant) and the service provider
-   ACSP and ACMPS will display a lifetime cap date and show that the
    MTCF/ITCF has been reduced to $0
-   any refund owing to the care recipient will be calculated during the
    next Quarterly Review

Change in care type

A care recipient is not liable to pay more than the annual cap amount in
any care year.

For care recipients who changed care type after November 2018, aged care
systems exchange previous care period information. This includes start
date, end date and accrued fees paid. This information is included in
the calculation of an annual or lifetime cap.

For care recipients who changed care type prior to November 2018, aged
care systems did not exchange previous care period information. Any fees
paid for previous care types are manually added to annual or lifetime
caps calculations. This is only needed in the first year annual cap
calculation or when a care recipient reaches their lifetime cap.

If a care recipient changes care types prior to November 2018, new care
type’s entry date will be the new anniversary date. These cases are
identified by care recipients asking about their annual or lifetime caps
calculations. After investigation, care recipients who have paid excess
fees will be refunded as a manual adjustment. See Aged care reviews
manual adjustments for post 1 July 2014 residential care recipients for
further information.

Reassessments of income and assets

Aged care systems calculate and apply an annual or lifetime cap based on
income and asset information recorded. This includes care recipients
with means not disclosed (MND).

If a reassessment changes the date of an annual or lifetime cap, aged
care systems reassess fees and resets caps if required. In ACMPS, this
applies for all care periods based on the date of effect of the
reassessment. ACSP will calculate the impact where there has been a
manual adjustment.

The different approach in how ACMPS and ACSP applies the reassessment of
income and assets is due to the care recipient’s resident status in
ACSP. For ACSP, the care recipient’s resident status (that is, low or
not low means) determines their accommodation status.

The Resources page contains links to the Aged Care fee calculator and
relevant websites.

Related links

Aged Care

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care Reviews – Manual adjustments for care recipients - overview

Aged care reviews manual adjustments for post 1 July 2014 residential
care recipients

Aged Care Staff Portal

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
