
Reviewable decisions under the Aged Care Act 1997 065-13070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines reviewable decisions, which are decisions made
that can be appealed against by people affected by the decision.
Reviewable decisions are listed under Section 85-1 of the Aged Care Act
1997 (the Act).

Lodging a review

Any person whose interests are affected by a reviewable decision can
make a request in writing for reconsideration of the decision. This
could include:

-   aged care service services
-   potential and current care recipients, and their immediate families
-   carers or legal guardians

Note: requests for review received from potential and current aged care
recipients and their immediate families, carers or legal guardians
should be referred to the Department of Health and Aged Care for
decision.

Different time frames apply in lodging a review.

Requests for review should generally be lodged within either 28 days or
90 days after the date on which the person first received notice of the
decision. The Department of Health and Aged Care’s Secretary may allow
for a longer timeframe if the Secretary is satisfied there is sufficient
reason to apply a longer period. Section 85-1 of the Act provides
further information about the relevant sections a review can be made
under and review timeframes.

Written requests for a decision to be reviewed must be under section
85-5 of the Act, and include reasons for the request.

The delegate must do one of the following:

-   confirm the decision
-   vary the decision, or
-   set aside the decision and substitute a new decision

The delegate has 90 days from receipt of the request for review to reach
a decision and confirm the decision in writing.

Power to review a decision

Under sections 85-4 and 85-5 of the Act, the Secretary of the Department
has the power to reconsider reviewable decisions.

This power has been delegated to certain positions with Services
Australia and/or the Department of Health and Aged Care.

The Secretary may initiate a review of a decision when satisfied that
there is sufficient reason to do so.

If the original decision is varied or set aside, the new decision may
specify a date on which it takes effect.

If a date is not specified, the new decision takes effect on the date on
which it was made.

The Resources page contains a list of reviewable decisions under section
85-1 of the Aged Care Act 1997 and links to Department of Health and
Aged Care website and the Aged Care Act 1997 - delegations.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
