
Aged care reviews – manual adjustments for care recipients - overview 065-20010613

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the initial investigations required prior to a
manual adjustment of aged care fees. A manual adjustment is a payment or
recovery amount that is applied to a service. This occurs when a
calculation has compared the fees a care recipient was charged to the
fees they should have paid.

The adjustment may be a one-off payment/recovery or applied over a
number of claim months. Manual adjustments are required due to a
non-payment or incorrect payment of subsidies and supplements to care
recipients.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version

Manual adjustments and calculations

A manual adjustment calculation compares the fees a care recipient was
charged to the fees they should have paid. The manual adjustment
calculation may result in a refund of payments to service providers.

Updating or correcting income and assets

Care recipients can provide updates or corrections to their income and
asset information. This may result in a change to their means assessment
and aged care fees. The changes and any refunds due are calculated and
advised at the next quarterly review (QR).

Fees and charges update immediately for residential care when a
significant change has occurred. Any refunds still owing are paid at the
next QR. Examples of significant changes would be:

-   when a care recipient who was Means Not Disclosed (MND) completes a
    means assessment
-   when a care recipient has failed to reply to Centrelink
    correspondence

Once the income and assets update is completed, there is no process to
pay a manual refund to a care recipient unless:

-   a care recipient is deceased
-   a referral is made to mySupport and ICT confirm they are not able to
    resolve
-   confirmation is received that aged care systems will not
    automatically calculate the correct adjustment (this may include the
    care recipient’s previous manual adjustments actioned)

In these limited circumstances, a manual calculation of fees and issue
of a manual refund (adjustment) may be undertaken.

A Service Officer can complete an ad hoc review if they identify a care
recipient may experience significant disadvantage and ongoing fees are
not automatically reviewed after a significant change. The ad hoc review
immediately adjusts fees and charges and may generate a refund for
manual action.

See Aged care reviews - ad hoc reviews for more details.

Manual adjustments and quarterly reviews (QR)

A manual calculation compares the fees a care recipient was charged with
the fees they should have paid.

Service Officers:

-   look at the fees set in ACMPS, ACSP and fee letters issued
-   refer manual calculation adjustments to the Aged Care Payments Team
    to arrange adjustment (refund) payments to service providers

Service Officers investigate manual adjustment in the following
circumstances:

a QR refund is incorrect by more than $5,000

-   the incorrect refund is rejected and the care recipient’s record is
    remediated to allow future reviews, including QR to correctly
    calculate refunds

a care recipient has departed care and the correct refund will not
calculate automatically including:

-   a residential care recipient corrects income and asset details for a
    period prior to their departure from care and this correction
    results in a refund
-   an initial means assessment is completed as Means Not Disclosed
    (MND), a residential care recipient is charged maximum fees by their
    provider, and they complete a means assessment after their departure
    from care
-   other care type fees are not taken into account for Lifetime Cap
-   a home care recipient is discharged from care, is no longer in any
    home care service, and corrects income details for their period in
    care

there is a registered Ministerial or Commonwealth Ombudsman case
recommending a manual adjustment

Care recipients and authorised third parties not meeting these criteria
are told any changes to their means assessment resulting in a decrease
in fees will have all adjustments, including refunds, calculated and
paid at the next QR.

When the care recipient is deceased:

-   only the executor or administrator of the estate can provide income
    and asset information for a manual adjustment using an Aged care
    Calculation of your cost of care form (SA486). Unless the care
    recipient had signed the SA486 before death. See the Resources page
    for a link to the SA486
-   evidence is needed that the person requesting the means assessment
    is the executor or administrator
-   if income and asset information has already been recorded, a manual
    adjustment can be completed following discharge, for example, when a
    provider is querying the payments they have received

Manual adjustment effective dates

Start date

It is important to identify the correct start date of a manual
adjustment, as this affects the annual or lifetime caps calculation.

The start date:

-   is the date the care recipient first commenced any type of aged care
    (for example, home care or residential care)
-   includes pre-entry leave (where applicable)
-   moves with a care recipient when they change to a new provider

Each new care year commences on the anniversary of the care recipient’s
start date.

Change in care type

From November 2018, when a care recipient moves between home and
residential care, the ACMPS and SPARC exchange data.

Data received in SPARC via this exchange populates the Maintain Home
Care (2.34) screen with the:

-   start date
-   end date
-   accrual amount of home care fees
-   anniversary date

Care recipients who commenced care prior to November 2018:

-   manually add previous home care fees to calculations when
    determining annual and lifetime cap eligibility
-   previous manual coding of Maintain Home Care overrides data
    exchanged between SPARC and ACMPS

End date

A manual adjustment end date is the:

-   latest month reconciled in the most recent quarterly review (QR), or
-   day prior to the care recipient’s discharge date (fees are not
    charged on the date of discharge)

This takes into account any future adjustments aged care systems may
calculate in future QR.

Pre-entry leave

Prior to 1 July 2015, service providers were paid 30% of the basic care
subsidy for care recipients who were on pre-entry leave. Care recipients
could be asked to contribute to the cost of their care during that time.

From 1 July 2015, no care subsidies are payable to a service provider
during pre-entry leave, and a care recipient could only be charged the
basic daily fee (BDF) during this time.

Service Officers must consider pre-entry fees a care recipient has paid
when assessing a manual adjustment for residential care only.

Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) and care subsidy in residential care

Services Australia pays care subsidies to providers based on the care
needs assessed for a care recipient.

The Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) is the tool used to assess the
care needs and determines the cost of care for a care recipient.

The care recipient’s means tested fee (MTCF) reduces the amount of the
provider’s care subsidy. The MTCF cannot be more than the assessed cost
of care.

Providers must lodge ACFI classification applications within 2 months of
the care recipient entering care. Late lodgement of an ACFI application
results in a reduction of care subsidies from the date of entry.

Applications lodged late:

Between 2 months and 5 months (from the date of entry):

-   the care subsidy reduced by $25 daily until Services Australia
    receives the ACFI
-   this may affect the MTF a care recipient is liable to pay if it is
    near the maximum cost of care

After 5 months (from date of entry):

-   no subsidy paid to the provider until Services Australia receives
    the ACFI
-   the care recipient is not liable to pay any MTCF until the day
    before the provider lodges an ACFI

Note: Services Australia only pay the subsidy from the day the late ACFI
is received.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Aged Care Fee Calculator
-   Aged Care Payments team contact details
-   external websites
-   Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care form (SA486) link

Related links

Aged Care

Aged care means assessment – manual means assessment

Aged Care means assessment – Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 – assets
assessment

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged care reviews – discharge and departure reviews

Aged Care Reviews – Manual adjustments for home care recipients

Aged Care Reviews - Manual adjustments for Pre 1 July 2014 Residential
Care

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for post 1 July 2014 residential
care

Aged care reviews – manual follow-ups

Aged care reviews – reassessments and updates

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
