
Aged care reviews – departure reviews 065-20082034

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This document outlines departure reviews for home care and residential
care.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 23 July 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version

Departure reviews

A departure review is a reconciliation process that aligns:

-   the fees a care recipient was liable to pay their service provider
-   any changes in circumstances
-   the fees associated with the care needs whilst receiving care from a
    particular service provider

Services Australia refunds any overcharged fees to the service provider.
The service provider is responsible for passing any refund on to the
care recipient or their estate (where eligible). For example, if the
care recipient did not pay fees, no refund is payable by the service
provider.

Departure reviews may also be referred to as discharge reviews.

A departure review occurs automatically when a care recipient:

-   changes care type (for example, from home care to residential care)
-   changes service providers (but remains in same care type)
-   leaves residential care
-   stops receiving home care
-   is deceased

Departure reviews are completed in:

-   the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) for residential care recipients
-   the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) for home care
    recipients

Note: Service Officers cannot manually trigger departure reviews.

Situations where a departure review refund generates

Following a home care or residential care departure review, an income
tested care fee (ITCF), income tested fee (ITF), means tested care fee
(MTCF) or means tested contribution (MTC) refund generates when:

a care recipient has accessed a period of social or hospital leave
greater than 28 days for hospital leave, 28 days social leave (home
care), or 52 days social leave (residential care):

-   Hospital leave - from day 29, the home care subsidy reduces by 25%
    and 50% for residential care
-   Social leave - from day 29, the home care subsidy reduces by 25%.
    From day 53, no residential care subsidy is paid
-   Care recipients cannot be asked to pay more than the subsidy payment
    (cost of care)
-   While accessing transitional or residential respite care, a care
    recipient is not charged for home care services
-   The Resources page contains a link to information on temporary leave
    from home care and residential care

a home care recipient's status changes from self-funded retiree to an
income support recipient

a care recipient's status was means not disclosed, they later disclosed
their means and the assessment is backdated

data updates in the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) after
the date of departure

incorrect fees were charged due to data transfer issues between Customer
First and ACMPS

a correction or update to the home care/residential care means
assessment results in a decrease of ITCF, ITF, MTCF or MTC

Departure review letters and refunds

Departure review letters are sent to the care recipient or their estate
and the service provider.

Home care:

-   The Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) triggers a letter if
    a refund is due
-   Refunds over $1,000 are checked and released if correct

Residential care:

-   The Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) triggers a letter for refunds over
    $1 after a departure review
-   When a care recipient is deceased, Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)
    triggers a letter for refunds over $10 after a departure review
-   All refunds created require manual action to approve or reject the
    refund amount

See manual letters where care recipient is deceased on the Resources
page in Aged care letter – creating manual letters.

The Resources page contains links to the Aged Care fee calculator and
relevant websites.

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged Care

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged care letters

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged Care means assessment

Aged care reviews - ad hoc reviews

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for care recipients - overview

Aged care reviews - reassessments and updates

Rent Assistance (RA) and change of address to and from aged care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
