
Rejecting a claim for Age Pension 065-03030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when a claim for Age
Pension including Age Pension (Blind) is to be rejected. A customer who
has lodged a claim for Age Pension may not be entitled to payment
because they do not meet the basic qualification, payability or
recipient obligation provisions for payment. In these circumstances,
reject the claims.

Failed to supply documents/return correspondence

Customers are required to provide documentation to support the
information declared in a claim for an income support payment. Online
claims provide the customer details of outstanding tasks and
documentation requirements for the claim.

Additional documentation is sometimes requested after the claim has been
submitted. Customers are required to provide information/documentation
in the allowable timeframe as requested in writing.

Reject claims 'Failed to Supply Documents (FSD)' or ‘Failed to Reply to
Correspondence (FRC)’ if:

-   documentation is not provided by the due date, or
-   if the delegate determines the customer has provided inappropriate
    or irrelevant documentation

See Request to reassess a rejected claim.

Residence related reasons

Claim can be rejected for a residence related reason based on
information the customer has provided. However, in some cases visa,
citizenship and movement information which is provided directly by the
Department of Home Affairs may cause the claim to be rejected. If the
information has been provided via the Department of Home Affairs
datalink, this will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer.

Not payable due to employment income

Where the income is too high for the customer to be payable, but the
customer will become payable within 13 weeks of the date they lodged the
claim, the start date should be moved to the earliest Entitlement Period
Start Date from which the customer is payable.

See Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus.

Recording claim information

Many rejection reasons where the customer is not qualified or payable
occur automatically after details have been coded in the claim activity
on the customer's record. Record all verified information provided for
the assessment of the claim.

See Documents required for Centrelink New Claims.

If a customer makes a claim within 14 days after their partner claims a
social security payment, and the claim is rejected FSD/FRC, the
customer's Pension Assessment Date (PNA) cannot be changed.

Online claims to be rejected FSD/FRC may be streamline rejected without
the need to code more details from the claim. Contact details are
updated in the online claim under My Profile. Check these to ensure the
correct notice of rejection is issued.

The streamline rejection function allows users to bypass errors and only
apply limited data to the customer's record. Provisional data from the
claim will not be coded in the claim, and not updated in ISIS.

The streamline rejection function checks the customer's known residence
details and online claim responses. If the claim does not auto-reject
due to a residence reason, the streamline function option will display.
If Service Officers do not see this option, it means that the claim may
be rejected due to a residence reason based on information on the
customer’s record.

Withdrawal of claims

Sometimes, customers may withdraw their claims voluntarily. Withdrawn
claims are not rejected, they are deemed to have never been made.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Customers that are not entitled to the Age Pension may qualify for a
CSHC. If a customers Age Pension is rejected for specific reasons (see
Resources for list), they may receive a Notification Task on their
Centrelink online account homepage inviting them to make a claim for a
CSHC. Customers can go to the online claim via the Notification Task.

To claim CSHC, the customer can [] claim online or complete a Claim for
a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (SA296).

Deceased customers

The system generated grant and reject letters for deceased customers are
not addressed correctly, and contain text that is inappropriate to send
to a deceased estate. The grant or rejection letter must be addressed
to:

-   the 'Executor of the Estate' (if applicable), or
-   to the 'Estate of the Late [customer's name]'

The Resources page contains an example of appropriate text for the
manual letter (Q999) that must be issued when a customer is deceased.

Related links

Qualification for Age Pension

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Processing transfers to Age Pension

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Requesting information (CLK)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Request to reassess a rejected claim

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Customer initiated review of decision

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
