
Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension 065-03080010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a list of codes used for the cancellation,
suspension and rejection of Age Pension. The Centrelink system uses
codes when a decision to cancel or suspend a payment, or to reject a
claim, is recorded on the computer system. A description of the code is
used in correspondence with customers.

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons

Suspension and cancellation reasons can be recorded manually via the
Benefit Action (BA) screen, or automatically by the system. Automatic
cancellations occur when information provided by the customer
disqualifies them from entitlement. For instance, if the customer
provides income details that exceed the income limit, then the system
will cancel the Age Pension with reason code INC as the income is too
high.

Note: if a new pension claim is rejecting income or paying the incorrect
rate under the income test and there is employment income coded, check
the Factors Affecting Rate (PFAR) screen for the apportionment of the
income. If the amount of income appears to be too high, it could be an
apportionment problem. See Assessing and coding employment income.

It is preferable, where possible, to allow the system to automatically
cancel the Age Pension after updating the customer's information on the
relevant screens. This enables other staff, such as Smart Centre staff,
to determine the reason for cancellation without requesting further
information, should a customer contact us or request a review.

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Note: customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative. Cancel any MFUs generated for customers in this situation.

The Resources page contains a table of cancellation, suspension and
rejection reasons for Age Pension.

Related links

Suspension of Age Pension

Cancellation of Age Pension

Restoration of Age Pension

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Compensation Preclusion Period

Former resident provisions

Foreign pensions

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Employment income nil rate period

Admission process for incarcerated customers

Common types of Australian visas

Assessing permanent blindness

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Identity Confirmation

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Australian residence requirements for payment

Returning to Australia

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
