-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document details the types of retirement villages available, and
the services they give. It also explains how to assess assets, and how
to consider if a customer may be a homeowner.

Accommodation provided

Retirement villages accommodate people aged 55 years or over. They
generally provide either:

-   Self-care units - where the resident looks after their own needs.
    The units are fully self-contained including a kitchen to prepare
    meals
-   Serviced units - which usually do not have full kitchen facilities.
    Meals are provided in a communal dining room. Other services such as
    cleaning and laundering may be provided

In some cases, facilities may provide accommodation that allows
residents to 'age in place'. They are comprised of a Retirement Village,
and low and high level care facilities all in the one complex.

Entry contribution amount

When a customer takes up residence in a retirement village, home
ownership is determined by the entry contribution amount, if any, and
affects assessment under the assets test.

The entry contribution amount:

is not subject to the deeming provisions

does not include ongoing costs such as:

-   general service, or
-   maintenance fees, which are payable on a regular basis

If the customer is assessed as a non-homeowner:

-   fees and charges are assessed as rent, and
-   Rent Assistance (RA) may be payable depending on the amount paid by
    way of fees and charges

If the customer owned their principal home before moving into the
retirement village:

-   the former home is an assessable asset, from the date of entry to
    the village
-   rental income received for the former home is assessed as income

A customer may not pay an entry contribution. When this occurs, the
customer may be asked to pay rent in addition to the maintenance fees.
RA is payable on the combined amount.

Care situation

A customer who enters a unit or aged care section of a retirement
village as an aged care resident, to receive a substantial level of care
for which ongoing government funding is being provided, is a person 'in
residential care'.

Customers can have their home exempt from the assets test for 2 years
from the date they entered residential care if:

-   they own their principal home, and
-   vacate it permanently

The customer’s homeownership status and payability of Rent Assistance
(RA) is determined by the assessment of the Entry Contribution (EC)

The 2 year assets test exemption does not apply if the customer is
already a retirement village resident moving, into residential care

The customer’s homeownership status and payability of RA is determined
by the assessment of the Entry Contribution (EC)

When customers enter residential care in a retirement village, the lump
sum payment must be compared to the extra allowable amount (E

If the lump sum is greater than the EAA, the customer is considered a
home owner:

-   they are not entitled to RA
-   the lump sum is not assessed as an asset

If the customer retains ownership of the former principal home, it is an
exempt asset for 2 years from the date the customer entered residential
care in the retirement village

If the lump sum is less than the EAA, the customer is a non-homeowner:

-   they may be eligible for RA
-   the lump sum payment is assessed as an asset, but not a financial
    asset. Therefore, deeming provisions do not apply

If the customer retains ownership of the former principal home, it is an
exempt asset for 2 years from the date the customer entered residential
care in the retirement village

Lifestyle villages, park homes and over 55 villages

A caravan park, mobile home (transportable home), or a lifestyle park
may promote itself as a retirement park or village by using a name which
gives this impression. Although it may restrict occupancy to residents
over a specified age, and have similar facilities to a retirement
village, there are factors that need to be considered to determine the
correct accommodation type. See Assessing caravans, boats and park
homes.

If there is doubt about the accommodation facility meeting the
definition of a retirement village:

-   obtain a copy of the contract and relevant details, and
-   refer to Level 2 Policy Help Desk for help with the decision. The
    Resources page contains a link

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

SRS operate privately in:

-   New South Wales
-   Victoria
-   Queensland, and
-   South Australia

SRS:

-   offer supported accommodation to older people and people with a
    disability
-   differ from Residential Aged Care, as an Aged Care Assessment Team
    (ACAT) assessment is not required to enter a SRS
-   do not receive funding from the Australian Government
-   differ from Retirement Villages, as they are not regulated under
    state Retirements Village legislation

See Supported Residential Services (SRS) for more details.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the Real Estate form (MOD R), and
-   the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query Form

Contents

Assessment of entry contribution

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
