
Transfer to Age Pension 065-03010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how income support customers of Age Pension age
who qualify for Age Pension can transfer to Age Pension from their
current payment. It explains when a claim or other documentation is
required and factors to consider. It also contains information on the
automatic transfer to Age Pension for some Indigenous customers.

Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) customers

Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA) ceased on 1 January
2022. Customers needed to transfer to Age Pension to continue receiving
payment after this date.

Transfer process for eligible customers

Identified Indigenous customers may be eligible for automatic transfer
to Age Pension or excluded from the review process.

[] Customers eligible to complete the online transfer to Age Pension can
access the online transfer 13 weeks before reaching Age Pension age.

91 days before reaching Age Pension age, if the customer is:

-   subscribed to online services, they will be sent an online letter to
    their myGov inbox to complete the transfer to Age Pension. The
    letter will include a hyperlink to the agency's website and direct
    link to their online transfer task
-   not subscribed to online letters or Electronic Messaging, they will
    be sent a letter and a Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form by mail,
    with the option to complete the transfer online rather than return
    the form

If the Transfer to Age Pension has not been completed online/returned 28
days before reaching Age Pension age and the customer is:

-   subscribed to online services, they will be sent a reminder letter
    to their myGov Inbox
-   not subscribed to online letters through myGov Inbox but to
    Electronic Messaging, they will be sent a reminder SMS or email
    depending on their preferred communication method
-   not subscribed to either myGov Inbox or Electronic Messaging, they
    will be sent a reminder letter by mail

If the customer has not completed the online task/returned the SA383
form upon reaching Age Pension age, their (and their partner's) payment
will be suspended, or cancelled.

If the customer reaches Age Pension age and their current payment
suspends or cancels, the Transfer to Age Pension task will remain
available on the Centrelink online account landing page for up to 13
weeks after the suspension or cancellation date.

Note: payment (including the partner's) should only be restored once the
customer has submitted the online transfer, via the Assisted Customer
Claim (ACC) workflow, or lodged a SA383 including required
documentation.

Online transfers may auto complete

Some online transfers will not require Service Officer intervention and
will automatically complete once submitted by the customer. Auto
completion may occur where the transfer is straightforward, for example,
there are no updates required, no documentation to be provided, and no
adverse impacts on the entitlements of the customer (or their partner).

Where transfers to Age Pension cannot auto complete, the claim status of
the activity will change to 'In Process' and either an AGE/NCL or
PEN/REA activity will be generated based on the reason for auto-complete
not proceeding.

Contact about transfer to Age Pension

If an income support customer contacts about transferring to Age Pension
because they have not received an invitation to transfer and they are
within 13 weeks of Age Pension age, [] an online transfer must be
offered first. Explain the benefits of using the transfer online,
including:

-   early warnings if claimants may not be eligible, for example, not
    residentially qualified
-   less information to provide, as information from Centrelink records
    will be pre-populated into the online transfer
-   for Carer Payment and Disability Support Pension customers, detailed
    messaging will populate within the online transfer process. This
    outlines the customer's circumstances including the advantages and
    disadvantages of transferring from their respective payment. This
    enables them to make an informed decision about whether to transfer
    to Age Pension or remain on their current payment
-   the ability to monitor the progress of a transfer through Centrelink
    online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If customers decline or are unable to use the online transfer offer, the
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can be run with the customer.

If a correspondence nominee enquires about transferring to Age Pension
on behalf of a customer, Service Officers can run the ACC workflow. ACC
allows for the Verbal Declaration or signed CDF to be made/provided by
the customer or their correspondence nominee.

A declaration is required prior to submitting the transfer. When a
Service Officer reads the Verbal Declaration to the customer (or
correspondence nominee), they must tick the Declaration box on the
Review your claim page. This confirms that the Service Officer has read
the declaration script and the customer (or correspondence nominee)
accepts it. Once the Verbal Declaration is accepted and ACC submitted a
DOC containing this information displays in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First super case
-   the Customer Claim Summary

If the customer cannot make a verbal declaration, the Service Officer
must:

-   invite the customer to log into their online services, accept the
    customer declaration and submit their transfer, or
-   request a signed Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The Resources page
    has a link to the CDF.

Service Officers must not submit the transfer without the customer
accepting the Verbal Declaration or completing and signing a CDF. Advise
the customer of any outstanding documents, or action required to submit
the transfer.

Qualification for Age Pension

A person qualifies for Age Pension if they have reached Age Pension age
and they satisfy the residence qualification for Age Pension.

Customers who were receiving Widow Allowance (WA), or Partner Allowance
(PA) immediately before reaching Age Pension age were qualified to be
transferred automatically without having to meet the normal 10 year
residence requirements.

WA customers who were not residentially qualified on 1 January 2022 were
eligible to transfer to Age Pension on 1 January 2022 under a residence
exemption.

Note: a customer will qualify for Age Pension without having to meet the
normal 10 year residence requirements if they:

-   were receiving Wife Pension (WP) on 19 March 2020
-   were not receiving Carer Allowance (CA) on 19 March 2020
-   turned Age Pension age after 20 March 2020

Customers who do not satisfy the residence requirements for Age Pension
but have:

-   lived or worked in an Agreement country may be qualified under an
    Agreement
-   not lived or worked in an Agreement country should be advised of the
    likely date they will meet the residence requirements so they can
    contact Services Australia at that time. Consider offering the
    customer an alternative income support payment where eligible.
    Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website can be
    used to determine any support the customer may be eligible for. The
    Resources page has a link to the Payment and Service Finder

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs will automatically
populate visa subclass details for most customers from 1 September 1994
to date. Where available, the datalink will also advise citizenship and
movement information from 1 September 1994. This information has been
available from 8 December 2008 to assist in assessing residence periods.

When transfer to Age Pension provisions do not apply

An Age Pension online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) will be
required from customers receiving the following payments:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Farm Household Allowance

See Claiming Age Pension.

Backdating of Age Pension claim

If an online transfer, an online claim, an Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC), a paper claim form, or an SA383 is lodged after becoming
qualified for Age Pension and the transfer provisions apply, the date of
effect may be backdated up to the later of:

-   13 weeks before the date of the decision to transfer
-   the date the person qualified for Age Pension

The References page contains more information on backdating provisions
(section 12, deemed claim in certain cases).

Documents/information that may be needed

-   Proof of age if not previously supplied, unless they are an
    identified Indigenous customer. This will be requested online or on
    the transfer form. If unable to provide proof of age, their age may
    be verified by another method
-   Documents confirming their identity if the Identity Confirmation
    Indicator is not showing as Confirmed or the identity on record is
    not sufficient
-   Details of superannuation investments, for example, approved deposit
    funds, deferred annuities or superannuation funds. These must be
    recorded for all customers who have these investments.
    Superannuation is assessable at Age Pension age whether they
    transfer to Age Pension or not. Note: if the partner is over pension
    age, the superannuation details of the partner must also be recorded
-   Information about their home property to see if they are eligible
    for the extended land use test curtilage concession if the principal
    home and adjacent land is on 1 title or multiple titles and is over
    2 hectares
-   They may have to meet Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) requirements
    if they were born overseas or lived overseas
-   They may have to report changes in earnings. Employment income
    coding must be checked to ensure it is still accurate. Customers
    with variable employment income will be required to report 2 weekly
-   They may require a valuation of assessable real estate

Possible adverse effect by transferring to Age Pension

Those receiving the following payments may be disadvantaged by
transferring to Age Pension and may choose not to transfer:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment (partnered or single)

The Resources page contains information about the effect on their
payments and the advantages and disadvantages of transferring to Age
Pension.

Customers receiving Carer Payment or Disability Support Pension who
lodge a transfer to Age Pension online will be presented with
personalised circumstance data including the advantages and
disadvantages of transferring from their respective payment to help them
make an informed decision about whether to transfer to Age Pension or
remain on their existing payment.

Customer does not wish to transfer to Age Pension

Except for identified Indigenous customers who are excluded from the
transfer process, customers must still complete the transfer to Age
Pension online, or via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or return their
Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form even if they do not wish to
transfer to Age Pension.

Superannuation details must be provided for customers who are Age
Pension age for all superannuation investments, for example approved
deposit fund, deferred annuity or superannuation fund.

Superannuation is assessable at Age Pension age whether or not the
customer transfers to Age Pension.

Customers who do not wish to transfer to Age Pension are not required to
provide identity documents.

Transfer treated as claim

Where a customer loses entitlement to their previous income support
payment they may still be able to claim Age Pension by completing the
transfer to Age Pension [] online via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or
using the Transfer to Age Pension (SA383) form. If the customer's income
support payment was cancelled after the Transfer to Age Pension process
has commenced, they may need to complete an Income and Assets form
(SA369) to ensure Age Pension entitlements are assessed based on the
customer's current circumstances. A link to the form is available on the
Resources page.

Exception: for Widow Allowance and Partner Allowance customers to
qualify for Age Pension under section 43(1)(c) of the Social Security
Act, their allowance must be payable immediately before reaching Age
Pension age.

Customers over Age Pension age

If the customer is already Age Pension age, paid an income support
payment and satisfies Age Pension qualification, they may be eligible to
transfer to Age Pension if they:

-   contact and enquire about transferring from another payment (for
    example Carer Payment), or
-   are Age Pension age and were not initially residentially qualified
    for Age Pension

They can complete the transfer to Age Pension [] online or via Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC).

Customers unable or unwilling to use the online transfer or use ACC need
to lodge a claim for Age Pension. Running the First Contact Service
Offer (FCSO) workflow will send out the correct forms.

Customers may not have contacted but have a Manual Follow-up (MFU)
maturing which is visible on the Activity List (AL) screen which
requires staff to contact the customer and inviting them to apply for
Age Pension online via ACC or by issuing a paper claim.

Section 12 of the SSAA (deemed claims provision) applies to customers
who were granted their current income support payment before or after
qualifying for the Age Pension.

Comparable foreign payment

If a customer or their partner has worked or lived outside Australia,
they may need to meet the comparable foreign payment requirements.

Customers may ask Centrelink for information about the social insurance
payments available from other countries.

Notices to customers advising of a possible entitlement to a foreign
pension are issued based on information recorded on the Country of
Residence (CRES) and Foreign Claim Details (FGD) screens. No action is
required by Service Officers.

Blind customers

For customers who want to transfer and who have not previously been
assessed as blind, additional steps must be followed regarding
assessment of blindness and whether or not their income and assets need
to be assessed.

Deceased customers

The system generated grant and reject letters for deceased customers are
not addressed correctly, and contain text that is inappropriate to send
to a deceased estate. The grant or rejection letter must be addressed
to:

-   the 'Executor of the Estate' (if applicable), or
-   to the 'Estate of the Late <customer's name>'

For an example of a pension grant letter for a deceased customer, see
the Assessing transfers to Age Pension.

Urgent transfers to Age Pension

Care is to be taken to ensure that customers who will soon lose
qualification of their existing payment (for example, JobSeeker Payment)
are processed as a priority and at the earliest touch point to avoid
placing the customer in financial hardship.

If staff who do not have the appropriate Transfer to Age Pension skill
tags encounter urgent transfers to Age Pension where a customer is in
hardship, or payment was cancelled, or is unable to complete the
transfer and requires urgent processing, create a Fast Note:

for Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC):

-   Select Auto Text use Older Australians > Claims > Age Transfer
    Online Urgent processing request

for SA383:

-   Select Auto Text use Older Australians > Claims > Age Transfer SA383
    Urgent processing request

Leave Fast Note DOC open. This will ensure that the transfer is
correctly prioritised for allocation.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
contact details for International Services (CIS), Age Pension verses
current payment information to help customers choose whether or not to
transfer to Age Pension, and changes to payments when customers reach
Age Pension age. It also contains information to help calculate a
person's Age Pension age date, and example of when the residence
exemption no longer applies.

Related links

Assessing transfers to Age Pension

Claiming Age Pension

Qualification for Age Pension

International Social Security Agreements

Former resident provisions

Foreign pensions

Identity Confirmation

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind)

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Recording legal residence status

Pensions income and assets tests

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
