
Veterans' Supplement for aged care services 065-13040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for the Veterans' Supplement for aged
care services.

On this Page:

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Veterans' Supplement in Flexible Care, Home Care and Residential Aged Care

A veteran:

-   receiving a Commonwealth-subsidised aged care service,
-   whose mental health condition has been accepted by the Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA) as associated with their service, may
    attract the Veterans' Supplement

The Veterans’ Supplement is automatically applied for care recipients
accessing these types of flexible care:

-   Multi-Purpose Services
-   National Aboriginal and the Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged
    Care Program
-   Transition Care Programme

The Veterans’ Supplement provides additional funding to Home Care
Package providers. This is for additional costs that may be required to
deliver appropriate care to veterans with accepted, service related
mental health conditions.

The supplement is available to residential aged care providers who care
for veterans with service related mental health conditions. The
supplement is designed to ensure a veteran’s mental health condition
does not act as a barrier to accessing appropriate care. The supplement
is paid directly to the Home Care Package provider on behalf of the care
recipient.

Eligibility

The Veterans’ Supplement was introduced on 1 August 2013.

A veteran is eligible who:

-   has a mental health condition accepted by the Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA) as related to their service, and
-   is receiving Commonwealth subsidised residential care or an eligible
    Home Care package

Care recipients are not required to undergo any further assessment to
establish eligibility for the supplement.

Payment for eligible veterans

Approved providers do not need to submit a claim for the Veterans’
Supplement. The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and Services
Australia match information to determine eligibility.

A veteran or their legal representative needs to provide consent for
information about their eligibility to be given to their aged care
provider. Once this occurs, payment to their provider is automatic and
backdated to either the date (whichever is the latest):

-   the supplement came into effect
-   of entry into care
-   the care recipient became eligible for the supplement

Timeframes for the Veterans' Supplement file

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) send the file to Services
Australia Aged Care Programmes Branch Operations team via email each
month as required.

Note: the file must be loaded prior to the start of the next claim
month.

Leave enough time to ensure that any errors can be dealt with before the
next month's run.

The Resources page has information on:

-   Veterans’ Supplement in aged care questions and answers
-   responsibilities for the Veterans’ Supplement consent list
-   links to relevant external websites

Related links

Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care program for service providers

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Payment statements for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
