-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process of determining whether a protected
person is residing in the former principal home and the process of
coding a protected person in Customer First. This document applies to
pre and post 1 July 2014 assessment schemes.

Protected person overview

From the date of entry into care, the value of a care recipient’s
interest in their principal home is included in the residential care
means assessment. This includes any refund amount due to them at a
future date when vacating a retirement village.

The means assessment caps the principal home at the value of the First
Asset Threshold. The Resources page contains a link to the current
threshold (within the Department of Health and Aged Care Schedule of
Fees and Charges). Note: only applies to post 1 July 2014 asset
assessments.

A protected person is someone whose continued presence in a home after
the owner (or co-owner) moves into residential care has the effect of
exempting the home from the assets tests that apply to aged care.

There are 4 categories of protected person. These are:

-   partner
-   dependent child/student
-   carer
-   close relative

Further definitions of the above categories of protected persons are
contained within the Aged Care Act 1997 and the Aged Care (Transitional
Provisions) Act 1997. Protected person status will be determined by
Services Australia or Veterans’ Affairs, whichever is the responsible
agency/department.

See the References page for further information.

Note: the Age Pension asset test and aged care means assessment treat
former principal home exemptions differently. For Age Pension
information.

See Vacation of principal home due to illness. For aged care means
assessment, see Aged care means assessment - home ownership and real
estate estimates.

Criteria where the protected person is a partner

Where a care recipient is a member of a couple, the partner is defined
as the care recipient’s current partner as at the date of event (DOV).
Same sex couples are recognised for aged care assessments.

If a care recipient is not a member of a couple at the DOV, coding of a
partner as a protected person is not accepted.

For social security purposes – being assessed as:

-   ‘living separately and apart’ or
-   ‘separated under one roof’ for social security purposes, or
-   divorced, separated or widowed, then
-   this means a care recipient is not partnered

Note: A protected person carer exemption may apply if the criteria is
met.

See Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness
for further information.

A couple cannot have more than 1 exempt principal home between them.

See Customer owns more than one home for more information.

Where a couple enter permanent residential care (post 1 July 2014) on
the same day, the former principal home is an assessable asset for both
members of the couple.

Consent to confirm protected person status for partners

Signed consent is not required from the partner to allow the agency to
confirm protected person status.

Criteria where the protected person is a dependent child/student

At the DOV, dependent children must:

-   be under 16 years of age, and
-   not be in full time work, and
-   not be in receipt of an Australian income support payment (ISP)

At the DOV, dependent students must:

-   have reached 16 years of age, but be under 25 years of age, and
-   be receiving full time education at a school, college or university,
    and
-   not be in full time work, and
-   not be in receipt of an Australian ISP

The Resources page contains a link to Services Australia website. This
site defines which payments are Australian ISPs.

Consent to confirm protected person status for dependent
children/students

Signed consent is not required from the dependent child/student to allow
the agency to confirm protected person status.

Criteria where the protected person is a carer or close relative

At the DOV, the carer or close relative must be:

-   in receipt of an Australian income support payment (ISP), or
-   eligible to receive an Australian ISP

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website.
This site defines which payments are Australian ISPs.

Carers

In addition to the above criteria regarding Australian ISPs:

the carer must have occupied the former principal home with the care
recipient for the past 2 years (as at the DOV)

-   the 2 year residency criteria may apply to multiple principal homes
    where the care recipient and the carer have changed address during
    this time

the carer does not need to have received (or be eligible to receive) an
ISP for the entire 2 year period

the carer does not need to have received either Carer Allowance or Carer
Payment

there is no test on the amount of care provided

Close Relatives

A close relative is defined as a care recipient’s:

-   parent (father or mother)
-   sister, brother, child or grandchild

Ex-partners are not considered a close relative. In some circumstances
they may qualify as a carer.

In addition to the above criteria regarding an Australian ISP:

the close relative must have occupied the former principal home with the
care recipient for the past 5 years (as at the DOV)

-   the 5 year residency criteria may apply to multiple principal homes
    where the care recipient and the close relative have changed address
    during this time

the close relative does not need to have received (or be eligible to
receive) an ISP for the entire 5 year period

Consent to confirm protected person status for carers and close
relatives

Consent to check occupancy details and eligibility for an Australian ISP
must be confirmed when a protected person status is claimed for carers
and close relatives. When the consent has been provided, occupancy and
eligibility details can be confirmed via 1 of the following:

The carer and/or close relative’s Customer First record:

-   may indicate that the carer or close relative is eligible for an
    Australian ISP, and has occupied the home for the required period (2
    years for a carer or 5 years for a close relative)
-   can only be accessed when the carer and/or close relative has
    provided their verbal consent to access this information or, in the
    Aged Care Calculation of Your Cost of Care form or, when the Aged
    Care carer or close relative online task has been completed

Where no consent is provided or additional information is required, the
‘Aged Care Carer or close relative assessment (SA483) form may be
provided:

-   by a close relative online task:
-   by sending the SA483 to the care recipient if consent is not
    provided in the calculation of your cost of care form
-   when there is consent in the calculation of your cost of care form
    or online claim but there is not enough information in the Customer
    First record
-   to show that the carer or close relative is eligible for an ISP, and
    has occupied the home for the required period (2 years for a carer
    or 5 years for a close relative)

See the Resources page for a link to the form.

Where protected person status changes

A protected person status may cease in some circumstances. The impact on
the aged care means assessment will depend upon whether the assessment
was made under a pre or post 1 July 2014 assessment scheme.

Post 1 July 2014 assessment schemes

Where a protected person no longer meets the eligibility criteria, the
former principal home will become an assessable asset from the date
protected person status ceases.

Protected person status may cease when:

-   the protected person no longer resides in the former principal home,
    except in circumstances where a partner has sold the principal home
    and purchases a new property as their principal home
-   the care recipient is no longer a member of a couple
-   the protected person (excluding partners and dependent
    children/students) is no longer eligible to receive an Australian
    income support payment (ISP)

Protected person status may be regained when:

-   the protected person returns to live in the former principal home
    and remains eligible for an ISP
-   the protected person is still in the former principal home and has
    regained eligibility for an ISP

Where a protected person no longer meets the eligibility criteria, the
value of the care recipient’s share of the principal home will become an
assessable asset.

If a partner is a protected person and leaves the former principal home
to enter permanent residential care, the principal home will become an
assessable asset for both members of the couple from the date of the
partner’s entry into care.

Pre 1 July 2014 assessment schemes

Where a protected person no longer meets the eligibility criteria, the
means assessment does not alter. This is because the assessed asset
amount is fixed, based on the care recipient’s circumstances at the date
of entry into care.

For example, if the protected person is a partner, and later enters
permanent residential care, the former principal home:

-   will remain an exempt asset for first member of the couple to enter
    care, and
-   will be an assessed asset for the partner, unless another exemption
    applied at the date of entry into care, for example: dependent
    child/carer/close relative

The Resources page contains links to the:

-   Services Australia website
-   Department of Health and Aged Care Schedule of Fees and Charges
-   Aged Care letter template
-   answers for common questions asked by customers

Outcome of a protected person assessment

A protected person may be contacted in order to confirm their details or
request further information, however the outcome of a protected person
assessment should not be communicated unless the person also has
authority to act on the care recipient’s behalf. A protected person does
not automatically meet the criteria to release information to them under
implied consent.

Related links

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Aged care means assessment – home ownership and real estate estimates

Implied consent regarding third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
