
Qualification for Age Pension (Blind) 065-04030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the qualification for Age
Pension (Blind).

Claiming Age Pension (Blind)

A pension paid to an Age Pensioner who is permanently blind is commonly
referred to as a 'Blind' Pension. However, there is no payment called
'Blind Pension'.

A customer can qualify for Age Pension (Blind) if they are qualified for
an Age Pension and can be regarded as permanently blind.

To be considered 'permanently blind', the customer must satisfy one of
the following guidelines:

-   Visual acuity on the Snellen Scale after correction by suitable
    lenses must be less than 6/60 in both eyes. For information on
    whether other ratings on the Snellen Scale qualifies a customer as
    being assessed as permanently blind, see Assessing permanent
    blindness
-   A field of vision constricted to 10 degrees or less of arc around
    central fixation in the better eye irrespective of corrected visual
    acuity (equivalent to 1/100 white test object)
-   A combination of visual defects resulting in the same degree of
    visual impairment as that occurring in the above points

DVA payments and Age Pension (Blind)

Customers receiving a Service Pension, Veteran Payment, Income Support
Supplement (ISS) or War Widow(er)'s Pension (WWP) from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA) cannot receive a social security income support
payment such as Age Pension (Blind). These DVA payments come under the
multiple entitlement exclusion, therefore customers cannot receive a
payment from both Centrelink and DVA.

Income and assets tests

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) are paid free of the income and
assets tests.

Customers will receive the basic rate of pension unless they want to
claim Rent Assistance (RA) or if their partner wants to claim an income
tested payment in their own right, e.g. Carer Payment (CP). In this
case, the customer and their partner will have to disclose their income
and assets so that a calculation can be done to determine whether they
will be eligible for RA or if the partner's payments will be affected.

Letters

Customers can choose to receive their letters from Centrelink in an
alternative format.

Related links

Assessing Age Pension (Blind) claims

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Australian residence requirements for payment

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Veterans' Affairs payments income and assets tests

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension (Blind)

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind)

Exempt income

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
