
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document contains information to assist with the management of
initial enquiries regarding aged care. Frequently asked aged care
questions are available on the Resources page.

Aged care means assessment - pre 1 July 2014 assessment rules

Home care

The Department of Health and Aged Care is responsible for aged care
means assessments for home care recipients assessed under pre 1 July
2014 assessment rules.

Residential care

Prior to 1 July 2014, an aged care means assessment was known as a
Residential Care Assessment (RCA). The RCA covered 2 different types of
assessments:

-   Residential Care Income Assessments (RCIA); and
-   Residential Care Assets Assessment (RCAA)

The income and assets assessment components of an aged care means
assessment are processed by Services Australia, or where applicable, the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Residential care income assessment

Can only be processed after entry to care

Applies only to care recipients who first entered residential care prior
to 1 July 2014 and have not:

-   had a break in care greater than 28 days since 1 July 2014
-   opted in to post 1 July 2014 assessment rules

Can be completed via data matching (for means tested income support
recipients) or via an Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care

Is used to determine the income-tested fee (ITF)

Residential care assets assessment

-   Can be processed either before or after entry to care
-   Applies only to care recipients who first entered residential care
    prior to 1 July 2014; and have not had a break in care greater than
    28 days since 1 July 2014; and have not opted in to post 1 July 2014
    assessment rules
-   Initiated only by the care recipient lodging an Aged Care
    Calculation of your cost of care
-   Is used to determine accommodation costs

Frequently asked aged care questions are available on the Resources
page.

Aged care means assessment - post 1 July 2014 assessment rules

From 1 July 2014, to determine eligibility for government assistance
with aged care costs:

-   For home care - an income assessment is required
-   For permanent residential care (residential care) - a combined
    assets and income assessment is required

Combined assets and income assessments are processed by Services
Australia, or the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) where
applicable.

A combined means assessment application can be processed either before
or after entry into care in circumstances where a:

-   care recipient has entered care, or is considering entering care
    after 1 July 2014
-   care recipient entered residential care prior to 1 July 2014 and
    wishes to estimate their fees under the post 1 July 2014 assessment
    rules if they move aged care services (opting-in)
-   previous residential care recipient has had a break in care of more
    than 28 days
-   previous combined means assessment was undertaken however is no
    longer valid

Frequently asked aged care questions are on the Resources page.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

DVA is responsible for completing assessments for the following care
recipients:

Veterans, War Widow(er)s and partners receiving an Income Support
Payment from DVA. This includes:

-   Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)
-   Age Service Pension

Self-funded retirees (and partners) in receipt of DVA Disability Pension
with Qualifying Service

War Widow(er)s in receipt of DVA War Widows Pension with Qualifying
Service

Veteran Ex-Prisoners of War (POWs)

Frequently asked questions and a link to the DVA Aged Care Website are
on the Resources page.

The following information is on the Resources page of Aged care means
assessment - preliminary checks:

-   Aged care DVA referral process
-   Responsible departments for aged care assessments

Home care means assessment

A home care means assessment is an income assessment and may be required
in the following circumstances:

-   A care recipient first entered into residential care prior to 1 July
    2014 and moves to a home care service
-   A care recipient first entered into home care prior to 1 July 2014
    and moves to a new home care service with a break in care less than
    28 days, and has 'opted in' to the post 1 July 2014 arrangements

An income assessment can be initiated via:

-   Completion of an Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care form
-   Verbally, for means tested income support care recipients only
-   Care recipients who receive a means tested income support payment
    may be eligible for an automatic assessment

See Aged care means assessment to assist with determining when a
calculation of your cost of care application is required.

The Aged Care - Calculation of your cost of care forms are available
from the Services Australia website. See the Resources page for a link
to the forms.

Residential care means assessment

A residential care means assessment is a combined assets and income
assessment and may be required in the following circumstances:

-   A care recipient entered permanent residential care after 1 July
    2014, or
-   A care recipient entered care prior to 1 July 2014 and are seeking
    an estimate of fees as they are considering opting in to the post 1
    July 2014 assessment scheme

A combined assets and income assessment can be initiated via:

-   Completion of an Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care form
-   Verbally, for homeowners who receive a means tested income support
    payment
-   Non-homeowners who receive a means tested income support payment may
    be eligible for an automatic assessment

See Aged Care means assessment to assist with determining when a
calculation of your cost of care is required.

Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care forms are available from the
Services Australia website. See the Resources page for a link to the
forms.

My Aged Care General Service Offer

As part of the 2021-22 Budget, the Australian Government announced it
was implementing an aged care reform package. The reform package aims to
build an aged care system that provides high quality and safe care for
older Australians.

As a result of this reform a new aged care general service offer is
being made available in all Services Australia service centres and aged
care contact centres (Smart Centres, Aged Care and Allied Health
Telephony). See My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO) for more
information.

Correspondence nominees and aged care services

From 5 December 2020, Centrelink correspondence nominees are able to
enquire, update and act on a care recipient's behalf for both Centrelink
payments and services and aged care costs.

Completing an 'Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on
your behalf form (SS313)' allows the appointment of:

-   one payment nominee (for Centrelink payments only)
-   one correspondence nominee
-   the same nominee for both payment and correspondence nominee
    arrangements
-   one person permitted to enquire (PPE)
-   one person permitted to update (PPU)

PPE and PPU appointments are only viewable on the care recipient's
Centrelink record. If a care recipient wants more than 1 PPE or PPU, a
SS313 form needs to be lodged for each appointment. See Person Permitted
to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority.

When a Centrelink customer becomes a care recipient, the correspondence
nominee arrangement is automatically applied to the aged care record.

DVA care recipients can have a different DVA nominee to their aged care
nominee.

Note: DVA care recipients use the Aged Care Request for a nominee for
Department of Veterans' Affairs customers form (AC019). The Resources
page has links to forms. See Aged care request for a nominee or
executor.

Note: My Aged Care use the term ‘representatives’. If someone is a
‘nominee’ for a customer at Services Australia, it does not mean they
are also representatives for the same person at My Aged Care. See My
Aged Care General Service Offer (GSO).

System access required to manage aged care enquiries

Aged care skill tagged staff handling enquiries require access to the
following systems:

Customer First

Aged Care Management and Payment System (ACMPS)

-   See the 'Requesting access to ACMPS' user guide in the Aged Care
    Management Payment System (ACMPS) for information on requesting
    access
-   See the 'ACMPS User Guide' in Aged Care Management Payment System
    (ACMPS) for information on using ACMPS

See Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) for information on:

-   requesting access
-   using ACSP

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions, links to contact
details, the Ageing and Aged Care page on the Department of Health and
Aged Care website, the My Aged Care website and forms.

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Aged Care

Aged care letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged care request for a nominee or executor

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
