
Homeless supplement for aged care services 065-13040030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the homeless supplement for residential aged care
services. The supplement aims to better support residential aged care
services that specialise in caring for care recipients with a history
of, or who are at risk of homelessness at the time of entry into care.
The homeless supplement is a component of the viability supplement
expansion and is not applicable for home care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Eligibility

To be eligible for the homeless supplement the residential aged care
service needs to meet all of the following criteria:

-   Be registered with the Department of Health and Aged Care for the
    expansion component of the viability supplement
-   Have more than half of all residents meeting the viability expansion
    component and homeless supplement assessment criteria
-   Send the Viability expansion component and homeless supplement
    assessment form (AC024) to Services Australia

The AC024 form consists of 4 pages.

Aged care services retains the Assessment section (pages 1 and 2) and
sends the Confirmation section (pages 3 and 4) to Services Australia for
processing.

When processing the AC024 form, Service Australia’s role is to process
the form and check the following details are completed on the form:

-   Care recipient details including ID number
-   Entry date
-   Receipt date (this date cannot be a future date and must be more
    than 28 days from date of entry)
-   Authorised person’s details including signature and date the form
    was signed

It is the aged care service’s responsibility to ensure the care
recipient meets the eligibility requirements, outlined on pages 1 and 2
of the AC024 form, before submitting the forms.

The Resources page contains questions and answers about the homeless
supplement, a link to contact details for Aged Care, and links to
relevant websites.

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

Viability Supplement for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
