-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers manage aged care recipient
records in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) and Aged Care Management
Payment System (ACMPS).

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 11 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Historical ACMPS process

The Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) was the previous system
used for processing Part 6 Name Change approval. Part 6 Name Change
approval details inactivate functionality was switched to view only from
15 April 2023.

To view the previous ACMPS process, see the historical version.

Aged care recipient records

Care recipient records are created automatically, from data being
exchanged between systems, or manually in the following systems:

-   Customer First
-   ACMPS
-   Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)
-   Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)
-   My Aged Care/Aged Care Gateway
-   DVA system

Care recipient records are automatically created during the process of
National Screening Assessment Form (NSAF) being received via the My Aged
Care Gateway. Care recipient information is auto populated based on the
information from the NSAF and pre-assessment.

NSAFs are:

-   automatically matched to existing care recipient records, or
-   held for manual processing by the Health Service Delivery Division
    (HSDD)

If NSAFs are held, HSDD will determine if a new record is to be created
or has been matched to an existing care recipient profile. The NSAF
contains the approval details for the care recipient. All updates to a
care recipient’s personal details (for example, name, address, date of
birth) are also received via NSAFs.

Information can be updated between departments, for example:

-   My Aged Care (Department of Health and Aged Care) can update
    information that will flow through to Services Australia’s systems
-   Services Australia email Department of Health and Aged Care to
    advise of errors/information incorrectly matched

Service Officers will need to view a care recipient’s record in the aged
care payment systems to answer aged care services’ queries.

Care recipient notes

Care recipient notes must be recorded if manual action has occurred on a
care recipient record. Action can be requested by the Department of
Health and Aged Care, the aged care service or by the Service Officer.
For example, an aged care service can request a change to a hospital
leave’s start date. Smart Centres must record a note after advising the
Department of Health and Aged Care that a National Screening Assessment
Form (NSAF) created aged care record was mismatched due to misspelt
names or Date of Birth (DOB) issues.

The Aged Care Staff Portal manages all care recipient notes. For
example:

-   registered
-   deleted
-   updated, or
-   viewed

Deleting events on a care recipient record

While a care recipient record cannot be deleted, events recorded on the
care recipient record may be deleted. For example, entry events may be
deleted.

Note:

-   Requests to delete Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) appraisals
    and National Screening Assessment Form (NSAF) approvals must be
    directed to the Aged Care Programs Branch for action. See Aged care
    records remediation for the email referral process
-   Requests to change a permanent entry or delete dates require the
    provider to submit the signed residential care agreement that has
    been agreed between the provider and care recipient
-   Deleting permanent entry events where a previous respite entry was
    not coded is no longer required. The Aged Care Staff Portal will
    allow the respite entry to be coded in addition to the current
    permanent entry. See the Using the Aged Care Staff Portal to
    register residential entry events - (Service in Context) table for
    more information

Leave

See Aged Care leave for information on leave types and how to code and
register leave events in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) and ACMPS.

Aged care compensation

The most common forms of compensation are:

-   payments made in respect of personal injury
-   physical and/or emotional suffering, or
-   property damage

Compensation payments can be:

-   Workers’ Compensation
-   Third Party, and
-   Common Law

The Resources page contains links to the Aged Care Programs Branch and
external websites on leave types for home care and residential care, and
a historical process table.

Related links

Aged care leave

Aged care records remediation

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Emergency events and aged care service providers

Home Care Packages program

National Screening and Assessment Form (NSAF)

Payment statements for aged care services

Residential care monthly claim form

Residential Care program

Short-term Restorative Care (STRC) Programme

Transition Care Programme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
