
Basic Daily Fee (BDF) supplement for residential aged care services 065-21102659

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the 2021 and 2012 Basic Daily
Fee (BDF) supplements.

2021 Basic Daily Fee (BDF) supplement

The 2021 Basic Daily Fee (BDF) supplement supports aged care services to
deliver better care and services for residential care recipients.

From 1 July 2021, eligible residential aged care services who have
entered into an agreement with the Department of Health and Aged Care
are receiving an additional $10 per day, per care recipient. This
agreement is known as an undertaking.

The first 2021 BDF supplement payment was made as part of the August
2021 claim based on occupancy details from July 2021. The BDF supplement
was paid to all eligible residential aged care service via the System
for Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC). The last 2021 BDF
supplement payment will be paid at the start of October 2022 as part of
the September 2022 claim, due to the introduction of the Australian
National Aged Care Classification (AN-ACC) which will incorporate the
supplement.

See the Resources page for further information on the implementation of
the AN-ACC.

Note: the 2021 Basic Daily Fee supplement is paid in respect to the
residential aged care service. This does not impact on the care
recipient’s Basic Daily Fee and care recipients will continue to pay
their contribution towards their day to day living costs.

Eligibility

Residential aged care services must do the following to be eligible for
the 2021 BDF supplement:

-   complete a formal undertaking with the Department of Health and Aged
    Care to deliver better care and services
-   meet the living needs of residential care recipients, with focus on
    food and nutrition, and
-   submit quarterly reports to the Department of Health and Aged Care
    by the due date to keep their eligibility (the reporting form is
    available on the My Aged Care service provider portal)

Note:

The Department of Health and Aged Care manages the ongoing eligibility

Residential aged care services must complete and submit the undertaking
with the Department of Health and Aged Care. The Department of Health
and Aged Care will advise the Aged Care Programmes Branch - Operational
Change and Correspondence Management team via email of changes in
eligibility. See the Resources page for contact details

The Aged Care Programmes Branch - Operational Change and Correspondence
Management team is responsible for registering the Basic Daily Fee
supplement exclusion periods for residential care services excluded from
receiving the supplement

-   From July 2022, this is done in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).
    The updates for the 2021 BDF Supplement were completed in SPARC
    prior to moving into ACSP
-   See the Using the Aged Care Staff Portal for Administration menu tab
    purposes table for more information.

Residential aged care services submitting the undertaking with the
Department of Health and Aged Care after 21 July 2021 are eligible from
the date the aged care service has signed the undertaking

Residential aged care services must submit the quarterly reports to the
Department of Health and Aged Care and Aged Care by the relevant due
date to keep their eligibility for the BDF supplement

2012 Basic Daily Fee (BDF) supplement

The 2021 Basic Daily Fee (BDF) supplement separate to the 2012 BDF
supplement.

The 2012 BDF supplement is paid in respect to residential care
recipients who did not receive any financial support to meet the 2012
fee increase.

Services Australia will continue to automatically pay this supplement
for eligible residential care recipients.

Eligibility

Residential care recipients are eligible for the 2012 BDF supplement if,
on 1 July 2012, the care recipient’s did not have:

-   an aged pension
-   a service pension
-   a seniors supplement
-   a senior health card

The Resources page contains:

-   links to the undertaking form and further information regarding the
    2021 and the 2012 Basic Daily Fee supplement on the Department of
    Health and Aged Care and Aged Care’s website
-   a link to the rates for 2021 and 2012 BDF supplements under the
    Schedule of Subsidies and Supplements for Aged Care
-   a link to the 2021 Basic Daily Fee supplement reporting requirements
    on the Department of Health and Aged Care and Aged Care’s website
-   a link to the My Aged Care service provider portal to the quarterly
    reporting submission
-   the Reporting Periods and deadlines table outlining reporting
    submission dates and the deadlines

Related links

Aged Care – fees and charges

Residential Care Program

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
