-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the effect of an overseas absence
on Age Pension and how to code the details. It also explains the actions
the Service Officer and the customer are to take before the customer's
departure.

Portability of Age Pension

Autonomous Age Pension customers who travel overseas may remain eligible
for payment indefinitely.

A customer generally does not have to remain an Australian resident to
continue to receive Age Pension while overseas and the overseas absence
can be for any reason. For temporary departures and departures where the
customer will no longer be residing in Australia, the rate of payment
after 26 weeks will be paid at a proportional rate calculated by using
the person's own Australian Working Life Residence (WLR), unless the
customer is:

-   travelling to New Zealand
-   paid under an International Agreement, or
-   saved under the pre 20 September 2000 portability rules

A customer can lodge an early claim in Australia within 13 weeks of
reaching Age Pension age and then go overseas; the start date for
payment will be the date they qualify for payment. Claims lodged from
outside Australia must meet an exception to the lodgement inside
Australia rule.

When Age Pension is not portable

Age Pension is not portable if the customer is:

-   subject to former resident rules, or
-   leaving Australia to live in another country and currently qualifies
    for Age Pension solely due to a qualifying residence exemption as
    the holder or former holder of a refugee visa, and does not
    otherwise meet Age Pension residence requirements. For more
    information, see Residence assessment for customers claiming Age
    Pension

Temporary absence

For temporary departures the basic pension plus Pension Supplement, or
the transitional pension rate inside Australia, will be paid for up to 6
weeks from date of departure. Add-on payments may continue, if
qualified, for a limited period. After 6 weeks absence, the customer
will receive the basic pension plus Pension Supplement Basic amount or
the transitional pension rate outside Australia. After 26 weeks the
basic pension will continue and be paid according to the person’s
Australian working life residence (WLR).

If a customer has more than the maximum working life residence, the rate
of pension is not affected. If a person has no WLR, for example, they
arrived in Australia after reaching Age Pension age, the proportional
rate will be nil and payment will cease 26 weeks after departure from
Australia.

From 1 July 2021, legislation passed to allow the discretion to extend
the period of portability for customers receiving Age Pension, if they
are not able to return to Australia within 26 weeks due to unforeseen
circumstances such as hospitalisation or ill health. If granted, this
extension enables the customer’s payment to continue for an agreed
period, without reducing to a proportional rate. It also allows certain
add-on payments to continue for the period of the extension. These
add-on payments include:

-   Pharmaceutical Allowance, and
-   Rent Assistance

To determine whether an Age Pension customer with indefinite portability
may be assessed under the discretionary portability extension
provisions, see Discretion to extend portability period.

Note: if a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has
ceased to be portable, their payment can be restored if they return to
Australia within 13 weeks of their payment ceasing. However, if they
received a transitional rate of pension, they will lose entitlement to
this rate and will be paid under the current income and assets tests
upon restoration.

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer is leaving Australia to live in another country or the
customer is paid under the 20 September 2000 portability rules, only the
basic pension and Pension Supplement basic amounts are paid.
Transitional rate customers will receive the transitional pension rate
outside Australia from the date of departure. Any add-on payments
received, such as Rent Assistance (RA), will be cancelled from the date
of departure.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia through the
Immigration Datalink. The system assesses portability of the payment,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided
through the Immigration Datalink. If adversely affected, the customer
can provide evidence of alternative dates. Services Australia must
consider applying the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results
in a beneficial outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are situations when customers must advise of a departure
before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify their departure from Australia
via the online Travelling outside of Australia service. If a customer's
circumstances are more complex, the system prompts them to contact the
agency.

The website lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
or returning to Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Portability interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while outside Australia and record
details on the customer's record. If the customer advises in advance,
the departure is recorded but the absence is not assessed until the
customer actually leaves Australia. If the script is available, use it
to code the absence from Australia.

A letter can be sent to the customer confirming the advice and providing
contact details for Centrelink while outside Australia.

Portability period

The portability period starts on the day the customer leaves Australia.
For portability purposes, a person is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as they are
considered to be inside Australia on that day (regardless of the time of
return) and no longer affected by portability. If they leave and return
on the same day, for example, airline crew, this is not considered a
departure from Australia for portability purposes.

Payment options overseas

Customers who continue to receive payment into their Australian bank
account must arrange access to their money while overseas.

If a customer goes overseas for more than 26 weeks, Centrelink
International Services (CIS) will administer payments. Customers going
overseas for longer than 12 months can continue to have their payment
paid into their Australian bank account, or have their payment made to
an overseas bank account.

Customers travelling to New Zealand or paid under the New Zealand Agreement

Customers receiving Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (DSP) or
Carer Payment may be affected by the portability and/or rate provisions
of the New Zealand Agreement if they are:

-   travelling to New Zealand
-   in receipt of a defined New Zealand benefit, or
-   paid their Australian payment by virtue of the Agreement

For more information, see New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension
information.

Return to Australia - CIS customers

CIS customers must contact Centrelink on their return to Australia to
ensure their payment and concession entitlement are correctly assessed.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, their payment can be
restored automatically or manually if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

The Resources page contains scenarios of Age Pension customers going
overseas. It also contains a link to a list of countries and the
appropriate team contact details in Centrelink International Services
(CIS), and links to the Services Australia website for information for
customers travelling overseas.

Related links

Australian pensions paid outside Australia, the proportional rate

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Customers overseas on 20 September 2000

Customers assessed under pre 1 July 2014 Australian Working Life
Residence (AWLR) rules

Discretion to extend portability period

Former resident provisions

Portability of add-ons

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Qualification for Age Pension

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Returning to Australia

Transfers to international social security agreements

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

Recording and correcting employment income details

View/update overseas travel online

Working Life Residence (WLR)

Actioning Immigration Datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
