-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details relating to reviews for the HEAS.

Overview of the HEAS

The HEAS allows customers to access equity in their Australian real
estate via a loan administered by Services Australia. The loan is paid
to customers in fortnightly instalments, or as lump sum advance payments
for a short period or until the maximum loan amount (MLA) is reached.

Loans including costs and accrued interest, are repayable by the
customer to the Commonwealth.

A person must maintain eligibility and comply with notification
obligations throughout their participation in the HEAS. Services
Australia also conducts periodic and circumstance reviews.

Most HEAS reviews are generated automatically with some requiring manual
action. Manual HEAS reviews are actioned by Complex Assessment Officers
(CAO) in the Home Equity Access Scheme National processing team.

Periodic reviews

HEAS periodic reviews are generally automated and do not require manual
intervention. Exceptions may apply, for example where the customer is
deceased. Periodic reviews include:

-   fortnightly calculation of interest and update of loan balance
-   annual update of the customer’s age component and maximum loan
    amount (MLA)
-   annual issue of the person’s itemised loan statement
-   checking if the customer’s loan balance is approaching, or exceeded,
    the MLA
-   Consumer Price Index (CPI) reviews

Customers can review their circumstances through the online services via
the Home Equity Access Scheme summary screen.

Circumstance reviews

A manual follow up (MFU) automatically generates, and a Work Item
assigns to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) for investigation if:

-   a single customer becomes a member of a couple
-   a partnered customer separates from their partner
-   a customer or partner passes away
-   the customer’s qualifying payment is cancelled (in certain
    circumstances)
-   the customer is of Age Pension age (and not receiving Age Pension)
    and their qualifying payment (for example, DSP) is cancelled

An MFU is created if task locking conflicts prevent certain automated
updates from finalising.

Customers obligation to advise of change in circumstances

Customers receiving a loan under the HEAS must advise Services Australia
within 14 days of any change in circumstances that affects:

-   their eligibility, or
-   the real estate used to secure the loan

This includes circumstances where a customer:

-   changes or corrects their name
-   becomes a member of a couple, separates from their partner or their
    partner passes away
-   or any co-owner of secured real estate becomes bankrupt or subject
    to a personal insolvency agreement
-   intends to change or transfer the title or dispose of (for example,
    sell) any secured real estate
-   takes out, or changes the details of, any mortgages or loans on any
    secured real estate
-   intends to use the secured real estate to guarantee a loan taken out
    by the customer or another person
-   allows the insured value of the secured real estate to fall below
    the market value of all buildings on that property

Note: if a customer initiates a request for a transmission of title, and
a separation occurs or partner is deceased, see the Process page for
more details.

See Change of circumstances – Home Equity Access Scheme for details
about actioning customer initiated requests.

Failure to notify of changes to the secured real estate may result in
the customer being ineligible for the No Negative Equity Guarantee. See
Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more details.

Customers must also notify Services Australia if they:

-   close, change or can no longer use the account their payments are
    sent to
-   are sent to prison or charged with an offence and are in custody on
    remand
-   change their contact details or their residential or postal address
-   leave the country, temporarily or to live somewhere else

Real estate for HEAS purposes

Customers can only use real estate owned in Australia as security for a
loan under the HEAS.

See Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) for more details.

Customer initiated requests

If a customer wishes to make changes to their loan, they must request
the change in writing.

The easiest way for customers to do this, is to request the change via
their myGov Centrelink online account.

This includes if they want to:

-   settle their loan
-   change, cease or start fortnightly loan payments
-   request an advance payment
-   increase or decrease their maximum loan amount (MLA)
-   apply, remove or adjust a Nominated Amount
-   make changes to the real estate asset(s) being used as security for
    the loan

If customers are unable to use online services, they can complete a Home
Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497) to request these changes.

See Change of circumstances - Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) for
details about actioning customer initiated requests.

Risk based reviews

Risk based reviews replace the need for Service Officers to manually
create annual real estate reviews

Customers accessing the HEAS payments, are regularly reviewed based on a
risk assessment

The reviews are set on the anniversary of the date of grant of the HEAS

Customers are selected for a review based on 3 risk categories:

-   High, reviewed annually on the next Entitlement Period End Date
    (EPED) after their date of grant anniversary
-   Medium, reviewed every 2 years on the next EPED after their date of
    grant anniversary, and
-   Low, reviewed every 3 years on the next EPED after their date of
    grant anniversary

Services Australia reviews partnered customers at the same time

Staff can:

-   apply an extension, send a request for information, or update the
    ISIS DOC with more details
-   see Table 2, Step 9 for more details

The Resources page contains more details about the risk profiling
criteria.

Note: customers have a manual review recorded in 2023, if:

-   they are profiled as High, and
-   they have an anniversary date between 30 October 2022 and 27
    November 2022

The Process page contains more details.

Identifying fraud

If a staff member identifies suspected fraud with a HEAS claim or
activity, they must report it.

See:

-   Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption, and
-   Identity fraud

The Resources page contains:

a list of codes:

-   auto cancellation reasons
-   manual cancellation reasons
-   manual completion reasons
-   risk review reason codes

transmission of title request templates, and

the risk profiling criteria

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme
(HEAS)

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) applications

Change of circumstances – Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

How to code and action a manual review

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) debts

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) outstanding
loan amount

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Identity fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
