
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax year 065-06030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC) income test and explains the reference tax year.

Impact of coronavirus (COVID-19)

Customers who lodge a CSHC claim up to 31 August 2020 could be assessed
from their Income Tax Return (ITR) for the relevant financial year, if
their Taxation Notice of Assessment (for the reference year) was not
provided.

Reference tax year

All customers claiming CSHC must provide evidence of their income for
the applicable financial year plus evidence of any account based income
streams.

Defined benefit income streams will be included in the customer's
Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) and therefore do not need to be
individually noted for CSHC claims.

The reference tax year is usually the tax year immediately prior to the
current tax year.

If a customer is unable to provide verifiable details for that tax year,
then the one immediately preceding will be the reference tax year.

If a customer's entitlement is to be determined based on a current year
estimate of income (excluding situations where income is below the tax
free threshold or if they are not required to lodge a tax return as the
result of an ATO tax offset), the reference tax year is the current
financial year.

A customer and their partner must provide income details for the same
tax year.

If the customer is not required to lodge an income tax return because
their income is below the tax free threshold or as a result of an
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax offset, the reference tax year is
usually the previous financial year. It cannot be the current financial
year.

Deemed income from any account-based income streams will be calculated
on the current balance. Customer or partner must provide a Details of
Income Stream Product form (SA330) or similar schedule from their
provider, before the new account-based income stream can be added.

Income test

The income test for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) is based
on:

-   Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) of the customer (and their partner if
    applicable) for the applicable financial year, plus
-   deemed income from any account-based income streams

Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) is the sum of:

-   Taxable income - Customers need to include taxable income whether or
    not their income is below the tax free threshold or if they are not
    required to lodge a tax return as a result of an Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO) tax offset. If a person's taxable income is negative,
    it is taken to be zero before adding any investment losses and other
    ATI components. From 1 January 2011, Paid Parental Leave (PPL) is
    included as taxable income. Note: Prisoner of War Recognition
    Supplement from Department of Veterans' Affairs is not taxable
    income. It is also exempt income for social security purposes.
-   Total net investment losses, the sum of net financial investment
    losses and rental property losses.
-   Target foreign income on which Australian income tax is not paid
-   Reportable superannuation contributions
-   Employer provided fringe benefits in excess of $1,000

Note: for CSHC purposes, a person's fringe benefits value for a
particular tax year is the total grossed up value (as shown on the
payment summary/ATO income statement) of the person's employer provided
benefits minus $1,000.

Deemed income

The deemed income is added to the ATI amount, with the combined total
used in the CSHC income test. Deeming will only be applied to
account-based income stream(s) and not any other financial assets they
own.

Customers will be required to provide evidence of any account-based
income streams. Grandfathering provisions for account based income
streams also apply in some circumstances. See Adding or updating an
account-based income stream.

Income limits

Commencing from 20 September 2014, the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC) income thresholds will be indexed annually by movements in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI). The additional dependent child amount will
not be indexed.

For current CSHC annual income limits, see Rates and thresholds.

Customer is not required to lodge a tax return

Customers who are not required to lodge an income tax return, either
because their income is below the tax free threshold or as a result of
an ATO tax offset, will not receive a Notice of Assessment, so they will
need to estimate their income for the previous financial year.

Customers who are required to lodge a tax return but are unable to
provide income details from either of the previous two financial years
because the customer has not yet lodged their tax return with the ATO
are not permitted to use an estimate of their income. The customers
claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) must be manually
rejected or CSHC entitlement manually cancelled.

The only exception to this is where the customer can provide
verification from the ATO that they have been granted a lodgement
extension no older than 2 years previous to the current financial year
and which has not expired. Customers who have been granted an ATO
lodgement extension must provide documents to support what their
estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) is likely to be for either of
the previous two financial years. An estimate for the current financial
year cannot be used.

Income estimates

A customer's entitlement may be determined based on a current year
estimate of income, providing that the change in circumstances:

-   has already occurred
-   can be satisfactorily demonstrated, and
-   is an acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for the
    Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test

If a customer's income for the preceding tax year is above the CSHC
income limits, and they can demonstrate a change in circumstances that
is an acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for the CSHC
income test, they may give a current year estimate of their income for
the current financial year.

If customer has had their claim or entitlement for CSHC rejected or
cancelled due to an estimate of their income for the current financial
year being over the income limit, and the customer then lodges another
claim/reclaim, they must provide a revised estimate of their current
year income. The claim is not to be granted based on income details from
a previous financial year. The customer must also provide details of why
the estimate has changed. The new estimate should only be accepted if
both the reason and the amount are considered reasonable and has been
verified.

When completing income estimates on the Seniors Health Card income
summary and details (SHIS/SHID) screen in Process Direct or SHC Income
Details (SHID) screen in Customer First, all income components such as
Target Foreign Income must be entered using Australian dollars (AUD).

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) website for information on:

-   ATO tax offsets
-   what is and isn't a financial investment
-   how to calculate investment income and capitals gains/losses
-   reportable superannuation contributions, and
-   the reporting, conversion and assessment of foreign income

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Initial contact by customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
(CSHC)

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Completing a re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Exempt Income

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
