
Aged Care fees and charges – care subsidy reduction to zero 065-19103005

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances when a care recipient has their
care subsidy reduction (CSR) set to zero. It provides information for
when a manual letter can be issued to confirm CSR to zero.

On this Page:

Care subsidy reduction and ITCF/MTCF for post 1 July 2014 care recipients

The Australian Government contributes to the costs of aged care through
subsidies paid to aged care providers. Once a care recipient enters care
an assessment is completed. This determines the cost of care. A
completed means assessment determines the care recipient’s contribution
to the cost based on:

-   their income and/or assets, or
-   means not disclosed (MND) status

The fee reduces the care subsidy paid to the provider. This is known as
a ‘care subsidy reduction’ (CSR).

Residential care

-   The CSR applies to the means tested care fee (MTCF)
-   For Service Providers - in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) payment
    statements for providers this is displayed as a Means Tested Subsidy
    Reduction
-   For Care Recipients – see Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care
    Recipient in Context (CRiC))

Home care

-   The CSR applies to the income tested care fee (ITCF)
-   In the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) payment
    statements for providers displays it as an Income Tested Subsidy
    Reduction (ITSR)

For example, a care recipient is assessed as requiring the highest level
of care. The provider is eligible to receive maximum subsidies for the
care recipient. A means assessment is then completed. This determines
that the care recipient is liable to pay $50 per day for an ITCF/MTCF.
The care subsidy paid to the provider is then reduced by $50 per day.

Care subsidy reduction to zero

In certain circumstances a care recipient’s care subsidy reduction (CSR)
can be ‘set’ to zero. The legislation outlines ‘classes’ (categories) of
people where the CSR is taken to zero. Where applicable, it also
outlines the duration the CSR to zero applies.

If a care recipient’s CSR is set to zero they do not have to pay any
ITCF/MTCF for that period. The government will pay the maximum eligible
subsidy to the service provider. The care recipient will still have to
pay any Basic Daily Fee (BDF) and Accommodation costs (for residential
care).

Care subsidy reduction to zero criteria

Care recipients are eligible to have their CSR set to zero when they:

-   have one or more dependent children
-   are described in paragraph 85 (4)(b) of the Veterans’ Entitlements
    Act (which describes former prisoners of war)
-   have an assessed care subsidy reduction that is less than $1
-   have reached their annual or lifetime cap

OR

For residential care recipients, the CSR is set to zero when they:

-   leave a residential care service (without entering another
    residential care service), or who die, before the approved provider
    has been informed of the care recipient’s care subsidy reduction (if
    any)
-   are not within 6 months of entry to the residential care service,
    informed of the care recipient’s care subsidy reduction (if any)

For home care recipients CSR is set to zero when they:

-   stop being provided with home care (without being provided with
    other home care), or who die, before the approved provider is
    informed of the person’s care subsidy reduction (if any)
-   are not within 6 months of receiving home care, informed of the care
    recipient’s care subsidy (if any)

CSR to zero – care recipient not advised of fees within 6 months

When a care recipient is in home or residential care they are issued
with an initial fee advice letter. A pre-entry advice does not qualify
as a fee advice. It provides an estimate of fees only. If a fee advice
is not issued within 6 months of entry into care CSR to zero is
automatically applied. It is applied by the aged care system and starts
from the date of entry until the day before advice is issued.

Home care

-   CSR to zero is automatically applied by ACMPS
-   Letters will be issued advising the period of CSR to zero and the
    care recipient’s ongoing fees

Residential care

-   CSR to zero is automatically applied by Aged Care Payment System
-   Letters will be issued advising the period of CSR to zero and the
    care recipient’s ongoing fees
-   To view care recipient’s fees and charges see Aged Care Staff Portal
    (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC))

See the Resources page for a link to the Aged care letter codes and
descriptions document for information about CSR to zero letters.

CSR to zero – care recipient discharged before approved provider receives fee advice

When a care recipient has been discharged from care before the approved
provider receives a fee advice, CSR to zero is automatically applied.
This includes when a care recipient is discharged from care within 7
days of a fee advice being issued. The approved provider is considered
to have not received the advice before discharge. Care subsidies paid to
the approved provider will be adjusted by the aged care system. No fee
advice letters are issued.

Service Officers can receive requests to issue fee advice letters
confirming ITCF/MTCF has been set as $0 for the period of care. These
letters are manually issued:

Where the care recipient is deceased:

-   only the executor of the estate is able to request a manual letter
-   evidence is required to verify that the person requesting the letter
    is the executor or administrator of the estate

Where the care recipient is not deceased:

-   the care recipient or their nominee can request a manual letter

Where a care recipient enters a new facility, legislation does not state
how long the break between care needs to be. Where there is a discharge
on an unmatched record, CSR to zero is applied, irrespective of whether
another admission occurs.

See Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC))
for information about how to:

-   view fees and charges, remediation of fees, or
-   update or delete existing remediation of fee record for residential
    care recipients

The current process for home care in ACMPS remains unchanged.

The Resources page contains links to the letter templates.

Income tested reduction for pre 1 July 2014 care recipients

Care recipients assessed under pre 1 July 2014 assessment schemes can
complete an income assessment. This determines the amount of income
tested fee (ITF). If the care recipient has a means not disclosed
status, they pay full ITF, based on the cost of their care. This reduces
the amount of care subsidy paid to a provider. This is known as the
Income Tested Subsidy Reduction (ITSR) in both SPARC and the ACSP.

Pre 1 July 2014 care recipients are eligible for their ITR to be
assessed as zero when they:

-   have 1 or more dependent children
-   are described in paragraph 85 (4)(b) of the Veterans’ Entitlements
    Act (which describes former prisoners of war)
-   have a care subsidy reduction that is worked out to be less than $1
-   leave a residential care service (without entering another
    residential care service), or who die, before the approved provider
    has been informed of the care recipient’s care subsidy reduction (if
    any)
-   are not, within 6 months of entry to the residential care service,
    informed of the care recipient’s care subsidy reduction (if any)

The Resources page contains:

-   examples of CSR to zero
-   Aged care letter codes and descriptions
-   links to external websites

Related links

Aged care letters

Aged care reviews – manual adjustments for care recipients - overview

Aged care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
