
Debt recovery in Aged Care program for service providers 065-13100070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about Debt recovery in Aged Care program
for service providers.

On this Page:

Write-off or waiver of debt (policy)

Aged care providers may incur a debt to the Commonwealth when aged care
subsidies are overpaid. Generally this occurs when:

-   approved places are transferred (sold) to another aged care
    provider, or
-   an aged care service may enter receivership, administration or
    liquidation and a Receiver/Manager or Administrator is appointed to
    oversee the operation or winding up of the business

Principles of debt recovery

Debts and amounts owing to the Commonwealth represent a cost to
taxpayers if not recovered, and should be pursued to the greatest
possible extent.

Whilst all reasonable effort must be undertaken to recover a debt to the
Commonwealth, a request may be made to the Commonwealth to write-off or
waive a debt.

Non-recovery (write-off) of debts

A decision to write-off a debt does not legally extinguish the debt. If
the debtor's circumstances change in the future, the debt can be
reinstated and pursued.

Waiver of debt

A waiver is a special concession granted to an individual or other body
that extinguishes a debt owing to the Commonwealth and the debt can no
longer be recovered even if the debtor's circumstances change in the
future.

Waivers are usually the result of special circumstances. For example,
where it is considered that the debt recovery is inequitable or causing
ongoing financial hardship.

The Resources page contains a table of information about actioning a
request to write-off or waive a debt, contact details for Aged Care and
a link to the Debt Advice Notice (DAN) form.

Related links

Payments in Aged Care programme for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
