-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how aged care accommodation payments are assessed
for Services Australia purposes. A care recipient can pay an
accommodation payment when entering an aged care service for permanent
care.

Date of admission

The type of accommodation payment a care recipient will pay depends on
the rules in place on the customer's date of admission to permanent
residential aged care.

Care recipient enters permanent care on or after 1 July 2014

Note: this section also covers existing (continuing) care recipients who
move to a different aged care provider on or after 1 July 2014 and who
elect to opt in to the new arrangements.

The assessment of income and assets determines if a care recipient is
required to pay any accommodation costs. This assessment may result in
the care recipient being required to pay:

-   no accommodation costs
-   an accommodation contribution
-   an agreed accommodation payment where the care recipient is liable
    to pay the full cost of their accommodation

Paying a combination of a lump sum payment and daily payment gives care
recipients the option to have their daily payments deducted from their
lump sum. This results in the total balance of a lump sum reducing over
time as daily payments are deducted. Other amounts such as care fees or
the costs of additional services can be deducted if agreed between the
care recipient and the provider.

Accommodation contribution

A care recipient is assessed as a low means care recipient if the care
recipient’s daily means tested amount on the day they enter care is less
than the maximum accommodation supplement amount for that day. Care
recipients assessed as low means may need to pay a contribution towards
their accommodation costs. They can pay this as a:

-   Lump sum - Refundable Accommodation Contribution (RAC), or
-   Daily Accommodation Contribution (DAC), or
-   a combination of both the RAC and DAC

The amount of accommodation contribution varies depending on:

-   changes to care recipients income and assets
-   if the services meets the 40% Supported Resident Ratio
-   if a service is significantly refurbished or newly built

Care recipients have 28 days from the date (or proposed date) of entry
to care to choose how the accommodation contribution is paid.

Payments must be made daily if a care recipient does not choose how to
pay the accommodation payment within 28 days.

Interest may be charged on contributions that have been outstanding for
more than one month. The rate of interest cannot exceed the maximum
permissible interest rate (MPIR) effective on the day of entry.

The Resources page contains examples of means tested care accommodation
costs from 1 July 2014 and information on calculating a RAC.

Accommodation payment

An accommodation payment is assessed on a care recipient’s daily means
tested amount on the day they enter residential care.

If the means tested amount is equal to or more than the maximum
accommodation supplement amount for that day the care recipient is
assessed as not low means, or with a means not disclosed status, they
are not eligible for assistance with their accommodation costs. Care
recipients assessed as not low means, or with a means not disclosed
status, are not eligible for assistance with their accommodation costs.
They can pay the agreed accommodation cost as one of the following:

-   Lump sum - Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD), or
-   Daily Accommodation Payment (DAP), or
-   a combination of both the RAD and the DAP

The amount of accommodation payment is negotiated directly with the aged
care provider. Care recipients have 28 days from the date (or proposed
date) of entry to care to choose how the accommodation payment is paid:

-   in full by a Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD), or
-   a combination of a smaller RAD and a Daily Accommodation Payment
    (DAP), or
-   pay in full by DAP

Note:

-   where a choice is not made within 28 days, the care recipient must
    pay by daily payments
-   if a choice is made to pay a RAD within 28 days, the care recipient
    will not be required to pay the RAD until 6 months after the date of
    entry, and must pay by daily payment until the RAD is paid

Interest may be charged on daily accommodation payments that have been
outstanding for more than one month. The rate of interest cannot exceed
the MPIR effective on the date of entry.

The Resources page contains examples of means tested care accommodation
costs from 1 July 2014 and instructions on calculating the equivalent
daily accommodation payment (DAP).

Encumbrance over accommodation payment balance

An amendment to the Aged Care Subsidy Principles in 2016 changed the
calculation of an accommodation payment balance if there is an
outstanding charge or encumbrance over the payment. For example, a
Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD) paid after funds were obtained
from a loan from a family member. This change ensures that the value of
any accommodation payment included for means testing purposes is the
total value regardless of the source of the funds such as a loan.

Care recipient enters permanent care before 1 July 2014

Care recipients who entered permanent residential aged care for the
first time prior to 1 July 2014 can pay either an:

-   Accommodation Bond, or
-   Accommodation Charge

Care recipients who entered care prior to 1 July 2014 pay Accommodation
Bonds in low level care and in extra service places. Accommodation Bonds
are paid:

-   in a lump sum, or
-   by periodical payments, or
-   by a combination of part lump sum and part periodical payments

Note: some care recipients may choose to pay only the interest on the
unpaid bond amount.

Care recipients who entered care before 1 July 2014 pay an Accommodation
Charge in high level care that is not in an extra service place.
Accommodation Charges are only paid as a daily amount.

Exempt assets for income support payments

Exempt assets for income support payment purposes include the following
lump sum payments:

-   Refundable Accommodation Deposits (RAD)
-   Refundable Accommodation Contributions (RAC)
-   Accommodation Bonds

The current refundable balance of the lump sum payment (if any) is
recorded in Customer First. Payments can be made in multiple lump sum
amounts on different dates or may be reduced by daily payments and fees
being deducted.

Note: lump sum accommodation payments are not exempt for aged care means
assessment purposes. They are included as an assessable asset in an aged
care cost of care calculation.

Care recipients can pay accommodation payments as a daily payment via:

-   Daily Accommodation Payments (DAP)
-   Daily Accommodation Contributions (DAC)
-   Accommodation Charges (pre 1 July 2014)

These daily accommodation payments are not recorded in Customer First.

A care recipient and service provider sign an agreement setting out the
amount and type of accommodation payment and how it is paid. Lump sum
accommodation payments are not the same as entry contributions paid to
retirement villages. A lump sum accommodation payment amount is not used
to determine home ownership status for social security purposes. See
Retirement villages for more information.

Charging interim accommodation costs

Where a care recipient enters care before a means assessment has been
completed, the accommodation agreement may include details of an agreed
interim accommodation payment/cost. If the care recipient’s means
assessment determines the resident status is low means, the care
recipient will need to discuss potential refund of the interim
accommodation payments made with their aged care provider.

The Resources page contains links to the Department of Health and Aged
Care Schedule of fees and charges, FAQ's and information on
accommodation bond assessment prior to 1 July 2005.

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged care letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged Care means assessment – Rental income from principal home

Aged care means assessment – residential care pre 1 July 2014 – assets
assessment

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Vacation of principal home due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
