
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to maintain membership of the Pension Bonus
Scheme (PBS). Once registered a person must meet the requirements of
either accruing and meeting the work test or non-accruing membership.
This procedure is about non-accruing membership.

On this Page:

Bonus period

To accrue bonus periods the customer needs to meet the flexible work
test requirement of 960 hours per annum.

During a non-accruing period a registered PBS member retains membership
of the scheme but does not accrue bonus periods. The time spent in a
non-accruing period is not counted as time that the person deferred
claiming Age Pension.

Non-accruing period

The most common reasons for a non-accruing period are:

-   non-accruing period for a non-working person relying on their
    partner's work prior to their partner reaching pension age (to be
    used only for periods before 20 September 2009)
-   deprivation non-accruing period
-   non-accruing due to illness
-   receipt of compensation
-   receipt of Carer Payment (CP)
-   non-accruing due to other work-related leave
-   other acceptable non-accruing reasons

Non-accruing period for a person not working

Non-accruing period for a non-working person relying on their partner's
work prior to their partner reaching pension age.

From 20 September 2009

From 20 September 2009 customers who are non-accruing members of the
scheme because they are not working and have a working partner who is
not qualified for Age Pension, and the partner intended to register in
the scheme when they do qualify for Age Pension, cannot remain as
non-accruing members of the scheme. Generally, unless these customers
recommenced meeting the work test, or are non-accruing members for
another reason, they were required to claim their Pension Bonus within
13 weeks of 20 September 2009.

Before 20 September 2009

Any period before 20 September 2009 is considered to be a non-accruing
period, when a person who was a member of a couple:

-   was a registered member of the scheme
-   was not meeting the work test, and
-   had a partner who was working and was not a registered member of the
    PBS but intended to become a registered member when they reached age
    pension qualification.

There is no discretion in applying a non-accruing period in these
circumstances.

Customers who had under Age Pension age working partners, or partners
who were not residentially qualified for Age Pension, may have been
affected by the closure of the scheme to new members. These customers
must be referred to the Financial Information Service (FIS).

Deprivation non-accruing period

If a PBS registered member or their partner exceeds the allowable
gifting amount in any year or any 5 year rolling period then a 5 year
non-accruing period applies starting from the date the gift exceeds the
allowable limit. There is no discretion in applying a non-accruing
period for deprivation.

If a decision is made that a gift has been returned the disposal
preclusion period ceases from the date of return of the gift.

Non-accruing due to illness

If a member of the PBS is absent from work due to illness then their
membership of the scheme becomes non-accruing.

Sick leave - There is a 26 week limit on the amount of time that a
person can be absent from work due to illness and remain a non-accruing
member of the PBS.

Prior to 1 January 2008 - the person takes a continuous period of sick
leave of between 4-26 weeks (whether or not in receipt of sick leave
payments), up to a maximum of 26 weeks duration. Non-accruing membership
does not apply to sick leave less than 4 weeks.

On or after 1 January 2008 - Sick leave taken on or after 1 January 2008
is treated the same as all other types of work-related leave, for
instance, there is no requirement that the member take more than 4 weeks
of sick leave in order to be eligible to be made non-accruing during
that leave. There is discretion in applying a non-accruing period for
sick leave. A non-accruing period should only be applied where the
customer would otherwise fail the work test.

From 6 September 2008 - Consecutive periods of work-related leave and
sick leave longer than 26 weeks cannot be recorded on the system.

If the customer or their partner is registered for the PBS, then the
leave may affect their entitlement to the Pension Bonus. The case should
be referred to the Senior Practitioner to consider if the entitlement to
the Pension Bonus is likely to be affected. If so, a Financial
Information Service (FIS) is required.

Receipt of compensation

Compensation - A non-accruing period applies while the customer is in
receipt of regular payments of compensation or a compensation lump sum
that would preclude the customer from pension if the member lodged a
claim due to a preclusion period applying. There is no limit to the
length of a non-accruing period due to compensation. There is no
discretion in applying a non-accruing period under these circumstances.
Note: in special circumstances, compensation payments can be treated as
not having been received under section 1184K(1) of the Social Security
Act 1991 and the person's membership is therefore assessed as accruing
for example, when a customer is receiving periodic compensation as a
'top up' to their employment income and they are otherwise meeting the
work test.

Receipt of Carer Payment

Carer Payment - A non-accruing period applies when the customer is in
receipt of CP. There is no limit to the length of a CP non-accruing
period. There is no discretion in applying a non-accruing period where
the member is in receipt of CP.

Non-accruing due to other work-related leave

On or after 1 January 2008 - any paid or unpaid leave from employment
(or any combination of leave types) for up to a maximum of 26 weeks can
be considered a non-accruing period where the customer would otherwise
fail the work test. That is, there is discretion in applying a
non-accruing period for work-related leave.

From 6 September 2008 - Consecutive periods of work-related leave and
sick leave longer than 26 weeks will unable to be recorded on the
system.

Other non-accruing reasons

Non-accruing periods also apply to customers:

-   Who are a Community Development Employment Project (CDEP) wages
    participant (no discretion applies).
-   Are in prison (no discretion applies).
-   Are in psychiatric confinement because of being charged with an
    offence (no discretion applies).
-   Following the death of the partner of a registered Pension Bonus
    Scheme (PBS) member, if the customer does not meet the work test
    requirements, a 13 week non-accruing period applies (discretion
    applies). From 6 September 2008 non-accruing periods longer than 13
    weeks due to bereavement cannot be recorded on the system.
-   Who are over 75 years of age and continue to meet the work test
    become non-accruing members of the scheme (no discretion applies).
    Note: there are some exceptions.
-   If, on or after 24 August 2006, the person suffered a reduction in
    the amount of gainful work they performed because of a major
    disaster as defined in section 23(1) of the Social Security
    Act 1991. A maximum period of 13 weeks as a non-accruing member
    applies (discretion applies).
-   If, on or after 1 March 2006, the member suffered a reduction in the
    amount of gainful work performed because of Cyclone Larry that hit
    the Australian mainland on 20 March 2006. A maximum period of 13
    weeks as a non-accruing member applies (discretion applies).
-   Who are affected by a major disaster (as per the Social Security
    Act, Section 36) and as a result suffered a reduction in the amount
    of gainful work they performed because of the Queensland floods or
    the Victorian bush fires. A maximum period of 13 weeks as a
    non-accruing member applies.

The Resources page contains examples of non-accruing membership.

Related links

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Calculating a Pension Bonus

Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
