
Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme 065-08020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether a customer has
sufficient real estate assets to secure and repay a loan under the Home
Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) and how to calculate the Maximum Loan
Amount.

Real estate the only accepted security

Only real estate owned in Australia can be used as security for a loan.
Any Australian real estate can be used by the customer including their
principal home or an investment property. Overseas property cannot be
accepted as security.

Any property, including the person’s principal home, which is offered as
security for the Scheme, must be valued before the loan can be granted.
When determining the value of the property any charge or encumbrance
over the property will be considered and may reduce the real asset value
for the purposes of determining the Maximum Loan Amount (MLA) that can
be paid.

Ownership of real estate as security

The customer can own the real estate solely or jointly with their
partner or a third party co-owner. The customer’s or their partner’s
name must be on the Title Certificate. All other owners need to consent
to the property being offered as security for the loan. Partners must
provide consent even if they are not a co-owner.

If the customer’s partner has sole ownership of the property it can
still be used as security for the customer’s application. Generally, the
value for each member of the couple is set as half of the value of their
combined interest for consistency in treatment of shared assets in the
Social Security Act and in recognition a claim may be made on the
property in the case of separation settlement. Exceptions may be made in
consultation with Policy Helpdesk. See Resources for a link to the
Policy Helpdesk.

If the customer or their partner is an attributable stakeholder of a
company or trust, then real estate assets owned by the company or trust
may be used as security. In this situation the company or trust must
provide a guarantee to the Commonwealth that any Scheme debt incurred by
the customer will be repaid by the company or trustee. The customer is
required to supply a copy of the company constitution or trust deed with
their Scheme application.

Real estate obtained under a ‘long lease’ which would not preclude the
Commonwealth from recovering the Scheme debt, and does not prevent the
person who receives the benefit of the lease (the lessee) from selling
the property, may satisfy the requirement for ownership under section
1133 of the Social Section Act 1991. For example, due to the system of
land title in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), a registered
proprietor for the lease (or Crown lessee) in the ACT has the right to
use land under a lease for a term of 99 years. Even though the Crown
lessee only has a ‘lease’ on the land, the person, not the ACT
Government, receives the financial benefit of the land value on sale.

Real asset value for the Scheme purposes

Any property which is offered as security for the Scheme must be valued,
including the principal home. When determining the equity of real
property you must take into consideration any charge or encumbrance over
the property.

The presence of a mortgage or reverse mortgage on the property offered
as security for a Scheme debt, does not necessarily disqualify a person
from the Scheme. The mortgage should be considered to determine the
available equity of real assets to calculate the customers (and partner
if applicable) maximum loan amount.

Factors that are taken into account when assessing the real estate
include:

-   current market value of the real estate
-   adequate insurance on the real estate
-   valuation of the real estate
-   life interest
-   sale of the real estate
-   real estate with a mortgage
-   real estate with a reverse mortgage
-   real estate owned by a trust or company
-   co-owners of the real estate

For further information about affecting factors refer to the Process
page.

Limiting the Maximum Loan Amount (MLA)

The Maximum Loan Amount is determined by a statutory formula, being the
equity offered rounded down to the nearest 10,000 divided by 10,000 and
then multiplied by the age component amount.

The age component amount is determined by using the customer’s age, or
if a member of a couple the younger of the couple’s age against a table
set by ministerial determination. See the References page for a link to
the determination.

A customer may choose to limit the MLA in 2 ways by:

-   nominating a Customer Maximum Loan Amount which will limit the total
    amount of loan payments that can be borrowed over the life of the
    loan. The Customer Maximum Loan Amount must be equal or lower than
    the actual MLA.
-   nominating an amount to be excluded from the asset’s value for
    calculation of the loan. The nominated amount can be changed at any
    time by written request. This request must be signed by the customer
    (and their partner if they are a member of a couple)

Neither of these prevent the loan being recovered if the loan balance
exceeds the maximum loan amount.

Customer’s obligation to advise of changes in circumstances

Customers receiving a loan under the Scheme must advise the agency of
any change in circumstances that affects the real estate used to secure
the loan. See Home Equity Access Scheme reviews for more information.

Discretion of the delegate

Decisions on adequate security are subject to the discretion of the
delegate and depend on the individual circumstances of the case. If
there is any doubt about whether a property is acceptable to secure a
Home Equity Access Scheme loan, escalate to the Policy Helpdesk for
assessment. See Resources for a link to the Policy Helpdesk.

Scheme loans secured by placement of a statutory charge or caveat

The agency secures repayment of the Scheme loan by placing a statutory
charge or caveat over the item(s) of real estate of the customer's
choosing. In practical terms, what the Commonwealth will do is lodge a
caveat over the real estate with the relevant Land Titles Office to
ensure Services Australia is advised of any impending sale of real
estate which has been used to secure a Scheme loan. The delegate can
then renegotiate or cancel and recover the loan as appropriate.

The customer (and their partner, if they are a member of a couple) must
consent to the lodgement of a charge or caveat over the nominated real
estate. In some jurisdictions (e.g. Queensland) third parties with a
registered interest must provide consent before a charge can be
registered. The charge or caveat will be removed when the customer
repays the debt in full. If the customer provides an alternate property
as security for the debt, the charge or caveat will be removed from the
previous security and lodged against the new security.

See Processing claims for the Home Equity Access Scheme for more
information about the registration of a caveat or charge when a Scheme
loan is granted.

Costs involved with caveats

The costs involved in registering a caveat are payable by the customer
and are added to the Scheme loan balance. Once these costs are added to
the loan balance they attract interest (compounded fortnightly) the same
way as the principal loan payments and previously accumulated interest.
The customer bears the cost of removal of the caveat, or in the event of
the customer's death, their estate.

Instances may arise where a customer wishes to rearrange their assets
and it becomes necessary to remove the caveat from one property and
place it on another. Again, these costs are paid by the customer. This
rearrangement of assets is not an obstacle to continuing to participate
in the Scheme as long as the value of the substitute property provides
adequate security for the debt. Costs may also be incurred if another
dealing is registered on the property and it requires Services Australia
to assess and consent.

The Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) in the PLS National processing
team are solely authorised to organise the registering of a caveat or
charge at the time of the claim assessment via Services Australia's
Legal Services Division. A tasking request is completed and provided to
the Legal Services Division via email, who then act on behalf of the
agency by communicating with external legal service providers.

Scheme loan balance an allowable deduction

The Scheme loan balance is an allowable deduction against the assessable
asset amount (not including exempt amounts) of secured properties. The
deduction is manually updated at least once per year by the PLS National
processing team as part of the Scheme annual real estate review on the
customer’s record. The deduction applies to the assessable asset
component of the offered security only which is different to the
treatment of other loans or encumbrances which are apportioned between
the assessable and non-assessable components of the property.

See the Process page for instructions on how to assess and apply the
deduction.

The Resources page contains examples of assessing the value of loan
security and the Maximum Loan Amount (MLA).

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Types of Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
