
Aged Care Education and Training Incentive (ACETI) program 065-13110070

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Aged Care Education and
Training Incentive (ACETI) program.

The Aged Care Education and Training Incentive (ACETI) program has closed

The ACETI program closed on 31 December 2020. ACETI applicants had until
30 March 2021 to submit applications to Services Australia.

The ACETI program provided incentive payments to eligible aged care
workers who completed specified education and training to develop their
aged care skills.

Aged care workers who were part of the program were eligible for
completion payments if they had:

-   received a commencement payment
-   completed their studies
-   registered with the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia if they
    have completed Enrolled Nurse and Registered Nurse training courses
-   provided Services Australia with a certified copy of their
    transcript

Note: in absence of a certified transcript, a confirmation letter from
the registered training organisation stating they have successfully
completed their studies is required.

ACETI applicants who were assessed as ineligible for the ACETI
completion payments were advised in writing of this outcome. If ACETI
applicants consider this decision was made in error, applicants must
write to the Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied Health
Branch) seeking a review of the decision. All requests for a review of
the decision must be lodged in writing to Services Australia.

The Aged Care Payments Team will escalate these reviews to the Aged Care
Programme Assurance Team (the External Escalations and Assurance Team).
Send the review details using the ACETI completion cover sheet for each
review via emails. See a Team Leader for a copy of the cover sheet.

The External Escalations and Assurance Team will forward all appeal
information to the Department of Health and Aged Care for advice. The
Department of Health and Aged Care conducts the review. The 2 outcomes
of the review are to:

-   uphold the initial decision to reject the completion application OR
-   overturn the initial decision (that is, process the completion
    application)

Services Australia receives email notification from the Department of
Health and Aged Care of all review outcomes. For review outcomes that
overturn the initial decision, Services Australia will process the ACETI
completion application. See the Process page for the process in
processing ACETI completion forms.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and
Department of Health and Aged Care websites.

Related links

Aged care program for service providers

Aged care systems and data exchange

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
