
Short-Term Restorative Care (STRC) Programme 065-13150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the STRC Programme.

About the STRC programme

STRC is aimed at reversing and/or slowing 'functional decline' in care
recipients without the need for a hospital admission. This is a package
of care designed for, and approved by, the care recipient.

STRC is goal-oriented, time-limited and multi-disciplinary. STRC can be
provided in a home setting, residential care setting or a combination of
both. A care recipient has up to 6 months and 1 day to commence STRC or
their approval lapses.

Eligibility

To be eligible for STRC, a care recipient must be:

-   at risk of losing independence
-   able to improve their independence with STRC

A person is not eligible to receive STRC if they:

-   are receiving (or on leave from) permanent residential care
-   are receiving home care
-   are receiving transition care
-   have received transition care in the 6 months before assessment
-   have been hospitalised in the previous 3 months for a condition
    related to their current STRC needs
-   are receiving end of life care
-   have received more than 2 episodes of STRC in a 12 month period (an
    episode is 8 weeks)

Note: pre-entry cannot be claimed in respect of care recipients
receiving STRC.

Length of care (episode and leave)

-   An episode of care is limited to 8 weeks (56 days) of subsidised
    care
-   A care recipient may take up to 7 days of unpaid leave. For example,
    a care recipient takes 7 days leave to travel interstate for an
    event. The leave is not counted towards the maximum 56 paid days of
    care they can receive
-   Leave is deemed to be an overnight absence from the service
-   Leave days are not subsidised
-   Leave may be taken consecutively or individually
-   If the care recipient exceeds 7 days of leave their episode of care
    ends

Note: there are no STRC extensions.

Lapsing of STRC approval

An STRC approval is valid on the approval date for 6 months and 1 day
after the date of My Aged Care signing the approval. To receive STRC,
the care recipient must enter STRC within the 6 month entry period.

STRC approvals lapse if the care recipient:

-   does not commence STRC within the entry period or
-   departs an episode of care

If an STRC approval lapses, to commence another episode of STRC, a care
recipient needs a reassessment and a new STRC approval from My Aged
Care.

Note: if STRC commences on the last day of the approval period, the STRC
is deemed valid.

The Resources page contains links to external websites.

Related links

Home Care Packages program

Residential Care Program

Transition Care Programme

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Maintain claims in Aged Care Management Payment Systems (ACMPS)

Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
