
Aged care reviews – reassessments and updates 065-20082042

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. For information on how
to identify abuse of older Australians and the referral options
available, go to Abuse of older Australians. If the customer is with
another person or on speaker phone, continue the current business
conversation as usual.

This document outlines when a change to income and/or assets corrects or
updates an aged care means assessment.

Requesting a reassessment or update

A care recipient or authorised third party can ask for:

-   a reassessment of the current aged care income and/or assets
    information from the date of entry into care
-   an update of the current aged care income and/or assets information
    when there is a change in circumstances

Services Australia can receive requests for reassessments and updates:

in writing via:

-   an Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care
-   a written statement
-   other supporting documentation, for example lodgement of bank
    statements, property settlement documents

over the phone

in person

from an update of Income and assets options online

Reassessment after income/assets corrected

A reassessment occurs when a care recipient or authorised third party:

-   asks for a correction to the income and/or assets used in the
    current aged care means assessment, or
-   provides income and assets for a means assessment previously
    completed as means not disclosed (MND)

The care recipient or authorised third party must provide evidence from
the date the reassessment applies. This may be:

before the date of entry (or pre-entry date where applicable) into
permanent residential care

equal to the:

-   date of entry into permanent residential care, or
-   commencement date of the home care package

There are no time limits for an aged care reassessment, however the:

-   date of event (DOV) stays the same as the original means assessment
-   date of receipt (DOR) is the date the information is given

Update after a change in circumstances

A change to a care recipient's income and/or assets circumstances
updates the ongoing aged care means assessment.

Any evidence needed to support the update must show the date the
circumstances changed.

If a care recipient also receives a means tested income support payment
(ISP), the changes may affect the ISP rate:

Increases in payment rates are effective from whichever is later:

-   date of the change, or
-   date of notification

Decreases in payment rates notified outside 14 days of the change:

-   take effect from the date of change
-   may create a recoverable debt

See Date of receipt and Notification Handler for more information
including favourable and unfavourable decisions.

Changes to aged care cost as a result of a reassessment or update

Reassessments and updates can change the aged care costs a care
recipient needs to pay. Changes to any fees are applied:

-   at the next quarterly review (QR), or
-   when an ad hoc review is completed

Letters are sent:

-   when the fee change is applied at the next QR, or
-   following an ad hoc review

Fee change letters are not sent at the time of the reassessment or
update

Reassessment of income and assets from date of entry into care may
result in a correction to a care recipient's assessed resident status.
See

Aged care reviews - quarterly reviews for more information

When a reassessment has been completed after a care recipient has been
discharged from care, manual letters will need to be issued.

-   Refer to Aged care letters – creating manual letters, Resources
    page, Table 2 for more information on issuing letters for deceased
    care recipients.

The Resources page contains a link to the Aged Care fee calculator.

Related links

Aged Care

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged care letters – creating manual letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged care reviews - ad hoc reviews

Aged care reviews - discharge and departure reviews

Aged care reviews - manual adjustments for care recipients - overview

Aged care reviews - quarterly reviews

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Income and assets options online

Rent Assistance (RA) and change of address to and from aged care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
