
Aged care means assessment - residential care post 1 July 2014 - post-entry 065-18082027

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about residential care means
assessments after the care recipient has entered permanent residential
care.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Post-entry residential care means assessment

When a care recipient starts permanent residential care, the Aged Care
Management Payment System (ACMPS) displays who is responsible for the
means assessment and sends entry details to either Services Australia or
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA).

Where Services Australia is responsible, means assessments are
undertaken via:

-   an automatic means assessment in Customer First
-   a verbal means assessment, or
-   the care recipient completing an Aged Care Calculation of your cost
    of care. See Aged care means assessment for more information

When a residential care means assessment is completed, a letter is sent
to the care recipient (and nominee if applicable) advising a summary of
the income and assets assessed to determine the aged care costs.

A fee letter is sent to the care recipient, aged care nominee (if
applicable) and the service provider.

Resident status and date of entry to permanent residential care

The care recipient's resident status determines the liability for
accommodation costs.

This means assessments will provide the resident status of low means or
not low means and is based on the care recipient's means assessment as
at their date of entry into permanent residential care, not on the
pre-entry leave date.

See Aged care means assessment for more information including
concessional assisted or supported resident status.

Pre-entry leave

Pre-entry leave is a period of up to 7 days taken by the care recipient
immediately before entering permanent residential care to secure their
place and/or allow time to prepare for their move.

During the pre-entry leave the care recipient can be charged the basic
daily fee (BDF) but not the means tested care fee (MTCF) or any
accommodation fee.

See Resources tab for more information on changes to pre-entry leave.

Income support payment (ISP) customers

Receiving an ISP means the customer or their partner receives a:

-   social security benefit
-   social security pension, or
-   service pension, income support supplement or veteran payment from
    the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

This does not include:

-   Age Pension (Blind) and Disability Support Pension (Blind) as they
    are paid free of income and assets test, unless Rent Assistance (RA)
    is claimed or the care recipient’s partner who is on or applying for
    a means tested income support payment
-   War Widow(er)'s Pension from DVA
-   ISP waiting periods including an Income Maintenance Period (SUS-IMM)
-   from 1 July 2019, periods where the pension status is current zero
    rate (CZR) for reason PLS (see Home Equity Access Scheme for further
    details)

Care recipients receiving Centrelink ISP

Information provided for the means assessment may affect a care
recipient's Centrelink ISP rate. Any change to circumstances coded as
part of a means assessment also need to consider the relevant dates for
updates to the ISP.

For ISP purposes:

-   changes to the value of assets only need to be notified if they
    exceed the small change to asset values thresholds
-   supporting documentation for any update is not needed unless there
    is a new income stream or there is doubt about the accuracy of the
    information is in question

Favourable decisions

Increases in payment rate are effective from the date of the change or
the date of notification, whichever is later.

Changes for ISP purposes notified before a means assessment is triggered
are coded separately from the means assessment using the earliest date
of notification.

Any increase in the rate of ISP calculated as part of a means
assessment:

is adjusted as a favourable decision, and

takes effect from the date of notification. This may be later than the
means assessment date. For example:

-   Care recipient enters care on 1 February
-   Auto activity is created in Customer First on 5 February
-   Verbal means assessment is completed on 20 February
-   Changes to income and assets that occurred before entry have been
    advised as part of the verbal means assessment and result in an
    increase to ISP
-   An increase to ISP will be applied from 20 February, as this is the
    date of notification. Any calculated arrears may need to be manually
    adjusted to ensure the arrears are issued from the correct date, see
    Payment of arrears after reassessment

Unfavourable decisions

A reduction in ISP rate is applied from the date of change in
circumstances, if a change in income or asset information provided for a
means assessment:

-   decreases the ISP rate, and
-   the change was not advised within the allowable notification period
    for ISP

For example:

-   Care recipient enters care on 15 March
-   Auto activity is created in Customer First on 20 March
-   Verbal means assessment is completed on 30 March
-   Changes to income and assets that occurred before entry have been
    advised as part of the verbal means assessment and result in a
    decrease to ISP
-   The decrease to ISP will be applied from the date of change and may
    result in an overpayment

For help including favourable and unfavourable decisions, see:

-   Notification Handler (NOHL)
-   Date of receipt

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

For Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) to be payable, the
carer must continue to provide care for their care recipient in a
private home.

A care recipient's record is identified by the following codes on the
Benefit Status line:

-   CRP (Care receiver (Carer Payment)), and/or
-   CRA (Care receiver (Carer Allowance))

See Carer Payment (CP) carer is absent or Carer Allowance (CA) carer is
absent where the CP/CA care provider permanently enters residential
care.

See Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves
an institution where the CP/CA care receiver permanently enters
residential care.

The Resources page contains links to, forms, letter templates and
Services Australia and Department of Health websites.

Related links

Accepting information from and disclosing information to Power of
Attorney

Aged care – consent and disclosure

Aged care letters - creating manual letters

Aged care means assessment

Aged care means assessment - home ownership and real estate estimates

Aged care means assessment - preliminary checks

Aged care means assessment - protected person

Aged Care means assessment – Rental income from principal home

Aged care request for a nominee

Aged care reviews - reassessments and updates

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Appointing nominees

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Assessing and coding the Real estate details Mod R

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Exempt lump sums

General 14 day notification provisions

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Income from boarders and lodgers

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

National Redress Scheme overview

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Verifying income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
