
Profiling and manual refresh of aged care means assessment data 065-19070940

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about manually refreshing means
assessment data from Customer First to the Aged Care Management and
Payment System (ACMPS) and Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Information needed for aged care fees to be set

Means assessment information recorded by Services Australia or
Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) is automatically transmitted to
the Aged Care Management and Payment System (ACMPS). The means
information is used to calculate the fees that display in Aged Care
Staff Portal (ACSP). The means assessment data includes:

-   income and assets
-   care recipient circumstances
-   care type
-   dates of effect

Once all information is transmitted to the required systems, aged care
fees are set and letters are issued to care recipients, nominees and
service providers.

If a letter is not automatically issued, investigate why before creating
a manual letter.

See Aged care systems and data exchange.

Refresh means assessment records

Refreshing data from Customer First to ACMPS

Means assessment data can be sent manually between an aged care system
by doing a refresh activity in Customer First. For example, when a
Customer Reference Number (CRN) is moved from one care recipient ID to
another care recipient ID.

All income, assets and dates of effect must be accurate and all aged
care system links established before a refresh activity is done. For
example, Customer First displays the correct care recipient ID, ACMPS
displays the correct CRN and there are no multiple or intertwined
records.

If means assessment data is coded from incorrect dates or links are not
established, a refresh activity will not correct the fee setting issues.

If the means assessment care type information is wrong, this may prevent
aged care fees from being set.

Refreshing data from DVA to ACMPS

Means assessments coded by the DVA are refreshed by DVA. See Resources
page in Aged Care means assessment - Preliminary checks for the DVA web
form.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and Office Locator.

Related links

Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care means assessment - Preliminary checks

Aged care reviews - discharge and departure reviews

Aged care reviews - reassessments and updates

Multiple ACMPS records remediation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
