[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to Age Pension (Blind).

Government intent

The Australian Government recognises challenges experienced by older
Australians and the need to access a greater level of financial and
practical support. Measures have been put in place to strengthen the
financial security of seniors, carers and people with disability. The
Age Pension (Blind) is one of these measures and provides income support
to eligible customers.

Services Australia aims to meet the needs of customers seeking help in
retirement by ensuring customers receive the right payment from the
earliest possible date of eligibility. It also aims to enhance the
quality of life of older Australians through support for positive and
healthy ageing and the provision of a cohesive framework of high quality
and cost effective care services for frail older people and their
carers.

Lodging a claim

It is a requirement of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
that any person wanting to receive a social security payment or a
concession card must make a claim and the claim must be made in
accordance with the Social Security (Administration) Act, for example,
by phone, personal lodgement, etc.

A claim for Age Pension (Blind) can be lodged up to 13 weeks prior to
qualification. This could include cases where a customer lodges an early
claim within 13 weeks of Age Pension age, then goes overseas. The start
date for payment will be the date the person qualifies for payment. A
customer could also lodge an early claim where they are qualified for an
Age Pension (Blind) but the Age Pension (Blind) is not payable at time
of claim.

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Customers claiming Age Pension (Blind) must be able to satisfy all
criteria for Age Pension as well as be permanently blind.

For the purposes of the Social Security Act 1991, a customer is regarded
as permanently blind when their vision is impaired as a result of a
combination of visual problems to the extent they have no useful vision.

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind)

A customer who is currently on an income support payment and wishes to
Age Pension (Blind) transfer provisions may not need to complete a claim
form.

They can be transferred to Age Pension (Blind) when they meet all of the
qualification criteria for Age Pension and the Social Security
definition of permanent blindness.

Alternative letter formats

Customers in receipt of Age Pension (Blind) can choose to receive their
Services Australia letters in an alternative format.

Contents

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Age Pension (Blind) transfer provisions

Assessing Age Pension (Blind) Claims

Rate of Age Pension (Blind)

Age Pension cancellations, suspensions, rejections and restorations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
