
Initial contact and identification of services for Older Australians 065-01000000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia can assist when a person
contacts seeking help in retirement.

Government intent

The Australian Government is committed to providing services to help
older Australians live active and independent lives. Services to support
older Australians include retirement and employment advice, information
about help with medical and pharmaceutical costs, financial support and
caring for others as well as delivering quality, affordable and
accessible aged care and carer support services.

Services Australia aims to meet the needs of customers seeking help in
retirement by ensuring they receive the right payment from the earliest
possible date of eligibility. It also aims to enhance the quality of
life of older Australians by through support for positive and healthy
ageing and providing a cohesive framework of high quality and cost
effective care services for frail older people and their carers.

Seeking help in retirement

When a person contacts seeking help in retirement, they need only
present with knowledge of their circumstances. Services Australia will
assess their circumstances to offer a package of products and services
best suited to helping them in retirement. Such services may include
financial assistance and referrals to specialists.

Initial contact may be made [] online, by phone, in person, or by an
agent or representative.

Services for older Australians

The Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website is a
way to learn more about government and community support available for
older Australians.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website.

Contents

Aged care - initial contact

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Financial Information Service (FIS)

State Seniors Cards

Related links

Multiple, duplicate or intertwined Customer Reference Numbers (CRNs) or
an Unauthenticated Online Entity (UOE)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
