
Bank account details for aged care services 065-13100030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on managing bank account details for
aged care services.

On this Page:

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Aged care services’ bank account details

To receive government funded aged care payments, aged care services need
to provide bank details using the Application to add or change Approved
Aged Care Service's bank details form (AC015). The Resources page
contains a link to the form.

The AC015 form is used for all care types:

-   Home and flexible care services’ bank account details are managed in
    the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS). This can also be
    viewed in the ACSP
-   Residential care services’ bank account details are managed in the
    Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) only

Aged care services must complete and submit a new AC015 form to Services
Australia when bank account details are incorrect or have changed. There
may be cases where a Bank State Branch (BSB) number has been changed and
the approved provider of the service(s) is not aware of the change. For
these cases:

-   the Aged Care Government Direct Entry Services (GDES) reports
    identify the payments as returned Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)
    payments
-   the approved provider needs to contact their bank to resolve the
    issue
-   a new AC015 form must be completed and submitted to Services
    Australia

Services Australia must process all AC015 forms before payments can
occur. The Resources page contains a link to an external website for
checking BSB details.

Note: Approved providers on occasion have the same bank account for
multiple services. In these cases, it is acceptable for the approved
provider to attach a spreadsheet to the application specifying the
details of the multiple services the bank details are applicable to.

The Process page has procedures for managing bank account details.

Privacy

Where possible, Service Officers should not discuss bank account details
with an approved provider over the phone. If a phone call is required,
Service Officers must first ask questions to authenticate the caller’s
identity prior to providing or confirming approved provider bank account
details. See Perform telephone security checks for aged care services
for the authentication process.

Service Officers must comply with the Australian Privacy Principle (APP)
Guidelines as contained in the Privacy Act 1988. Information on the
collection, storage and limits on the use of personal information is
found in the Australian Privacy Principles.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Privacy Principles.

Action an Aged Care GDES report

The Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) provides Services Australia with a
Government Direct Entry Services (GDES) report identifying returned RBA
payments.

The Process page has a procedure for actioning an Aged Care GDES report.

The Resources page contains a link to:

-   the Add or change Approved Aged Care Service's bank details form
    (AC015)
-   the contact details for Aged Care
-   an external website for checking BSB details and
-   the Australian Privacy Principles

Related links

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Perform telephone security checks for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
