
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the annual bulk issue of
Commonwealth Seniors Health Cards (CSHC) to eligible customers. The
annual bulk issue of CSHCs to eligible cardholders commences in
mid-August each year. All bulk issued CSHCs are lodged with Australia
Post and customers should receive them by mid-September.

Entitlements

From 3 June 2023 the CSHC will transition from a 1 year to 2 year
validity, with expiry dates aligning to the customer’s birth month.

New CSHC customers will be issued with a card valid for a period of 15
to 26 month, with the card expiring on the last day of the customer’s
birth month. These customers will not receive a new card in the 2023
annual bulk issue of CSHC.

Current CSHC customers with a card due to expire on 30 September 2023
will be issued a new card in the 2023 annual bulk issue of CSHC. The
card will be valid for a period of 15 to 26 months, with the card
expiring on the last day of customer’s birth month.

CSHCs will continue to be automatically reissued to eligible customers
4-6 weeks prior to the card expiring.

As a result of the transition to 2 years validity CSHC cards will no
longer be issued in a bulk mailout.

Cards issued with expiry date of September

CSHCs are issued with the expiry date of 30 September and are red and
light orange in colour. The customer's name, Customer Reference Number
(CRN) and residential address of the customer are printed on the card
and a strip is included for the customer's signature.

The card would normally be mailed to the customer's postal address and
display their residential address. However, customers who have other
addresses recorded on the Centrelink computer system (for example a
temporary address) can nominate an address preference for the postal
address and/or the address displayed on the card. Where a customer has a
Correspondence nominee on record, the card will be sent to the customer
and not to the nominee.

The card is attached to the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card carrier
(SA297).

Change in income

If customers contact Services Australia to advise of a change to their
income, following receipt of their new CSHC (for example their income
now exceeds the limit), they must lodge the Notice of Assessment and
other evidence of income for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

The Resources page provides a link to the Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card carrier (SA297) and a link to the ICT Security Portal to report a
problem via an online form.

Contents

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE) application to access
archived Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC) data

Related links

How to reissue concession cards

Preferences for concession cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
