-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how a customer can apply for a loan under the
HEAS. Customers can claim online, with help from a Service Officer using
the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or via a paper application form (SA310
partnered or SA496 single).

Eligibility and when to apply

A person may be eligible to participate in the HEAS if they meet the
eligibility criteria. Customers can apply for a HEAS loan by:

(preferred channel) submitting an online claim via their myGov
Centrelink online account, or with help from a Service Officer running
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

if partnered, and the partner also wants to apply for their own HEAS
loan. The customer and partner can make a joint decision to complete a
combined partner online claim. The customer must meet certain
requirements to be eligible for a combined claim

lodging a paper claim:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form (SA310)
-   Home Equity Access Scheme single application form (SA496)

There are no early claims for the HEAS. A person must wait until their
qualification date before submitting an application, for example the
date the person or their partner (if they are a member of a couple)
turns Age Pension age. If the person is not qualified on the date they
apply, the application will be rejected.

To participate in the HEAS the applicants must understand and accept the
terms and conditions.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) claims

The HEAS is voluntary for older Australians, including DVA customers.
DVA customers can use the HEAS to supplement their retirement income
through a loan from DVA

DVA customers can complete the DVA HEAS loan form, and:

-   send to the DVA by email or post, or
-   lodge their form at a Services Australia service centres using the
    DVA Standardised Service Offer. See Delivering face-to-face services
    for the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) for more details

The Resources page contains a link to the:

-   DVA Home Equity Access Scheme, and
-   DVA Home Equity Access Scheme loan form

Initial contact to apply for a loan

If a person contacts to apply for a loan under the HEAS, staff must
first offer an online claim. . Service Officers should explain the
benefits of applying for the HEAS online, such as:

-   they can submit a combined partner online claim if both members of
    the couple want to apply for a loan
-   help to apply for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   less details for them to provide, as details from their Centrelink
    record pre-populate into the online claim
-   they can monitor the progress of their claim through their
    Centrelink online account

If the customer declines the online claim offer, Service Officers can
use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to collect claim details from the
customer either:

-   over the phone, or
-   face-to-face

If the customer is unable or unwilling to apply online or using ACC,
they can apply using paper forms:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form (SA310), or
-   Home Equity Access Scheme single application form (SA496)

The Resources page contains links to the forms.

Online claim

[]

Some customers can lodge a combined HEAS application for their partner,
when starting their own online claim.

The option to submit as a combined claim will only appear if specific
criteria is met.

To lodge an online claim, customers must be registered with an 'active'
Centrelink online account.

Note: a nominee can submit an online claim on behalf of a customer.
Nominees cannot submit combined online claims.

Once registered, to start an online claim for a loan under the HEAS they
must:

-   sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account.
-   select the My profile link from the home page to update and save any
    changes to their personal details (such as address and relationship
    details)
-   on the Centrelink homepage, select Make a claim via the Payments and
    Claims link, or select Payments and Claims > Claims > Make a claim
    through the menu options
-   on the Make a Claim page select Get started under the Older
    Australians category
-   read the information about the HEAS then select Apply for a loan
    under the Home Equity Access Scheme
-   on the Eligibility Check page answer the streaming questions

If the customer satisfies the streaming questions, a started claim will
be registered once they press Continue.

Depending on the customers circumstances they may not be eligible for
the HEAS. Refer customers to the Payment and Service Finder to see what
other payments they might be eligible for. Customers can select Back to
return to the Make a Claim page to start another claim type.

Once a claim starts and all questions answered, the Next steps page
advises the customer if any more information or documentation is
required before they submit their claim.

Customers must provide all their required documents and confirm their
identity to submit their claim. The customer has 13 weeks to submit the
claim, otherwise the HEAS application expires and the customer is
required to re-apply.

Combined online claim

Partnered customers will get partner questions. This includes a question
to check if the partner has agreed to the customer applying on their
behalf. This helps determine if a combined claim will be offered

The partner must:

-   be registered with an active Centrelink online account, and
-   subscribe to electronic messaging

Either the customer or their partner can:

-   lodge the required documents for the claim in their own online
    account, and
-   submit the claim for processing

When a HEAS combined partner claim is started, customers get
notifications to advise the claim has been submitted

Additional notifications are sent to the customer and partner to advise
the claim's progress. These notifications are sent before the claim is
submitted, to help with the completion of the required combined claim
tasks

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

-   Service Officers can run ACC with the customer and applying partner
    to get and record the claim details
-   Nominees can provide details on behalf of the customer and/or
    partner and can submit an online claim on behalf of a customer
-   Nominees cannot submit combined online claims

Service Officers can:

-   access ACC via the ACC desktop icon
-   enter the customer’s Customer Reference Number (CRN), and
-   run the workflow

-   Start the ACC with the customer to show them how easy it is to claim
    online. Encourage them to complete the rest at home in their own
    time. If customers submit their claim online, they can monitor the
    progress of their claim through their Centrelink online account

To submit their claim, customers must:

-   answer all mandatory questions
-   provide all required documents
-   verify their identity if they do not have a Confirmed Identify
-   answer all partner questions, if it is a combined claim

Declaration and submitting the claim

When a Service Officer completes an ACC, they must advise the applicants
about:

-   any outstanding document/s they must provide, or
-   action they need to take to submit their application

The customer must either:

-   access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account to
    upload their documents and submit the claim, or
-   accept a verbal declaration and provide all required documents
    before submitting their claim. If the customer is unable or declines
    to make a verbal declaration, do not submit the claim via ACC

Note:

-   do not encourage claim submission via ACC based on a verbal
    declaration for the HEAS. Encourage customers to submit the claim
    through their online account if possible
-   customers that have their claim application submitted via ACC must
    provide a signed HEAS application form SA310 or SA496 Part A before
    Services Australia can approve their loan
-   claims expire after 13 weeks, if the customer does not submit their
    claim

Paper application form (SA310 partnered and SA496 single claims)

Claims for the HEAS can be made by completing a (SA310 partnered or
SA496 single) paper application form and submitting it by post or to the
nearest Service Centre.

Lodging a paper application involves 3 steps:

-   completing the form and relevant parts of the SA310 or SA496
-   collecting all documents needed as outlined in the application forms
-   lodging the claim with all required supporting documents

If a paper application form has been lodged, Service Officers should
scan the form and supporting documentation to Document Tools on the
customer’s record on Day 1 for action by processing staff.

Partnered customers

Where both members of a couple want to apply for a loan online under the
HEAS at the same time, they can make a combined claim:

-   online claim (preferred channel)
-   by phone, or in person with the Service Officer using ACC, or
-   by completing a HEAS partnered application form (SA310)

Members of a couple must make a joint decision for each member to apply
for a HEAS loan.

To verify the joint decision, both customer and their partner must
provide electronic consent through their own Centrelink online account.
Alternatively they can sign the application by reading and signing Part
A (Applicant and partner declarations and authorities) of the SA310.

If only one member of the couple is applying for a loan, their partner
must provide their consent by reading and signing the SA310 Part A.

Required documentation

Before accepting a claim application form, check the documentation
provided for the customer (and for their partner if applicable). This is
to make sure all required supporting documents are provided

Both the customer and partner (if applicable) must have a Confirmed
Identity Status before a claim application form is accepted:

-   partners of HEAS applicants must also complete linkage
-   if the customer and/or their partner do not have a confirmed
    identity status, Service Officers must code the identity details
    using the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct

Upon receipt of supporting documentation for a customer's HEAS
application, Service Officers must scan the document to Document Tools
on the customer’s record on Day 1:

-   if an associated task in the online claim exists, use the Request
    and Manage Customer Tasks guided procedure to mark the corresponding
    task as ‘Provided’
-   scan Identity documents if they are required for verification
    purposes other than identity assurance

For details about the assessment of required documents see Assessing
Home Equity Access Scheme applications.

Identifying fraud

If a staff member identifies suspected fraud with a HEAS claim, they
must report it.

See:

-   Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption, and
-   Identity fraud

The Resources page contains:

-   links to the Retirements Helpdesk
-   SA310 or SA496 forms, and
-   Services Australia website for details about payments and services
    for older Australians

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Change of circumstances - Home Equity Access Scheme

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Identity fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
