
Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) 065-07030030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to maintain membership of the Pension Bonus
Scheme (PBS). Once registered, a person must meet the requirements of
either a member who is accruing and meeting the work test, or a
non-accruing member. This procedure is about accruing membership.

Work test

To meet the work test for a full year bonus period, members of the
scheme must engage in gainful work for at least 960 hours during the
period. At least 640 of these 960 hours must be worked in Australia. The
work test is flexible. The minimum accrual period is 12 months.

Date of commencement

A customer's membership usually commences on their Age Pension age
qualification date or the date they lodge the PBS registration form.
Customers can only be paid a bonus calculated on the number of years and
days deferred during which the customer was accruing and meeting the
work test. A period of time during which Age Pension was not claimed but
the work test was not met may be a non-accrual period, but these periods
are not counted as time during which claiming Age Pension was deferred.
For example, a customer may meet the work test for 3 years whilst
deferring claiming Age Pension, then not meet the work test during a
non-accruing period of 26 weeks, then meet the work test for a further
year. Whilst the person has not claimed Age Pension for 4 and a half
years they will only be paid a bonus based on 4 years of deferment.

Maintaining membership

To maintain membership of the PBS a member must be either accruing and
meeting the work test, or non-accruing. Once a member ceases to meet the
requirements of either accruing or non-accruing membership the customer
is required to claim the Pension Bonus within certain time limits.

The Resources page contains examples of accruing membership calculation
meeting the work test.

Related links

Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Calculating a Pension Bonus

Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Eligibility and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Eligibility and assessment of Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
