-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer or correspondence nominee can
claim or re-claim Age Pension. This can be done online, with help from a
Service Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) or via a paper
claim. Eligible customers may also claim the Pension Bonus Payment when
claiming Age Pension. Where specific criteria are met, partnered
customers may be eligible to lodge a combined claim for themselves and
their partner when claiming Age Pension online.

Age Pension eligibility and when to claim

A person may qualify for Age Pension if they have reached Age Pension
age and they meet Australian residence and income and asset test
requirements. See the Resources page for a link to age requirements.

Claims can be lodged up to 13 weeks before the person's qualification
date. For example the date they reach Age Pension age.

For information about payments and services available, see Initial
contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire.

Initial contact to claim Age Pension

[]If a customer or their nominee contacts to claim Age Pension, an
online claim must be offered first. Service Officers should explain the
benefits of claiming online, such as:

-   help applying for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   less information for them to provide, as details from their
    Centrelink record will be pre-populated into the online claim
-   they can monitor the progress of their claim through their
    Centrelink online account
-   customers can also use the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to
    monitor their claim.

Note: nominees can access Centrelink online account on desktop or their
mobile browser (redirected through Express Plus Centrelink app) to view
claim progress or provide documents.

If the customer:

-   or the correspondence nominee declines the online claim offer, a
    Service Officer can use ACC to collect claim information from a
    customer or the correspondence nominee either over the phone or
    face-to-face
-   or nominee is unable or unwilling to claim online or via ACC, run
    the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow to send out the
    correct forms (including if both members of a couple want to claim
    payment)
-   is a member of the Pension Bonus Scheme and also wants to claim the
    Pension Bonus, Service Officers must recommend they contact a
    Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer before they lodge their
    claim

Transfers to Age Pension

Separate procedures apply for Transfers to Age Pension for income
support payment customers.

Re-Claiming Age Pension following a rejection or cancellation

If a previous claim was rejected, a new claim is generally not required
if the customer contacts within 13 weeks of being notified of the
rejection decision, or if the customer contacts and they have not been
notified of the decision. In these cases the original claim can be used
by the Service Officer. Check all information provided for the original
claim is still current and obtain details of any changes.

If a favourable determination is subsequently made to grant Age Pension,
payment will start from the date the person was both qualified and
payable. Note: the date that qualification and payability are both
satisfied may be different to the date of effect of the original claim
determination.

Exceptions to this are where the previous claim was rejected because the
customer was not in Australia (reason NIA) or not an Australian resident
(NAU) when they lodged their claim. They must lodge a new claim as their
previous claim is taken not to have been made.

A person who withdrew their previous claim must also lodge a new claim.
If contact is made more than 13 weeks after being notified of the
rejection, a new claim is required.

Review processes apply if a customer’s Age Pension is cancelled and they
believe the decision was incorrect based on their circumstances at the
time, and they:

-   have not been notified of the decision, or
-   were notified of the decision within the last 13 weeks

If a customer’s Age Pension has been correctly cancelled and the
customer’s circumstances have changed since cancellation, a re-claim is
required regardless of the length of time that has passed.

Online claim

[] Customers or their correspondence nominee must be registered with an
'active' Centrelink online account. Organisation nominees must be
registered for the Business Hub to access nominee services online.

Once registered, to start an online claim for Age Pension (and Pension
Bonus) they must:

-   sign into myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   organisation nominees must log into Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
    to access nominee services in Business Hub
-   nominees must select the person they wish to act for
-   from the menu, select My Details > My profile, update and save any
    changes to their personal details (such as address and relationship
    details)
-   from the home page, select MENU > Payments and Claims > Claims >
    Make a claim
-   in the Older Australians category, select Get started > Apply for
    Age Pension
-   answer the pre-claim questions on the Eligibility Check page to
    check their eligibility for Age Pension, including details of
    circumstances to help the customer determine if they are in a crisis
    situation. The online claim will advise why they may not be eligible
    and refer them to the Payment and Service Finder or advise them to
    contact Services Australia to discuss a more suitable payment. They
    can select Back to return to Make a claim page to begin another
    claim type

If both members of a couple want to claim Age Pension online at the same
time, they will usually need to complete their own online claim. If
specific criteria is met, the option to complete as an Age Pension
combined partner claim is offered. Step 8 of the Making an Age Pension
online claim table on the Process page has information about eligibility
for completing a combined partner claim.

The online claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted.

Notifications will be sent to the customer to advise of the claim's
progress. For a full list of the notifications that the customer will
receive during the Age Pension online claim process refer to the CCM
Notifications Matrix in Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM).

Combined partner online claim

[] Where specific criteria is met, a customer may be eligible to lodge a
claim on behalf of their partner when claiming Age Pension online. Step
8 of the Making an Age Pension online claim table on the Process page
has information about eligibility for lodging a claim on a partner’s
behalf.

Partners of customers who want, and are eligible, to lodge an Age
Pension combined partner online claim must also be registered with an
active Centrelink online account and subscribed to electronic messaging.

The Age Pension combined partner claim will send a notification to the
partner asking them to log into their own online account to complete the
task for Age Pension combined partner claim. Once the partner has
completed and confirmed this task and either customer or partner has
lodged all required documentation, the claim can only then be submitted
as an Age Pension combined partner claim.

Note: the partner task must be completed and confirmed within 3 days of
being notified of the task or it will disappear and the claim will
revert to an individual Age Pension claim for the customer only. If the
partner still wants to claim, they will need to submit their own claim
within 14 days to ensure the same start date of payment if eligible.

Notifications will be sent to the customer and partner to advise of the
claim's progress. These notifications are sent before the claim is
submitted to assist with the completion of the required combined claim
tasks and again once the claim is submitted. For a full list of the
notifications that the customer and partner will receive during the Age
Pension combined partner online claim process refer to the CCM
Notifications Matrix in Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM).

Nominees acting on behalf of their principals cannot submit an Age
Pension combined partner online claim. However, nominees:

-   are able to submit an Age Pension claim for their principal as a
    single claim, or
-   where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of
    a couple, submit individual claims separately, or
-   where they are appointed correspondence nominee for both members of
    a couple and the couple is eligible to lodge an Age Pension combined
    partner claim, staff can run an ACC for an Age Pension combined
    partner claim. However, the nominee cannot submit it online

The online claim will expire after 13 weeks if not submitted.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Service Officers can run ACC with the customer or correspondence nominee
to obtain and record the claim information. ACC can also be used for an
Age Pension combined partner claim where both members of the couple are
eligible and specific criteria is met. Step 8 of the Making an Age
Pension online claim table on the Process page has information about
eligibility for lodging a claim on a partner’s behalf.

Note: ACC is only able to be used with a nominee for an Age Pension
combined partner claim where specific criteria is met, including the
nominee is appointed for both members of the couple. However, the
nominee cannot submit the ACC Age Pension combined partner claim online.

ACC can also be run for an Age Pension and Pension Bonus claim. Staff
must recommend to customers that they contact a Financial Information
Service (FIS) Officer before submitting their claim. See Initial contact
to claim Pension Bonus Payment (PBP).

For more information, see Viewing and processing online and Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC).

Customer declaration and submitting the claim

Once ACC has been completed by the Service Officer, the customer must
either:

-   [] Access the draft claim through their Centrelink online account or
    Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to upload their documents and
    submit the claim, or
-   Accept a verbal declaration and provide all required documents
    before submitting their claim

Some exceptions apply. Read the customer the verbal declaration script.
Tick the box on the Review your claim page if they accept. This will
confirm that the declaration script has been read, and that the customer
accepts it. Once the verbal declaration is accepted and ACC submitted a
DOC containing 'Staff assisted verbal declaration accepted - Yes' will
display in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   The Customer Claim Summary

If the customer is unable or declines to make a verbal declaration, the
Service Officer must:

-   invite the customer to log on to their online services, accept the
    customer declaration and submit their claim, or
-   provide the customer with a Customer Declaration Form (CDF). The
    claim must not be submitted by the Service Officer without the CDF
    being completed, signed and returned

If the customer fails to submit their claim, it will expire after 13
weeks.

Paper claim form lodgement

Claims for Age Pension (including Age Pension Blind) and Pension Bonus
Payment (PBP) can be made by completing paper claim forms. If a customer
or their correspondence nominee have completed paper claim forms (SA002
and SA369) or been issued pre-populated claim forms via FCSO, all forms
must be fully completed and lodged to be assessed for Age Pension. Check
forms and supporting documentation provided by the customer (and their
partner if applicable).

Paper claim forms include partner details. If the partner is also
claiming Age Pension at the same time as the customer, they can both
claim on the one form. However, if they wish to provide their details
individually for privacy reasons, they can complete and lodge separate
forms.

Scan the claim and supporting documentation on Day 1 for action by
processing staff. Only scan identity documents if they are required for
verification purposes other than identity verification.

Customers overseas intending to claim

For information about claiming an Australian Age Pension while living
overseas, see information about claim forms and processes for claiming
Australian payments under the relevant agreement country. See
International Social Security Agreements.

Upon lodgement of a claim, see Claims for Australian payments under
International Agreements.

Customers intending to claim Pension Bonus

Service Officers must recommend to customers registered in the Pension
Bonus Scheme that they contact a Financial Information Service (FIS)
Officer before they lodge their claim for Age Pension and the Pension
Bonus Payment (PBP).

Maximising a customer's entitlement to PBP may depend on various
factors. The date a customer finishes work may not be the same as the
date their bonus period ends. Customers may disadvantage themselves by
lodging a claim too early or too late. See Initial contact to claim
Pension Bonus Payment (PBP).

A FIS contact will determine the best time for the customer to lodge
their PBP claim based on their circumstances.

Verification, supporting documentation and identity confirmation

Check documentation for the customer (and for their partner if
applicable). Scan supporting documentation on Day 1 for action by
processing staff. Only scan identity documents if they are required for
verification purposes. Customers must confirm their identity (if there
is no confirmed identity status recorded) to be able to submit their
online claim or ACC. Some exceptions apply. Customers lodging a paper
claim must have their identity confirmation status checked and if
required code their identity details using the Identity Confirmation
Dashboard in Process Direct.

Age Pension - Home Equity Access Scheme recipients

Customers currently receiving Age Pension as a loan-only payment through
the Home Equity Access Scheme may wish to claim Age Pension if their
income or assets are under the limit. Customers with a loan-only
arrangement have a benefit status of AGE/CZR-PLS and are:

-   unable to submit an Age Pension online claim
-   unable to have ACC run, and
-   advised in the Age Pension online claim to contact Services
    Australia

To issue the appropriate claim forms, run the First Contact Service
Offer (FCSO).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about payments and services for older Australians, and a
link to the Customer Declaration Form.

Contents

Transfer to Age Pension

Progress of claim

Age/Disability Support Pension on the basis of blindness: Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013)

Related links

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claim lodgement of Centrelink Claims

Home Equity Access Scheme

Initial contact by a customer who has retired or is about to retire

Initial contact to claim Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Nominees

Processing Age Pension and Pension Bonus claims

Progress of claim

Qualification for Age Pension

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Identity Confirmation

Indexing, re-indexing, and cancelling claim activities

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Completing the Income and Assets (SA369)

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
