-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for recording fees and charges.

Fees and charges overview

Staff can give this information to customers. Refer customers to the
aged care means assessment line or if there is an Aged Care Specialist
Officer (ACSO) in their area offer to book the customer in for a
face-to-face appointment if more information is required.

The Australian Government may subsidise a care recipient’s cost of care.
If they can afford to, the care recipient also contributes depending on
their income and assets. Services Australia or Department of Veterans’
Affairs (DVA) complete a means assessment to determine the amount.

Cost of care is the amount of subsidies and primary supplements the
government pays to the aged care provider for providing care to the care
recipient. The subsidy is reduced by the amount of the income or means
tested fee the care recipient pays directly to the provider.

See the Process page for fees and charges information in the Aged Care
Staff Portal (ACSP) and the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP).

See Resources for Fees and Subsidies by Scheme and Resident Status.

Care recipients dissatisfied with their means assessment can have the
assessment reviewed by Services Australia or DVA, see Initial contact
about a decision and the review of decision process.

Residential care

Entered care pre 1 July 2014:

Basic daily fees are paid at different rates depending on resident
status

Income tested fees are paid when the total assessable income is in
excess of the relevant aged care total assessable income free area, plus

An accommodation component, either:

-   A daily accommodation charge determined by the value of the care
    recipient's assets on the date of entry into permanent residential
    aged care, or
-   An accommodation bond negotiated directly with the aged care service
    provider

Extra service fees are paid by care recipients in an extra service
facility

Entered care on or after 1 July 2014:

Basic daily fees are paid at different rates depending on resident
status

Means tested care fees are an additional contribution. The amount is
determined by the means assessment

An Accommodation payment, is paid as either a:

-   Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD), or
-   Daily Accommodation Contribution (DAC)
-   The amount is based on the care recipient’s income and assets

Extra service fees are paid by care recipients in an extra service
facility

Home care

Entered care pre 1 July 2014:

-   Basic daily fees are paid at different rates depending on the home
    care package level
-   Income tested fees are paid where the service provider has asked a
    care recipient to pay an income tested fee. Note: under pre 1 July
    2014 schemes the Department of Health and Aged Care is responsible
    for home care means assessments

Entered care on or after 1 July 2014:

-   Basic daily fees are paid at different rates depending on the home
    care package level
-   Income tested fees may be paid in addition to the basic daily fee.
    The amount is based on the care recipient’s income

Home care

Basic daily fee (BDF)

-   paid by the care recipient
-   paid daily from the date they enter home care
-   calculated daily
-   indexed on 20 March and 20 September each year, in line with
    increases to the Age Pension
-   not payable while on leave from home care (in transition care or
    residential respite care)
-   payable while on social leave or hospital leave

Before 1 July 2019, BDF was 17.5% of the single basic Age Pension for
all care levels. This also applied to members of a couple.

From 1 July 2019, four levels of BDF align to home care package levels
1, 2, 3 and 4, replacing the previous single BDF.

If a care recipient lodges an application for financial hardship
assistance prior to an assignment of a home care package, their highest
approved care level is used to calculate any BDF hardship assistance.

Income tested fee (ITF)

A care recipient pays ITF if their income is over the maximum income
threshold for a full pensioner.

Entered care before 1 July 2014:

-   the fee can be up to 50% of the care recipient’s income above the
    Age Pension amount
-   the Department of Health and Aged Care is responsible for the means
    assessment

Entered care on or after 1 July 2014:

-   the fee is different for everyone because it is based on their means
    assessment
-   Services Australia or Department of Veterans’ Affairs are
    responsible for the means assessment

See the Resources page for a link to the Department of Health and Aged
Care’s Schedule of Fees and Charges.

Residential care - pre 1 July 2014

Entered care pre 1 July 2014:

Basic daily fee (BDF)

-   paid by the care recipient
-   paid daily from the date they enter permanent residential care
-   is indexed on 20 March and 20 September each year, in line with
    increases to the Age Pension
-   the rate is standard, non-standard or protected
-   the standard rate is set at 85% of the single basic Age Pension and
    is the same for both single and members of a couple
-   the non-standard and protected rates apply to some residents who
    were in care before 20 September 2009

Income tested fees (ITF)

Some care recipients pay an ITF. This is an additional amount determined
by a means assessment.

pay an ITF if income above set thresholds

the amount is set at the lower of the:

-   calculated income tested fee amount
-   cost of care or
-   maximum income tested fee amount

the maximum ITF is 135% of the single basic Age Pension and is subject
to indexation

a daily cap applies to ITF for pre-1 July 2014 care recipients limiting
the amount of contribution to their care costs
Note: care recipients who were provided with care at any time after 30
September 1997 and before
1 March 1998, for any entry assessed under a pre 1 July 2014 assessment
scheme, have Care Subsidy to Zero applied for an ITF liability where
their income is over the threshold

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Health and Aged
Care’s Schedules of Fees and Charges.

Residential care - post 1 July 2014

Entered care on or after 1 July 2014:

Basic daily fee (BDF)

-   equal to 85% of the single basic Age Pension
-   paid by the care recipient
-   paid daily from the date they enter permanent residential care
-   is indexed on 20 March and 20 September each year, in line with
    increases to the Age Pension

Means tested care fees (MTCF)

Some care recipients pay a MTCF. This is an additional amount determined
by a means assessment.

the MTCF is based on the care recipient’s means and their cost of care
as per their:

-   Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) assessment before 1 October
    2022, or
-   AN-ACC assessment from 1 October 2022 onwards

the amount is set at the lower of:

-   their means tested amount or
-   their cost of care

annual and lifetime caps limit how much MTCF a care recipient pays

indexation of annual and lifetime caps occurs on 20 March and 20
September each year, in line with the Age Pension

Services Australia advises care recipients, aged care nominees and
providers when the cap is reached

MTCF – AN-ACC and cost of care

From 1 October 2022, the Department of Health and Aged Care replaced the
Aged Care Funding Instrument (ACFI) with a new funding model -
Australian National Aged Care Classification (AN-ACC).

There is no change to the means assessment process for care recipients.
However, it does affect the care recipient's cost of care and may affect
their Means Tested Care Fees (MTCF) rates. This change results in
changes to the cost of care for most care recipients. It also increases
the income and assets rates that cause care recipients to pay maximum
fees.

This affects MTCF for care recipients who are either:

-   Means Not Disclosed (MND) and liable to pay the full cost of their
    care, or
-   Assessed as having high income and/or assets which make them liable
    to pay most or all of the cost of their care

New care recipients: Care recipients who enter permanent residential
care from 1 October 2022 have a default AN-ACC rating applied - Class
99 - pending completion of an AN-ACC assessment to determine the cost of
their care. This occurs unless they are entering for the purpose of
palliative care, which has default Class 98.

Existing care recipients:

From 1 October 2022:

The following have their care assessed under the AN-ACC funding model:

-   Care recipients who have had AN-ACC assessments completed over the
    last 12 months, and
-   All care recipients in permanent residential care as at 1 October
    2022

Aged care services started to get their funding based on their AN-ACC

A reassessment of a care recipients' MTCF occurred as part of a
Quarterly Review. Many care recipients had new MTCF rates applied from
date of effect, 28 October 2022. Services Australia sent fee change
letters (RC63) to care recipients/nominees to tell them about the new
fees from 28 October 2022, which may have been due to changes to the
amount of means tested care fee because of the start of AN-ACC on 1
October 2022. (There are no changes to Annual and lifetime cap
thresholds.)

See the Comparison between ACFI and AN-ACC table for some real examples
of changes to the cost of care because of the funding model changing
from ACFI to AN-ACC.

Accommodation payments

An accommodation payment is a contribution towards, or full payment for
the care recipient’s room that they may have to pay depending on their
assessed income and assets.

Each provider sets its own pricing, depending on factors such as
facility location and room size. The amount a care recipient pays for
their accommodation depends on their eligibility for government help.

The type of accommodation payments payable is dependent on the date the
care recipient entered permanent residential care and their available
means to pay the accommodation cost.

Entered care pre 1 July 2014:

-   Accommodation charge
-   Accommodation bond

See Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 -
assets assessment for further detail.

Entered care on or after 1 July 2014:

resident is eligible for government assistance with their accommodation
costs and pays either:

-   a Refundable Accommodation Contribution (RAC)
-   a Daily Accommodation Contribution (DAC) or
-   a combination of these two

resident is not eligible for government assistance with their
accommodation costs and pays either:

-   a Refundable Accommodation Deposit (RAD)
-   a Daily Accommodation Payment (DAP) or
-   a combination of these two

See Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments for further
detail.

Note: if a care recipient chooses to pay a lump sum, any unused money is
refundable when they depart aged care.

Extra service fees in residential care

Care recipients residing in extra service facilities pay extra service
fees. Extra service facilities provide a higher standard of
accommodation not extra care.

A care recipient negotiates the extra service fee amount with their
service provider. Services Australia is not involved in determining
extra service fees. Extra service fees are not based on either an asset
or income assessment. There is no maximum limit for extra service fees.

Extra service fees are regulated for care recipients who entered care on
or after 1 July 2014. Aged care providers with dedicated extra service
places must publish their extra service fees on the My Aged Care
website, their own website and in other relevant materials provided to
prospective care recipients.

Fees on day of discharge

On the day a resident permanently leaves a service, they can be charged:

-   a basic daily fee
-   an accommodation payment (If applicable)

They cannot be charged:

-   a means-tested fee
-   an accommodation contribution

The Resources page contains:

-   contact details
-   Aged Care Fee Calculator
-   links to external websites
-   frequently asked questions

Contents

Aged care fees and charges - accommodation payments

Aged Care fees and payments – annual and lifetime caps

Aged Care fees and charges – care subsidy reduction to zero

Related links

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged Care

Aged Care – Australian National Aged Care Classification (AN-ACC)

Aged care financial hardship assistance - overview

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs)

Deeming provisions

Deprivation effects on Centrelink payments

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Pensions income and assets tests

Vacation of principal home due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
