
Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims 065-18102915

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process online claims, Assisted Customer
Claims (ACC) and paper CSHC claims. It includes instructions for Process
Direct, and for Customer First when required. It also explains how to
reassess a rejected or cancelled CSHC claim.

CSHC claim options

Customers can apply for a CSHC:

-   [] online
-   via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   via paper claim

CSHC reclaim options

If the customer's CSHC was cancelled it may be restored, require a
re-claim or [] a full new claim. See Claiming Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC).

Verified income over the income limit but lower this financial year

If a customer's verified income is over the income limit but is likely
to be lower in this financial year then an estimate of their income may
be taken.

An estimate can only be accepted when a change in circumstances:

-   has already occurred
-   can be satisfactorily demonstrated, and
-   is an acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for the
    CSHC income test

Note: when a customer provides an estimate, a superannuation withdrawal
under the First Home Super Saver (FHSS) Scheme is not counted towards
their taxable income.

Customers who have requested an estimate for the current financial year
must also provide details of their verified income that is over the
income limit from either of the last 2 financial years (reference tax
years).

Re-claim after CSHC rejected/ cancelled due to income estimate

A customer may lodge another claim or re-claim if their CSHC claim is
rejected or their CSHC is cancelled due to an estimate of income
provided for an acceptable condition for the current financial year,
plus any deemed income from account-based income streams.

The customer must provide a revised estimate of the current financial
year with details of why the estimate has changed.

Note: customers cannot lodge a claim or re-claim using income details
previous to the financial year already confirmed.

The revised estimate should only be accepted if it is considered
reasonable and remains an acceptable condition for using an estimate of
income for the CSHC income test.

An estimate is reasonable if:

-   the customer's explanation of how they calculated the estimate is
    consistent with the estimated amount, and
-   the reason for the revised income is reasonable and remains an
    acceptable condition for using an estimate of income for the CSHC
    income test (the reasons given are consistent with the reduction in
    income)

Care assessment for CSHC claims

Customers advising in the claim of a child entering care need to provide
a completed 'Details of your child's care arrangement (FA012)' before
they can submit their claim.

Where an

Assessment of Care Arrangements Referral is required the assessment must
be completed by a suitably skilled Families Service Officer before the
claim can be finalised.

After the care assessment has been completed, Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card processing staff will proceed to claim assessment and
finalisation

Overseas absence from Australia

If the customer does reclaim CSHC upon their return to Australia, the
CSHC date of claim will be automatically taken as the immigration
advised date of return when:

-   the customer lodges a CSHC re-claim within 14 days of the date of
    return to Australia, and
-   the date of return is less than 26 weeks since their CSHC
    cancellation date

This will apply to CSHC online claims, customised claims, paper claims
and verbal re-claims. Customers whose CSHC has been cancelled for more
than 26 weeks will need to complete a full new claim.

Customer has recently died after lodging a claim

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a customer
will still need to be determined.

The Resources contains links to forms and publications, Services
Australia website, contact details and the Australian Taxation Officer
(ATO) website.

Related links

Eligibility for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment new claim processing
interactions

Rejecting a claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Quarterly supplement

Process Direct

Payment rates and thresholds

Leaving Australia

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
