-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the way a Pension Bonus is calculated. The
Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) provides a tax-free lump sum bonus for people
who choose to work past Age Pension age and defer claiming Age Pension.

PBS closed to new registrations

The Pension Bonus Scheme closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014.

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their Pension
Bonus in due course, in line with existing arrangements.

Calculation of Pension Bonus

From 20 September 2009, the Pension Bonus Payment is calculated using
the components of Basic Pension rate and a payment called the Pension
Supplement Component for Pension Bonus (PSCPB).

The formula used to calculate the bonus payable reflects the amount of
Age Pension the customer is entitled to at the start day (date of
grant), and the length of the deferment period. If the customer's
marital status changes during the deferment period, a separate formula
is used to take account of the proportions of the bonus accrued while
the customer was single and partnered.

If the customer has more than 5 bonus periods accrued, the last 5 full
year bonus periods are used to calculate the bonus, and it is the
marital status during those periods which is taken into account.

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Service Officers must recommend to the customer that they contact a FIS
Officer before they lodge their claim for Pension Bonus Scheme and Age
Pension. If the customer has submitted a claim, Service Officers should
still recommend a FIS appointment.

Maximising a customer's entitlement to PBS may depend on various
factors. The date a customer finishes work may not be the same as the
date their bonus period ends.

A customer may disadvantage themselves by lodging a claim:

-   too early, for example before they get their last employment
    payment, or
-   too late, for example more than 13 weeks after they finished work

A FIS contact will determine the best time for the customer to lodge
their PBS claim taking into consideration their individual
circumstances.

If a customer has claimed, consider if the Age Pension start date can be
moved to allow Age Pension and PBP to be paid if:

-   they or their partner were paid employment income for longer than
    one entitlement period (LOP), and
-   the LOP payment will preclude Age Pension

Refer the claim to the Retirements Helpdesk if the Age Pension start
date cannot be moved far enough, or if a Pension Bonus will be paid but
the LOP payment will be assessed for 13 weeks or more after the start
date.

Superannuation exemption from means tests

If the customer has applied for an exemption from the income and assets
tests for their superannuation investment the amount of the Pension
Bonus will still be calculated on their rate of Age Pension at the start
day (date of grant). If the application is successful, then a Pension
Bonus Top-up may be payable. A Top-up will only be payable if the date
of effect of the superannuation exemption is no later than the end date
of the Pension Bonus Top-up period.

If no Pension Bonus was payable due to the initial assessment of a
superannuation investment that is later exempted from the Age Pension
start day, reconsider the original decision based on the revised income
and asset assessment.

Bereavement payment

The Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) is based on the amount of
Pension Bonus that would have been payable had the deceased customer
claimed Age Pension and the Bonus just before their death. Employment
income and regular or lump sum compensation payments are not assessed
when calculating the PBBP under the income test.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms, publications and
rates on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Non-accruing membership of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Registration for Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)

Exempting superannuation investments

Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
