-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to help customers making initial contact to
apply for loan payments under the HEAS. The HEAS allows older
Australians and their partners to convert equity tied up in their
Australian real estate into loan payments.

Overview and eligibility

The HEAS is a loan administered by Services Australia and the Department
of Veterans’ Affairs. The HEAS is paid to customers:

-   in fortnightly instalments, and/or
-   as advance payments

Customers can use the HEAS to get financial support. For example:

-   for a short period during a period of financial readjustment
-   indefinitely, to supplement regular income

Australian real estate owned by the customer secures the loan. Interest
is charged on the loan balance using an annual interest rate,
compounding fortnightly

A customer must meet the eligibility criteria to receive payments under
the HEAS

See Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme for more details.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)

-   The HEAS is voluntary for older Australians, including DVA customers
-   DVA customers can use the HEAS to supplement their retirement income
    through a loan from DVA

The Resources page contains a link to the DVA HEAS, which lists the
eligibility details.

Loan must be repaid

The amount loaned to the customer is a debt to the Commonwealth. The
customer must repay all of the following:

-   the loan amounts they receive
-   legal costs incurred by the Commonwealth, and
-   compound interest

The loan is recovered:

-   when the customer voluntarily repays either by lump sum or
    instalments
-   when the secured real estate is sold, or
-   from the customer's (or surviving partner's) estate after their
    death

See Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans for more details.

No Negative Equity Guarantee

The No Negative Equity Guarantee only applies when the balance of the
loan settles in full.

When a customer settles their HEAS debt, they (or their estate) will not
repay more than the market value of the property secured against the
loan, minus:

-   any mortgages, or
-   legitimate debt

See Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme loan amounts for more
details.

Rate of loan payments

Customers can elect to get the HEAS loans:

-   as a fortnightly payment, or
-   as an advance payment (or both)

The most that can be paid each fortnight is the equivalent of 1.5 times
(that is, 150% of) the maximum pension rate (including supplements and
Rent Assistance, if applicable). If the customer receives a pension, the
combined amount of loan and actual pension cannot exceed the 150% limit.

The customer can request to receive the maximum amount of loan each
fortnight (that is, 150%) or a lower amount, either:

-   a percentage of their maximum pension rate, or
-   a fixed amount per fortnight

Advance payments may reduce the fortnightly loan amount for a period of
26 fortnights. A customer can access up to 2 advance payments in any 26
fortnight period. The most that can be advanced in any 26 fortnight
period is 50% of the maximum pension rate.

See Advance payments under the Home Equity Access Scheme loans for more
details.

Interest rate

-   The HEAS interest rate is a compound rate applied to the outstanding
    loan balance each fortnight
-   The outstanding loan balance consists of the principal (loan
    payments made) plus previously accrued interest and any outstanding
    legal fees, less any repayments made by the customer
-   The current rate of interest is 3.95% per annum
-   The interest rate is set by the Minister for the Department of
    Social Services (DSS), and is published in the Australian Government
    Gazette

Commencement of loans

The HEAS is a voluntary arrangement. A loan arrangement will not start
unless the customer makes an application and agrees to the terms and
conditions of the HEAS. The application contains terms and conditions
and must be signed by:

-   the customer
-   the partner, if a member of a couple, and
-   any third parties with ownership or similar interest in the real
    estate offered as security for the loan, or
-   a nominee that has legal authority to act on the customers behalf

A customer who does not receive a payment from Services Australia may
need to lodge a claim for a Home Equity Access Scheme qualifying
payment, as well as the loan application

See Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme for more details about
the qualifying payment criteria.

Assets hardship provisions

-   A person can be paid under the HEAS, or under assets hardship
    provisions but not both. The 2 provisions are mutually exclusive
-   If a customer says they are in financial hardship check if they have
    entitlement under the assets hardship provisions before going ahead
    with a request for payment under the HEAS
-   Before a customer can be paid an income support payment under the
    assets hardship provisions, their fortnightly loan payments must
    stop

See Home Equity Access Scheme cancellation and rejections for more
details on how to request cancellation of the HEAS payments.

How to apply

Customers can apply for the HEAS loan payments by submitting an online
claim through their Centrelink online account. Service Officers can run
an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to help customers who require
assistance with their online claim.

Applications can be lodged using the:

-   Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form (SA310) or
-   Home Equity Access Scheme single application form (SA496)

Nominees can:

-   lodge an online claim for the HEAS on behalf of another person, and
-   give consent if they have the legal authority to make financial
    decisions on the customers behalf

See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan for more details.

Department of Veterans’ Affairs claims

DVA customers can lodge their HEAS claim at Service Australia service
centres, using the DVA Standardised Service Offer.

See Delivering face-to-face services for the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) for more details.

The Resources page contains a link to the DVA HEAS loan form.

Partnered customers

Members of a couple:

-   must make a joint decision to receive loan payments under the HEAS,
    even if 1 member only is applying
-   both members of the couple must sign and consent to the application

If both members of the couple want to apply for a loan, they can apply
together by lodging:

-   an online claim via their myGov Centrelink online account, or
-   the Home Equity Access Scheme partnered application form (SA310)

If partnered customers lodge separate applications, both members of the
couple need to sign both applications.

Tell customers to seek independent legal or financial advice before
applying for a loan under the HEAS

HEAS calculators

There are 2 calculators available for customers and staff to use to
estimate eligibility and rate available.

The Process page has details about how to access the links, and how to
use the calculators.

Contents

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Related links

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Home Equity Access Scheme

Rates and thresholds

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Portability of payments

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assets hardship for income support payments

Types of Centrelink records

Delivering face-to-face services for the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
