
New, combine, sales, closure and transfer processes for aged care services 065-20120123

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to set up new, transfer, combine or close
aged care services with Services Australia.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Changes to aged care services

Aged care providers can open, close, combine or transfer services. The
Department of Health and Aged Care approves these requests and notifies
Services Australia. To support correct payments and means assessment,
Services Australia updates information in the:

-   Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) for home care and
    flexible care services
-   Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) for residential care services

Combining of aged care services

Two or more residential care services operated by 1 approved provider
can apply to the Department of Health and Aged Care to combine their
services. Combined services are considered a variation of an existing
service and not a new service.

An approved provider may combine services for several reasons,
including:

-   to save administration work and costs
-   if a restructure of a corporate entity consolidates multiple
    approved providers into one approved provider

Ownership transfer of aged care services

A transfer can occur between two existing services when ownership is
changed. When a transfer of ownership occurs, the allocated places are
transferred from the approved provider selling the aged care service, to
the purchaser of the aged care service. Only approved providers can
receive transferred places.

Related links

Advances in the Aged Care Management Payments System (ACMPS)

Advances for residential aged care services

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Bank account details for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
