
Home Equity Access Scheme 065-08000000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) to
help Service Officers answer enquiries from customers, and escalate for
more complex questions.

Government intent

Customers and self-funded retirees who are Age Pension age (or partnered
to a person who is) can access equity in their Australian real estate
asset(s) under the Home Equity Access Scheme to supplement their
retirement income.

Service Officer role in the Scheme

The role of Service Officers (frontline and telephony) is to:

answer basic questions about the Scheme using this and related
Operational Blueprint

provide information such as the Scheme eligibility

accept and help customers to lodge the Scheme claims (Home Equity Access
Scheme partnered application form (SA310) or Home Equity Access Scheme
single application form (SA496), see Resources for links) and
appropriate documentation and scan to the customer and partners (if
applicable) record to be sent to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

refer the customer to the:

-   Services Australia Home Equity Access Scheme website. See the
    Resources page for a link
-   Services Australia Payment and Service Finder online tool to see if
    they might be eligible. This will also estimate how much they can
    borrow. See the Resources page for a link

refer an authenticated Scheme customer to the Pension Loans Scheme
Summary screen in the Centrelink online account for their loan
information

print a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497) for the
customer, see the Resources page for a link

for more complex questions:

-   refer the customer to the Financial Information Service (FIS), or
-   escalate to Home Equity Access Scheme Complex Assessment Officers
    (see Escalating enquiries to Complex Assessment Officers (CAO)
    below)

Changes to the Scheme loan payments

Customers can request variations to their loan, including:

-   settling the loan
-   stopping their loan payments
-   changing the property the loan is secured against
-   restarting their loan payments
-   changing the fortnightly loan payment
-   changing or adding a maximum loan amount
-   changing or adding a nominated amount

Issue the customer with the SA497 form which can be accessed from the
Resources page.

Escalate enquiries to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

Do not escalate general enquires about claim timeliness or the progress
of a claim.

If a customer asks about their Scheme claim, confirm a claim has been
lodged and advise it will be allocated for processing in due course.

If the customer asks for priority processing, see Immediate new claim
and non-new claim priority processing to assess the customer’s
circumstances. Requests for urgent processing may be appropriate if
Service Officers identify a customer as being at risk.

Financial hardship provisions do not apply to the processing of Scheme
claims, however if the customer asks for priority processing, see
Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship.

Enquiry types that may be escalated include:

-   a request to vary or cease an existing Scheme loan arrangement
-   making a repayment or settling a Scheme loan
-   when instructed by Operational Blueprint

To escalate an enquiry to a CAO, see Home Equity Access Scheme .

Scheme Frequently Asked Questions for Service Officers

The Resources page includes commonly asked questions and answers about
the Scheme to help front line and telephony Service Officers.

What is the Scheme

The Scheme is a voluntary arrangement that provides financial support to
customers in the form of a non-taxable, government funded loan.

The loan:

-   accrues compound interest, currently 3.95% each fortnight until
    repaid in full
-   is secured against Australian real estate owned by the customer
    and/or partner

Customers:

can repay the loan electronically in full or in part at any time through
their Centrelink online account or BPAY even though there are no
mandatory repayments

must settle the loan:

-   at the sale of the secured property, or
-   through the deceased customer’s estate

The Scheme loans are paid each fortnight for a short or indefinite
period until their loan balance reaches their Maximum Loan Amount. The
Maximum Loan Amount is based on the age of the customer and partner (if
applicable) and how much equity there is to offer as security. Lump sum
loans are not currently available through this scheme.

Advise customers they should seek independent legal or financial advice
before applying for a loan under the Scheme.

Background

The original Scheme was set up in 1985 when the assets test was
introduced.

On 10 July 1996, a new scheme commenced and new applications were no
longer accepted under the old provisions.

On 1 July 2019, the current scheme expanded:

-   to increase the maximum fortnightly loan rate, and
-   the eligibility criteria to allow more people to participate

Before 1 July 2019, to be eligible the customer’s qualifying payment
rate had to be a reduced rate because of their income or assets. Nil
rate customers could apply as long as their pension rate was reduced to
nil by only one (not both) of the income or assets tests. These
requirements were removed from 1 July 2019, enabling maximum rate
pensioners to participate in the scheme, and people who are not eligible
for a pension under both the income test and assets test.

On 1 January 2022, the Scheme was renamed to the Home Equity Access
Scheme.

Eligibility criteria for the Scheme

See Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme and Home Equity Access
Scheme - only customers for information.

Home Equity Access Scheme claims

See Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan for information including
required documentation.

Impact of the Scheme on other income support payments

The loan amount a customer owes under the Scheme can be deducted from
the value of the customer's assessable real estate for social security
payments or benefits.

As the amount owing increases with each payment made under the Scheme:

-   the value of the customer's assessable assets may decrease
    (depending on whether the value of the asset is appreciating)
-   their pension payable under the assets test may increase, and
-   this may lead to the customer’s fortnightly loan amount reducing

No reduction in the overall value of assessable assets occurs where the
person's principal home is the security for the loan as this is an
exempt or non-assessable asset. The only exception is when the principal
home is partly assessable because the house and curtilage exceeds 2
hectares and does not meet the extended land use test.

Home Equity Access Scheme only customers

The Scheme is also open to self-funded retirees so long as they qualify
for (but not necessarily receive) one of the qualifying pensions.

This may be because they:

-   are not eligible to receive a pension under the income and assets
    test, or
-   have chosen not to claim a pension

Customers who receive their entire payment as a Scheme loan without any
qualifying payment components are ‘the loan-only’ customers. These
customers do not meet the definition of an income support payment (ISP)
recipient, as they do not receive a payable rate of a social security
pension or benefit.

Service Officers can identify a loan-only customer if the Scheme
qualifying payment is Current Zero Rate (CZR) because of nil rate reason
PLS.

The loan-only customers are not entitled to a Pensioner Concession Card
(PCC). However some customers may have a grandfathered entitlement to a
non-pensioner PCC (see Pensioner Concession Cards (PCC) for details).
Customers who wish to test their eligibility for a concession card can
lodge an online claim for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

Payment method

-   The Scheme loan payments are paid as a rate component of the
    qualifying pension
-   Loan payments display on the Payment Details (PD) screen as a ‘LON’
    component
-   For the loan-only customers, this is the only component that
    displays
-   The loan information displays on the Pension Loans Scheme Summary
    screen in the customer’s Centrelink online account

Rate payable

The maximum Scheme rate payable per fortnight is 150% of the maximum
payment rate of the qualifying payment (1.5 times the maximum payment
rate of the qualifying payment).

The maximum payment rate is the sum of the maximum basic rate of
pension, and any supplements (for example, Pension Supplement and Energy
Supplement) and Rent Assistance a person is eligible for.

Customers provide a nominated amount they want to receive per fortnight
(p/f). They can either choose to receive:

-   the maximum amount available (loan type ‘maximum’), being 150% (1.5
    times) the maximum payment rate
-   a percentage that is lower than 150% (loan type ‘percent’). For
    example, 120% p/f (maximum payment rate x 1.2) or 80% (maximum
    payment rate x 0.8), or
-   a fixed flat rate (loan type ‘fixed’) for example, $500 p/f

If a customer gets a pension:

the loan is added to the pension each fortnight

the combined amount of pension and loan can’t exceed 150% of the maximum
payment rate

the loan amount will automatically increase or decrease:

-   if their pension rate changes in order to maintain their chosen
    percentage for that fortnight (which may be 150% or a lower percent)

if a customer does not want their loan amount to increase over a certain
amount:

-   they can choose to receive a fixed loan amount each fortnight

the combined fixed rate of loan and actual pension rate can’t exceed
150% of the maximum rate of pension

If the customer or their partner received a Department of Veterans'
Affairs disability payment before 1 January 2022, their maximum payment
rate for the Scheme purposes would have been affected by any Defence
Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA) they received. The maximum Scheme
rate was reduced by the amount of DFISA received. This was to ensure
that a person couldn’t receive more in income support payments than the
maximum payment rate.

The Resources page has examples of rates payable.

Maximum Loan Amount (MLA)

The MLA:

is the loan balance at which a person’s fortnightly payments will stop

depends on:

-   the value of their equity in Australian real estate, and
-   their Scheme age component based on the customer’s age, or in some
    cases their partner’s age if they are younger

is not necessarily a fixed set amount

is re-calculated:

-   at least once every 12 months when the person’s age component is
    reassessed on their (or their younger partner’s) birthday
-   when there’s a change in circumstances (for example, changed value
    of the secured real estate, separation)

Complex Assessment Officers (CAO) assess MLA at the time of claim.

The customer:

can ask to change their MLA at any time via a SA497

can increase their MLA if they have enough loan security for the higher
amount:

-   if partnered, their partner must give written approval to increase
    the MLA
    Note: even if the partner is not named as an owner in the title
    certificate or title search of the property

Any requests to change the MLA can be done by completing a SA497.

See Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme on how the MLA is
calculated.

The Resources page contains links to a SA497 and to the Payment and
Service Finder on the Services Australia website. This is where
customers are asked questions to see if they qualify for the Home Equity
Access Scheme.

The Scheme loan balance, legal costs and compound interest

The Scheme loan balance

The amount the customer must repay to the Commonwealth.

It is:

-   the sum of the principal loan payments made to the customer
-   plus legal costs
-   plus previously accrued interest
-   less any repayments made by the customer

Compound interest

Interest is charged on the loan balance each fortnight until the
outstanding loan balance is repaid in full.

As of 1 January 2022, the interest rate for the Scheme is 3.95% per
annum – compounding fortnightly.

Compound interest:

-   increases the amount the customer must repay to the Commonwealth,
    and
-   may mean the person’s total loan balance increases beyond their
    Maximum Loan Amount (MLA)

The interest rate is set by the Minister for Families and Social
Services, and is published in the Australian Government Gazette.

Annual loan statement

Sent to customers around their (or their younger partner’s) birthday and
includes:

-   information about the loan amount paid
-   the interest accrued
-   the costs associated (such as legal costs)
-   the transaction (e.g. payments, repayments, interest accrual) on the
    loan

Legal costs

Costs incurred by the Commonwealth in registering, changing and removing
the charge and/or caveat on the real estate used by the customer to
secure repayment of the loan.

These costs:

-   depend on the customer’s circumstances (e.g. how many properties
    they offer)
-   are payable by the customer
-   get added to their Scheme loan balance
-   accrue compound interest

The agency notifies the customer in writing when the legal costs are
added. The customer can choose to pay the costs immediately or at
another time.

Changing fortnightly loan payments

A customer can change their fortnightly loan payment at any time. The
request can be done by completing a SA497signed by the customer and
their partner (if they are a member of a couple). See Escalating
enquires to CAOs below for more information.

Customer requests to cease loan payments

A customer may request to cease their loan payments at any time. The
request must be made in writing via a SA497 as required by Section
1142(3) of the Social Security Act 1991.

Interest will continue to accrue on the outstanding loan amount,
compounding fortnightly, until it is fully recovered.

Advise the customer that their request can be done by completing a
SA497. This will need to be signed by the customer and their partner (if
they are a member of a couple).

-   Notify the Scheme team of the customer’s request by using Fast
    Note > Complex Assessment > Request for CAO action > CAO Pension
    Loans Scheme

Note: to be correctly followed up, do not close the Fast Note.

The Resources page contains a link to a SA497.

Repaying the Scheme loans

Electronic repayments are available using BPAY and credit and debit
cards through Centrelink online account.

There are no mandatory repayments over the life of the loan.

The outstanding loan amount must be repaid:

immediately, when the property used to secure the loan is sold, or

in the event of the customers death or the death of their surviving
partner (if applicable)

-   the loan amount will be recovered from their estate unless a
    surviving partner is over Aged Pension age, and
-   a Deceased Estate Letter is sent followed by a Deceased Loan
    Statement to the executor

See Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans for information.

The Resources page contains:

-   examples demonstrating the different Scheme fortnightly loan amounts
    payable
-   customer frequently asked questions about the Scheme
-   link to PLS National contacts
-   the Scheme forms, and
-   the Home Equity Access Scheme grant and projection calculator

Contents

Initial contact by customers applying for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Related links

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Search for existing and adding new records to the Income Security
Integrated System (ISIS)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Assessing Home Equity Access Scheme applications

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme outstanding loan
amount

Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme loan amounts

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Home Equity Access Scheme cancellations and rejections

Calculation of Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
