
Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) 065-01010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers claim the PBBP.

Description of PBBP

The PBBP is a tax free lump sum payable to the surviving partner of a
deceased member of the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) who died on or after 1
January 2008 and had not previously been paid Age Pension or Pension
Bonus Payment before they passed away.

No payment is made to the estate of a single person who died before
claiming Age Pension and the Pension Bonus.

PBS closed to new registrations

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) was closed to new entrants who do not qualify
for Age Pension before 20 September 2009.

The PBS is closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014. Applications to
register in the PBS that were lodged or deemed to be lodged before 1
July 2014 can be processed per existing procedures.

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their Pension
Bonus in due course, in line with existing arrangements. The closure of
the Scheme does not prevent the surviving partner of a PBS member from
claiming a PBBP.

Requirements for PBBP

The PBBP is based on 100% of the deceased person's entitlement to the
Pension Bonus immediately prior to their death. The bonus calculation
excludes the deceased person's and/or their partner's PBBP employment
income and any compensation payments.

There are specific requirements for PBBP. The deceased person must:

-   have died on or after 1 January 2008 and their death must be
    verified
-   have been partnered at the time of death
-   have been an Australian resident for the purposes of social security
    law at the time of death (not necessarily in Australia at the time
    of death - as long as their absence was temporary)
-   have been registered for the PBS
-   have accumulated at least 1 full year bonus period and met the work
    test while accruing the bonus period
-   have met the residential requirements for PBBP for example must have
    been able to qualify for Age Pension without the use of an
    international agreement to satisfy residence criteria
-   have not previously received a pension bonus
-   since being qualified for Age Pension, have not received an income
    support payment, apart from Carer Payment or have not received a
    Department of Veterans' Affairs income support payment since
    reaching service pension age

In addition, the customer must:

-   be an Australian resident for the purposes of social security law at
    the time of claim
-   be physically in Australia at the time of claim
-   provide identity documentation
-   have been partnered to the PBS member at the time the PBS member
    died

Verification

The following additional documents must be provided when a claim for the
Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) is lodged. The customer will
need to provide:

-   Verification of partner's death.
-   Their partner's evidentiary certificates or work records. If the
    customer does not have evidentiary certificates or for any periods
    the evidentiary certificates do not cover, a record of all work
    performed must be provided to show they had met the work test.

The Resources page contains a link to the claim for Pension Bonus
Bereavement Payment (SA388).

Related links

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Residence requirements

Qualification for Age Pension

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Types of Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
