
Assessing Age Pension (Blind) claims 065-04020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for actioning an Age Pension (Blind)
claim for customers who are not in receipt of an income support payment.

Claim lodgement

A customer who is currently on an income support payment and wishes to
transfer to Age Pension (Blind) may not need to complete a claim form.
For more information on eligibility and procedures required for the
transfer, see Transfer to Age Pension (Blind).

Early claims

Age Pension (Blind) claims can be lodged up to 13 weeks prior to
qualification for Age Pension, where customers are yet to reach Age
Pension age. The start date for payment will be the date the person
qualifies.

If a customer is qualified for Age Pension (Blind) but not payable on
the date they lodged their claim:

-   early claim provisions do not apply
-   start day rules may apply a later start if a change of circumstances
    applies within 13 weeks of claim lodgement

See Calculating the start day general rule.

Income and assets tests

Age Pension (Blind) customers who are Age Pension age and permanently
blind do not need to disclose their income and assets unless they wish
to claim Rent Assistance (RA) or their partner is in receipt of or
wishes to claim an income support payment in their own right, for
example Carer Payment (CP), (and is not also blind).

Income and asset test free pensioners will receive the basic rate of
pension and may be entitled to the Pension Supplement as well as other
additional products and services.

Effect of receiving other payments on Age Pension (Blind) rate

If a customer is granted Age Pension (Blind) under a provision of an
International Social Security Agreement then the direct deduction rules
will apply, this includes any customer granted a New Zealand Government
payment as these will also have the direct deduction rules applied.

Although foreign income would not usually affect the customer's rate of
payment (if paid free of the income and assets test), Age Pension
(Blind) customers are still required to pursue their comparable foreign
payment entitlements.

The compensation provisions impact on Age Pension (Blind) in the same
way they affect Age Pension - a direct deduction or a preclusion period
may apply.

Self-Employment Allowance affects Age Pension (Blind) in the same way it
affects Age Pension. Self-Employment Allowance is not assessed as
income, however it is are a direct deduction.

DVA payments and Age Pension (Blind)

A customer cannot receive Age Pension (Blind) and either a Service
Pension, Veteran Payment, or an Income Support Supplement (ISS) from the
Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA). If a customer receives a War
Widow(er)'s Pension (WWP), the date of grant of the WWP will determine
if they are precluded from receiving Age Pension.

If the customer receives any of the following DVA payments, they are not
entitled to receive the Pension Supplement:

-   War Widow(er)'s Pension
-   Disability Compensation Payment at Special Rate (Totally Permanently
    Incapacitated (TPI))
-   Extreme Disablement Adjustment
-   DVA Telephone Allowance
-   DVA Veteran Supplement at the Telephone Allowance (VST) or high rate
    (VSH)
-   An increased rate of Disability Compensation Payment because of
    being an amputee
-   Prior to 20 September 2009 - the person's partner is a World War 1
    veteran. These veterans will receive a full refund of their
    telephone rental from DVA. In these cases a low rate of TAL is
    payable to the partners of these customers. This will occur unless
    the partner fails to qualify in their own right or the couple are
    illness separated. From 20 September 2009 TAL is no longer payable
    by DVA, it was replaced by Veterans Supplement

Letters

Customers in receipt of Age Pension (Blind) can choose to receive their
Centrelink letters in an alternative format.

The Resources page contains links to the Income and Assets form (SA369),
Income and Assets form (MOD IA) and Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) form and CO153 – A guide to
concession cards.

Related links

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind)

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Assessing permanent blindness

Alternative letter formats for customers receiving Disability Support
Pension (DSP) (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
