
Restoration of Age Pension 065-03080030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to restore a customer's Age Pension when
qualification has been re-established after cancellation or suspension
of payment.

Criteria for restoring payment

Restoration of a suspended pension may occur as a result of:

-   a change of circumstances, or
-   a favourable review of the decision to stop payment

When a customer's circumstances change, Service Officers must update the
details before restoring payment. This avoids generating incorrect
arrears.

Establish the customer's ongoing eligibility and restart payments from
the date they become eligible again.

Customers released from prison

Before restoring a customer's payment first confirm the date the
customer was released from prison. This is confirmed via contact with
the appropriate state authority.

Cancellation or suspension reason Whereabouts Unknown (WUK)

As long as the customer has continued to be qualified and payable during
the entire period of suspension/cancellation (or eligible for an
employment income nil rate), their payment may be restored with full
arrears.

This can occur when the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the
suspension/ cancellation decision and they are taken not to have
received advice of the decision. For example, if they were not at their
known address or if the advice was returned to Services Australia.

Some Age Pension customers admitted to residential aged care are unable
to advise their change of address due to, for example, infirmity.
Customers living in residential aged care will have a current RCA
benefit status. The name of the aged care home will display on the RCA
Institution Summary (RIS) screen. Take care to check these details when
reviewing suspended WUK cases.

Restoring payment

The date of effect is the date of the original suspend/cancel decision
when a customer has a favourable determination (restoration) resulting
from a review of the decision. This includes when payment cancels after
it has been suspended for 13 weeks, because the cancellation date of
effect is the same as the suspension date of effect. See the References
page.

If the customer contacts within 13 weeks of the decision to suspend or
cancel, check their circumstances to determine if full arrears are
payable. Payment can be restored from the date of effect of suspension
or cancellation if they:

-   retained qualification from the date of effect of the decision, and
-   they were payable or eligible for an employment income nil rate
    period

If they contact more than 13 weeks after the later of the decision to
suspend or cancel, check if it is possible they may not have received
advice of the decision to suspend/cancel. If so, payment can be restored
from the date of effect of the suspension or cancellation, providing the
customer retained qualification and they were payable or eligible for an
employment income nil rate period.

If the customer's payment was cancelled incorrectly, it can be restored
when the error has been corrected. For example, CAN-NSR due to
incomplete or wrongly recorded residence details.

A customer is required to reclaim if their payment cannot be restored
from the date of effect of the suspension or cancellation. For the
reclaim process, see Initial contact to claim Age Pension.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Cancellation of Age Pension

Suspension of Age Pension

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes

Customer initiated review of decision

Re-claim for Age Pension

Reviews and appeals

Confirming prison admission and release dates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
