
Matching new care recipients via External Customer Match Listing (ECML) 065-19111818

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of matching an Aged Care Management
Payment System (ACMPS) record to a Customer First record via External
Customer Match Listing (ECML).

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Aged care – matching new care recipients

ECML is an automatic matching process that occurs between ACMPS and
Customer First when a care recipient has entered either residential or
home care and ACMPS receives the date of entry. ACMPS locates a matching
Customer First record, the ACMPS and Customer First records are linked
and a new entry event is populated on the RCA Institution Summary (RIS)
screen. This creates a claim activity (RCA/NCL or RCA/HOM) in Customer
First. The claim activity will complete automatically when the care
recipient meets the criteria for this to occur.

The Indexing Manager Facility consists of a number of External Customer
Match (ECM) screens used in the identification and linking of mutual
customers for the purposes of customer data exchange between Centrelink
and external agencies. If ACMPS cannot determine an exact match due to
unclear or multiple records, it creates a match request on the ECM
screens to be actioned manually. A match should not be finalised unless
it is certain that the ACMPS and Customer First records belong to the
same care recipient.

ACMPS is unable to determine an exact match with a care recipient’s
Customer First record when:

-   the name, date of birth and/or address details in ACMPS do not match
    Customer First
-   there are multiple or intertwined ACMPS records and one is already
    linked to a Customer First record
-   multiple CRNs exist, or
-   there is no Customer First record

Address details

It is common for matches to fail when care recipients enter care. In
residential care, a service provider may code the address of the
facility as the care recipient’s address, which does not match the
residential address coded in Customer First. In both home and
residential care, the care recipient details contained in an Aged Care
Assessment may be incorrect and will not match details recorded in
Customer First. When this happens, the match will fail.

The Resources page contains an email template for escalating
multiple/intertwined records.

Related links

Accelerated Claimant Matching (ACM) System

Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care means assessment

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged care systems and data exchange

Multiple ACMPS records remediation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
