[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various accommodation choices available to
older Australians.

Government intent

When a customer is retirement age or nearing retirement age, they may
decide to change their accommodation to suit their needs. Home and
residence choices can affect the assessment of income and assets,
entitlement to Rent Assistance (RA) and in some cases eligibility for
payment.

Customers with care needs may choose from a range of care options,
including home care, transition care or residential care. Services
Australia provides home care income test assessments and residential
aged care asset and income means test assessments for customers.

If a customer or family member is considering care options, they can
have a face-to-face appointment with an Aged Care Specialist Officer
(ACSO) if there is one available in their area. ACSOs provide free,
independent and confidential end-to-end access and navigation services
for aged care including;

The Aged Care General Service Officer (GSO)

Access and navigation of My Aged Care services

In-depth information on the different types of aged care services

-   Help at Home (Commonwealth Home Support Programme, Home Care
    Packages)
-   Short term care (Respite and transition care)
-   Aged Care homes (permanent residential aged care)

If an ACSO is not available in the customers local area, they (or their
family member) can be referred to the Financial Information Service
(FIS) if they request an interview in relation to their home and
residence choices.

Customers can speak to a Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer
about their accommodation options. FIS is a free education and expert
information service provided by the Government. FIS helps people make
informed decisions about investment and financial issues by helping them
to understand their own financial affairs and options. The service is
available by phone, appointment and through seminars.

Home and residence choices or changes

The accommodation choices or changes are numerous and are not limited by
the following:

-   retirement villages
-   residential care/aged care
-   granny flat provisions
-   caravan parks/mobile homes
-   transferring a farm
-   deprivation/gifting
-   reverse mortgages
-   illness separation of a couple
-   vacating principal home due to illness
-   respite care
-   life interest in a home
-   changing address to more suitable accommodation
-   travelling
-   nominees

The Resources page contains links to organisations customers can be
referred to for more information.

Contents

Retirement villages

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

Related links

Aged Care

My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSO)

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Assessing a life interest in a home

Granny flat provisions

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Assessment of asset value of Home Equity Conversion loans and Reverse
Mortgages

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Change of address to an aged care home

Deprivation related to the transfer of a farm to a close relative

Determining home owners and non-homeowners

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Purchasing another residence

Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

Selling a home

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Vacation of home to enter care situation (INH) reviews

Vacation of principal home to provide care

Updating address details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
