
Pension Bonus Top-up Payment (PBTP) 065-07010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains eligibility for a PBTP.

PBTP eligibility

A customer who has received a Pension Bonus payment may be entitled to a
PBTP if:

-   their Age Pension rate increases within the 13 weeks after the start
    day of Age Pension, and
-   the increase is due to a reduction in the assessment of their income
    or assets

The PBTP was implemented for all Age Pension customers granted with a
start date on or after 1 January 2008.

PBTP is a tax-free payment. The PBTP is not a second bonus payment, it
is a recalculation of the original bonus amount. Note: the PBTP does not
apply to Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment.

A customer does not qualify for a top-up payment if the increase in Age
Pension rate was solely due to a Consumer Price Index (CPI) change to
the maximum rate of pension or a CPI change to the income and assets
limits or a change to the amount of Direct Deduction assessed.

1 July 2014 Pension Bonus Scheme changes

The Pension Bonus Scheme is closed to new registrations from 1 July 2014

As part of the Government's Secure and Sustainable Pension Reforms, the
PBS closed to new entrants who did not qualify for Age Pension before 20
September 2009.

All existing members may remain in the scheme and claim their Pension
Bonus Payments in due course, in line with existing arrangements. The
closure of the scheme does not affect an existing customer's entitlement
to a PBTP.

How the PBTP is calculated

All manual PBTP calculations are to be undertaken by the seniors
processing centre (PCT).

The Pension Bonus Payment (PBP) is calculated based on the rate of Age
Pension on the start day when granted. For a top-up qualifying event,
there must have been a reduction in the assessed value of the person's
income/assets which caused an increase in pension rate within the 13
weeks after the start day of Age Pension.

The customer may be entitled to a higher bonus payment using the new
rate. The system automatically determines if the customer may be
entitled to a PBTP. The assessment is generally done at week 16.

The customer does not need to apply for the PBTP. In most cases, the
system will complete the assessment and notify the customer. No
rejection letter issues when the customer is not entitled to the PBTP if
the assessment is part of the automatic review.

If a customer wants to apply for a formal review about not receiving a
PBTP, they should apply for a formal review of the original amount of
PBP paid.

PBTP is not subject to income management.

The automatic PBTP may be paid at week 16 if a customer or their partner
is paid employment income for longer than one entitlement period (LOP)
and it is assessed for 13 weeks or more. Refer these cases to the
retirements helpdesk when processing the claim.

Qualifying event for PBTP

For PBTP purposes, a qualifying event occurs when a customer's rate of
Age Pension increases because of a decrease in Centrelink's assessment
of a customer's income and assets which can be due to:

-   a decrease in the customer's income and/or assets as notified by the
    customer
-   a change in the exchange rate used to assess the customer's foreign
    income
-   a change in the deeming rate used to assess a customer's financial
    investments
-   a change in the deeming thresholds at which the different deeming
    rates are applied

A qualifying event does not occur when a change of Age Pension rate is
solely due to the following events:

-   CPI changes to the rate of payment or other regular non means tested
    changes (for example, changes to allowable income and assets
    thresholds or child free thresholds)
-   Change to direct deduction amounts, and/or
-   change in marital status

A customer whose Age Pension rate increases only because of these
reasons is not qualified for a PBTP.

Recalculation of original PBP

If the customer's original PBP is underpaid due to error, for example
income or assets incorrectly reported or coded, the error should be
corrected however, the customer will have to wait until 16 weeks from
the start day of Age Pension to receive the PBTP automatically. An
interim manual top-up cannot be paid.

Stimulus customers

If a customer is subject to reporting requirements, a top-up should not
be paid in respect of a period for which reporting requirements have not
yet been fulfilled.

Customer's payment is suspended or cancelled

If the customer's payment is suspended at week 16 when the PBTP would
have been calculated no assessment will be made. The top-up payment is
to be made automatically at the next available opportunity, for example:

-   if the record is restored, the top-up is calculated when payment is
    restored
-   if the record is cancelled, the top-up is calculated automatically
    via the cancellation process

If the customer's payment is cancelled within the 13 weeks after the
start day or the customer dies within the 13 weeks after grant of Age
Pension the PBTP assessment will be triggered immediately.

Manual calculation

A manual calculation will be required if:

-   the customer has a change in marital status within the 13 week
    period after the start day of Age Pension and their rate is affected
    by a reduction in their income or assets
-   a customer has previously received a PBTP but has since had a
    reassessment backdated to a date that falls within the 13 week
    period following the start day of pension. A second PBTP can be paid
    even though arrears of Age Pension may not be payable

Overpayments

There is no overpayment assessed against the PBP if the customer's rate
should go down in the initial 13 week period after the start day of Age
Pension (providing the reduction was not due to a misrepresentation of
circumstances applicable at grant).

The Resources page contains a list of the Manual Follow Up (MFU)
keywords for PBTPs.

Related links

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
