
Completing the Claim for Age Pension and Pension Bonus (SA002) 065-03020010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how to help customers complete the Claim for Age
Pension and Pension Bonus (SA002).

On this Page:

Claiming entitlements

[] Customers are encouraged to claim online. See Claiming Age Pension.

Claims for Age Pension (including Age Pension Blind) and Pension Bonus
Payment (PBP) can be made by completing a combined claim form (SA002)
and submitting it either by post or nearest Service Centre.

Partners claiming entitlements

The SA002 includes partner details. If the partner is also claiming Age
Pension at the same time as the customer, they can both claim on the one
form. However, if they wish to provide their details individually for
privacy reasons, they can complete and lodge separate forms.

Lodging a claim involves 4 steps:

-   complete the form
-   collect all documents needed
-   arrange an interview
-   lodge the claim with supporting documents as required, for example
    Identity documentation, proof of age or income

Customers intending to claim Pension Bonus

Financial Information Service Officer

Service Officers must recommend to customers registered in the Pension
Bonus Scheme that they contact a Financial Information Service (FIS)
Officer before they lodge their claim for Age Pension and the Pension
Bonus Payment (PBP).

Maximising a customer's entitlement to PBP may depend on various
factors. The date a customer finishes work may not be the same as the
date their bonus period ends. Customers may disadvantage themselves by
lodging a claim too early or too late. See Initial contact to claim
Pension Bonus Payment (PBP).

A FIS contact will determine the best time for the customer to lodge
their PBP claim based on their circumstances.

Pension Supplement

As part of the new claim process, the customer will be asked if they
wish to receive the Pension Supplement quarterly. Customers can elect to
have the minimum amount of the Pension Supplement withheld from their
fortnightly payment and instead receive a lump sum payment after each
instalment date.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
the Claim for Age Pension and Pension Bonus (SA002) and Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) forms, and the terms and
conditions of Electronic Messaging.

Related links

Completing the Income and Assets (SA369)

Claiming Age Pension

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Exemptions from income and assets tests for superannuation investments

Pension Supplement

Types of Centrelink records

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
