
Advances for residential aged care services 065-13100010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about processing advance payments for
residential care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Calculation of advance payments

Residential aged care services who have submitted their current monthly
claim are entitled to receive an advance payment for the forthcoming
month.

An advance is calculated on an aged care service's entitlement for the
period 2 months prior to the advance month and pro-rated for the number
of calendar days in the advance month. The advance calculation excludes
any subsidy entitlements paid retrospectively in the previous claim
month. That is, the advance calculation only takes into account actual
entitlements for the claim month and not retrospective entitlements for
previous months.

Advance payments

Advances made to a residential aged care service for each month of a
financial year are displayed in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Dates relating to when these payments were created and paid are also
displayed. See Advances in the Aged Care Management Payments System
(ACMPS) for processing advance payments in ACMPS.

Vary or top up advance

It may be appropriate to vary or top up a residential aged care
service's monthly advance. For example, for a new service that may have
been underpaid in their initial start-up advance.

Prevent an advance that has not been calculated

The Department of Health and Aged Care may advise that a reduced advance
amount should be paid to a residential aged care service. This is
usually due to a planned closure, when full payment would result in
overpayment of Commonwealth, subsidy creating a debt to the
Commonwealth, requiring recovery action.

Suspend an advance

An advance may be suspended when formal notification is received from
the Department of Health and Aged Care that a residential aged care
service is closing, or its ownership is being transferred to another
approved service. The suspension is put in place to minimise/avoid the
overpayment of subsidy which could result in a debt.

An advance may also be suspended where a service is in the hands of a
receiver. A residential aged care service can also request for an
advance suspension to be in place.

Unsuspend an advance

Where a suspension was put in place due to the transfer of ownership of
a service to a new approved service, the suspension can be lifted when
the new banking details have been received (from the service), keyed and
verified in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Manual advances

A manual advance is an amount that is calculated manually.

Manual advances can be paid to a service for various reasons and are
actioned on a case by case basis.

Create manual advance for a new service

An advance payment will be made for a new service when:

-   formal notification has been received from the Department of Health
    and Aged Care that the service has commenced operation
-   banking details have been received from the approved service for the
    new service and entered onto the applicable systems

Manual advances are made for the first 2 months of operation of the
service. They are based on a 2 month projected occupancy level obtained
from the service.

Create manual advance for a closing service

An advance payment can be made to a closing residential aged care
service when the Department of Health and Aged Care has notified that
the service is due to close.

Manual advances for a closing residential aged care service take into
account:

-   the number of occupied operational places within the service, and
-   the timing of the closure to ensure that the service is not overpaid
    and incurs a debt

The calculation is based on:

-   the average subsidy per day per care recipient x number of care
    recipients for a month x number of days the service will be open in
    the final month
-   minus any held over amounts from the previous claim period

Monthly advance not received

Advance payments to aged care services are made during the first week of
each month. The advance is based on the claim for the period 2 months
prior to the advance. The advance calculation date is generally the last
working day of the month.

Note: the exceptions to the rule are the January and July advances.

January advances

January advances are paid in December to assist aged care services with
budgets and payments during the holiday period.

July advances

July advances may be paid a day or 2 later than normal whilst Services
Australia waits for appropriation of funds to be distributed by the
Department of Finance for the new financial year.

The following is a list of reasons why a service may not have received
their advance payment:

-   There is a pending sale or closure of the service and the advances
    have been suspended
-   The service's 'accreditation to' or 'approval to' dates may have
    lapsed
-   The service's claim for the previous period may not have been
    received, processed and paid before the date the monthly advances
    are calculated
-   There is a large negative held over amount from the previous claim
    month which exceeds what the advance would have been
-   There is an unverified adjustment
-   There is a system problem preventing the advance payment from being
    approved

New services

For new services the first 2 monthly advances must be input manually as
no 'Auto' advance calculation will occur as there is no previous subsidy
entitlement history on which to base an entitlement estimate.

To verify if the service is a new service, check the advance payment
history on the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Manual advances for an expired accreditation service

Where an accreditation for a residential aged care service expires
during the month of an advance, an auto advance payment will not be
generated. A manual advance for a part advance payment needs to be
calculated and entered onto the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP).

Manual advance payment queries

If there are any problems with processing a manual advance payment,
contact the Aged Care and Allied Health Branch for assistance.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Aged Care.

Related links

Advances in the Aged Care Management Payments System (ACMPS)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Reports in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
