
Lodgement of the Notice of Assessment (NOA) and other evidence of income for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what documentation is acceptable proof of income
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) and how to update the
information.

On this Page:

Original documents not required

The customer does not have to supply original copies of the Notice of
Assessment (NOA) and other supporting documents, such as payment
summaries and income tax returns, copies are acceptable.

The type of income the customer has will determine what type of
verification of income is required. Not all information recorded on the
tax return is on a NOA, so further information or verification may be
required.

From 1 January 2015 deemed income from account-based income streams will
be included in the CSHC income test. Customer or partner must provide a
Details of income stream product form (SA330) or similar schedule from
their provider, before a new account-based income stream can be added or
updates to an existing account-based income stream can be recorded. See
Adding or updating an account-based income stream.

Verification of income

The CSHC claim process requires verification of income for the Income
test qualification:

-   Customer (and partner) must provide a NOA for the same reference
    year (the tax year immediately prior to the current tax year)
-   If the customer (and partner) is unable to provide a NOA for the
    reference year, then an NOA for the previous year to the reference
    year may be provided
-   If the customer (or partner) is required to lodge yet cannot provide
    a NOA for the either of the two financial years before the current
    financial year as they have an extension to lodge, or suspension of
    enforcement action on outstanding income tax returns granted by the
    Australian Taxation Office (ATO), must provide evidence from the
    ATO. This must also be supported with other relevant documents for
    verification of income for the financial year
-   If the customer (and partner) has declared their combined income
    will be lower in the current financial year, then evidence to
    support the reason and verification of income, is required
-   If the customer (or partner) is not required to lodge a tax return
    for the relevant tax year, they need to provide other relevant
    documents for verification of income for the financial year
-   If the customer (or partner) meet all other CSHC qualification
    criteria, and they declare ZERO income for the current financial
    year, then no documentation for the verification of income is
    required

For partnered cases, the customer and partner must provide the tax
Notice of Assessment or other financial documents (if not required to
lodge) for the same year.

If the customer is unable to meet the income requirements, the CSHC
claim must be rejected.

To determine if the declaration of income supports the correct claim
outcome, the decision to accept the verification provided rests with the
delegate.

When a customer advises that they have little or nil income, then they
should consider applying for Age Pension. The customer may not be
eligible for Age Pension if they are excluded due to the assets test or
residential qualifications. For more information, see Qualification of
Age Pension.

CSHC income reviews

Services Australia and the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) match
records twice a year. Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) data received from
the ATO when matched with CSHC customers may result in an intervention
where income details exceed the applicable income threshold for the
relevant tax year.

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference tax
year

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Processing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
