
Supported Residential Services (SRS) 065-11020000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment process for when a customer moves
into a Supported Residential Service (SRS).

On this Page:

About Supported Residential Services

SRSs operate privately in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and
South Australia. They offer supported accommodation to older people and
people with a disability.

They differ from Residential Aged Care because an Aged Care Assessment
Team (ACAT) assessment is not required to enter a SRS and a SRS does not
receive funding from the Department of Social Services. They also differ
from retirement villages as they are not regulated under state
retirement village legislation.

In some cases the SRS will provide care services for some of their
residents. In these situations the customer's assessment will depend
upon the level of care provided by the SRS and whether the customer has
paid a lump sum as a condition of entry.

SRS - care situation

In situations where a customer needs and is likely to receive a
substantial level of care in the SRS for at least 14 consecutive days,
the customer may be considered to be in a care situation for social
security Assets Test and Rent Assistance (RA) purposes. The customer
meets the definition of a care situation for the purposes of section
13(9) of the Social Security Act 1991, as the SRS is considered to be a
'private residence'.

If the customer owns their home, and vacates it to permanently enter a
care situation in an SRS, the former home will be exempt from the Assets
Test for 2 years from the date the customer first enters the care
situation in accordance with sections 11A (9) of the Social Security Act
1991. RA will also be payable in these situations because the customer
is not an ineligible homeowner as set out in section 13 of the Social
Security Act 1991.

SRS - not in a care situation

Where the customer does not need or is not likely to receive a
substantial level of care for at least 14 consecutive days, the customer
is not considered to be in a care situation for social security purposes
as they do not meet the definition of a care situation set out in
section 13(9) of the Social Security Act 1991.

The provisions for exemption of the former principal home from the
social security Assets Test set out in sections 11A(8) and (9) of the
Social Security Act 1991 do not apply to customers who move into an SRS
and do not need or are not likely to receive a substantial level of
care.

If the customer permanently enters an SRS without selling their former
home, it will be assessed as an asset. The customer is considered a
non-homeowner and Rent Assistance (RA) may be payable.

Temporary vacation

A customer who vacates their principal home to enter an SRS and advises
that vacation is temporary will be assessed as per the temporary
vacation of principal home provisions.

Lump sum paid

A lump sum payment made by a customer to an SRS is not an accommodation
bond because an SRS is not an accredited aged care home for the purposes
of the Aged Care Act 1997. Customers living in them are not considered
to be aged care residents for the purposes of section 13(8A) of the
Social Security Act 1991.

Although an SRS may require payment of a lump sum by residents, the SRS
is not generally assessed as a retirement village. However, in some
situations Services Australia can decide that the residential premises
have similar functions to a retirement village and are to be treated as
if they were a retirement village.

In the case where the customer is partnered and they or their partner is
subsequently admitted to an Aged Care Facility, the Resources page of
Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers has scenarios for an illness
separated couple. This means that a customer who is a resident of an SRS
may apply on an individual basis to have their accommodation assessed as
a special residence in the same way as a retirement village.

If a customer advises that they have moved into an SRS that requires
them to make a lump sum payment as a condition of entry, and they have
requested it be treated under retirement village conditions, Service
Officers should contact the Level 2 Retirements Policy Helpdesk to see
if the SRS can be treated in the same way as a retirement village.

Special residence and in a care situation

If the customer needs and is likely to receive a substantial level of
care for at least 14 consecutive days and the Level 2 Retirements Policy
Helpdesk advises that the SRS is to be treated as a special residence:

-   Compare the lump sum payment to the Extra Allowable Amount (EAA). If
    the lump sum is more than the EAA the customer is a homeowner and
    not eligible for RA. The lump sum will not be assessed as an asset.
    If the customer has retained ownership of the former principal home,
    it is an exempt asset for 2 years from the date the customer entered
    the SRS
-   If the lump sum is less than the EAA, the customer is a
    non-homeowner and will be eligible for RA. The lump sum payment is
    assessed as an asset, but is not considered a financial asset, that
    is, deeming does not apply. If the customer has retained ownership
    of the former principal home, it is an exempt asset for 2 years,
    from the date the customer entered the SRS
-   If the SRS is not to be treated as a special residence, the EAA rule
    does not apply and the customer is a non-homeowner and will be
    eligible for RA. The lump sum payment is assessed as an asset, but
    is not considered a financial asset. If the customer has retained
    ownership of the former principal home, it is an exempt asset for 2
    years from the date the customer entered the SRS

Special residence and not in a care situation

If the customer does not need and is not likely to receive a substantial
level of care for at least 14 consecutive days and the Level 2
Retirements Policy Helpdesk advises that the SRS:

-   Is to be treated as a special residence, compare the lump sum
    payment to the EAA. If the lump sum is more than the EAA the
    customer is a homeowner and is not eligible for RA. The lump sum
    payment is not assessed as an asset. If the customer has retained
    ownership of the former principal home, it is assessed as an asset
-   If the lump sum is less than the EAA, then the customer is a
    non-homeowner and eligible for RA. The lump sum payment is assessed
    as an asset, but it is not considered a financial asset, that is,
    deeming does not apply. If the customer has retained ownership of
    the former principal home it is assessed as an asset
-   Is not to be treated as a special residence, the EAA rule does not
    apply and the customer is a non-homeowner and eligible for RA. The
    lump sum payment is assessed as an asset, but it is not considered a
    financial asset. If the customer has retained ownership of the
    former principal home it will be assessed as an asset.

The Resources page contains details for the Level 2 Retirements Policy
Helpdesk.

Related links

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Assessment of entry contribution

Board and lodging

Permanent vacation of principal home

Payment rates and thresholds

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers

Temporary vacation of principal home

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
