
Aged Care Web Services and Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) 065-13090050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Aged Care Provider Portal
(ACPP) and Aged Care Web Services.

Aged Care Web Services

Services Australia’s legacy aged care online claiming systems previously
used Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and adaptor technology. Updating to
web services ensures the agency is providing digital claiming and data
channels that:

-   are secure and stable now and into the future
-   meet current technology standards
-   are easier to update and improve

Residential aged care providers who previously used the Business to
Business (B2B) claiming channel will need web services compatible
Business to Government (B2G) software to access Aged Care Web Services
by 30 June 2022.

Aged Care Web Services is a new digital channel. It is used to submit
claims and data information to Services Australia across all aged care
programs:

-   Residential Care
-   Home Care, and
-   Flexible Care (Short Term Restorative Care and Transition Care)

If software is not upgraded by 30 June 2022, residential aged care
providers will need to:

-   revert to the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) for claiming, or
-   submit claims manually which may disrupt business operations

PRODA

Services Australia has replaced Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
technology with Provider Digital Access (PRODA) for organisations. PRODA
is the online authentication platform used for aged care online claiming
and data transmissions.

To access Aged Care Web Services, residential aged care providers must
register their organisation in PRODA. The Resources page contains links
to the Services Australia website for information on registering an
organisation in PRODA.

A third party intermediary, for example, a software developer, cannot
manage the authentication on behalf of their aged care end users. The
end user must manage their own authentication to web services by
registering their organisation in PRODA.

See Provider Digital Access (PRODA) for more information.

Aged Care Provider Portal and web services

The Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) is the secure system for aged care
providers to access online services and claim aged care subsidies and
supplements. The ACPP replaces the legacy aged care online claiming
systems.

The ACPP uses PRODA, a more secure authentication and log in technology.
To access the ACPP, authorised users (‘A users’) from aged care
providers must have a PRODA account.

See Online claiming registration process for aged care providers for
more information.

Aged Care web services enquiries

For aged care providers with enquiries relating to ACPP digital claiming
and the registration process, contact the Aged Care and Allied Health
Branch.

For software developers with web services and PRODA related enquiries,
contact the PRODA helpdesk.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details
-   forms
-   Services Australia website
-   Health Professional Education Resources website

Related links

eBusiness Service Centre for Medicare

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP) self service

Online claiming registration process for aged care providers

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
