
Maintain claims in Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) 065-18052200

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details to assist Service Officers in approving
home and flexible care claims in the Aged Care Management Payment System
(ACMPS).

Claim registration and finalisation

Aged care services that are not registered for online claiming are
required to submit their monthly claim in a paper format (manual
claims). The claim registration and finalisation (2 separate processes)
are only required for manual claims that are processed via the Aged Care
Management Payment System (ACMPS).

Service Officers are not required to undertake the claim registration
and finalisation process in ACMPS for:

-   online claims submitted via the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP),
    and/or
-   manual claims processed in the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)

The claim registration process is automatically done as part of the
claim finalisation process in ACPP and ACSP.

Note: the cancel claim registration process is used when duplicate
claims have been created in error. Service Officers must cancel the
duplicate claims and undertake the claim registration and finalisation
process in ACMPS again.

Claim approval

On completion of the claim approval process (finalised claim is
approved), the Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS) will
determine (that is, calculate) the final entitlement amount (if any)
owing to the service.

A payment statement is produced the following day. The payment statement
displays all the entitlements, adjustments and reductions that have
affected the amount of subsidy and supplements paid.

If the payment statement has not been produced due to:

-   issues with the claim’s approval process (Service Officers must
    escalate these cases to ICT), or
-   a claim amount is marked as genuine zero (no active care recipient)

Service Officers must ensure the escalation process is actioned
appropriately. For further details about payment statements, see Payment
statements for aged care services.

Note:

a Team Leader or a Subject Matter Expert (SME) from the Aged Care
Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied Health Branch) can approve and/or
delete claims in either:

-   ACMPS, or
-   the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP). See the Using the Aged Care Staff
    Portal home page table for details on the Claim Search screen

a different Team Leader or a SME to the one who finalised the claim can
approve the claim

the claim deletion process in ACMPS is called cancel claim calculation

Aged Care Provider Portal

Aged care providers can submit, finalise and view claims using the Aged
Care Provider Portal. See the Aged Care Provider Portal for more
details.

Request to change (vary) events beyond the 70 day or 2 year limit

Aged care providers can make changes to events. There are different
processes in place depending on the care recipient’s departure date.

Care recipients departing care on or after 1 September 2021

For care recipients whose departure date from the home care service
occurred on or after 1 September 2021, the services have a limit of 70
days from the departure date to make changes and include a care
recipient in claims. The 70 days:

-   starts on the day the care recipient has departed from home care
-   applies to all events
-   applies both claiming channels (online and manual)

Care recipients currently in a home care service or departed care prior
to 1 September 2021

Aged care services have a limit of 2 years after the end of a payment
period to change an event through the Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP).

Requests for changes beyond the applicable limits

For all requests beyond the 70 day and 2 year limit, aged care services
must include relevant supporting evidence and email their request to the
Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied Health Branch).

For those requests beyond the 70 day limit, the Aged Care Payments Team
will assess and escalate these cases to the Aged Care Programmes
Branch’s Home Care help desk. See the Resources page for a guide of
supporting evidence required. The Aged Care Programmes Branch’s Home
Care Team with restricted access only will be able to make changes after
70 days for departed home care recipients. This is only done in
exceptional circumstances (i.e. defective administration).

For those requests beyond the 2 year limit, Service Officers in the Aged
Care Payments Team must be satisfied the request to change is a result
of:

-   an administrative error made by the Commonwealth or an agent of the
    Commonwealth, or
-   determining the circumstances of a care recipient are different from
    those on the basis the subsidy was claimed

The Resources page contains:

-   a list of supporting evidence
-   the investigation process for requests outside the 70 day and 2 year
    limit, and
-   a link to contact details for Aged Care and the My Aged Care website

Related links

Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care Provider (ACPP) self service

Aged Care Provider Portal (ACPP)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP)

Aged care systems and data exchange

Payment statements for aged care services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
