
Oxygen and Enteral Feeding Supplement for aged care services 065-13040040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Oxygen and Enteral Feeding
Supplement for aged care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Oxygen and/or Enteral Feeding Supplement

Aged care services can get the oxygen and enteral feeding supplements to
help with the costs of supplying oxygen and enteral feeding to a care
recipient.

Aged care services can claim the oxygen and/or enteral feeding
supplement after the care recipient’s treatment has commenced. They must
complete the ‘Application for the Oxygen and/or Enteral Feeding
Supplement’ (AC011) form and provide supporting evidence. This form can
be used to apply for the standard or higher supplements relating to
oxygen and/or enteral feeding. The Resources page contains a link to the
form.

Continual oxygen does not have to mean oxygen treatment for 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week. It means that the care recipient requires regular
oxygen for an ongoing medical reason.

Note: the oxygen supplement and/or enteral feeding supplement does not
transfer when a care recipient moves to a new service. Whenever a care
recipient enters into care with a new service, a new AC011 and
supporting evidence must be provided to Services Australia.

Oxygen Supplement higher rate

Aged care services can claim the higher oxygen supplement rate when the
cost of administering oxygen is 125% of the standard supplement amount
or more. The application for the higher oxygen supplement must include
application form, certificate from a doctor and copies of the tax
invoices as supporting evidence.

Enteral Feeding Supplement higher rate

Aged care services can claim the higher enteral supplement rate when the
cost of administering enteral feeding is 125% of the standard supplement
amount or more. The application for higher enteral feeding supplement
must include an application form and certificate(s).

Decision to reject an application for higher rate

Service Officers may reject an application if it does not meet the
eligibility criteria. The reason for rejection must be clearly
documented and meet the requirements of the Aged Care Act 1997. A
Service Officer must inform the aged care service in writing if the
application has been rejected.

The application for the higher oxygen supplement is rejected if the
average daily costs are less than 125% of the standard supplement. If
this occurs:

-   the application is approved for the standard supplement, and/or
-   the application is already receiving the standard supplement and
    would remain eligible for the standard supplement

Aged care services can apply for a review if an application for the
higher rate has been rejected. Any additional documents must be supplied
with the application for review.

Request for review of a rejected decision

Services Australia will undertake a review of the decision if requested.
A Subject Matter Expert (SME) or higher who has not been involved in the
initial decision-making process must conduct this review.

If the review of the rejection is upheld, the aged care service must be
informed in writing.

The aged care service may apply to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT) if it has any concerns following the review.

The Resources page contains questions and answers about oxygen and/or
enteral feeding supplement and links to:

-   contact details for aged care
-   standard letter templates
-   the ‘Application for Oxygen and/or Enteral Feeding Supplement’ form
    (AC011), and
-   external websites

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Supplements in Aged Care program for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
