-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains what to do when a HEAS customer requests a change
of circumstances. HEAS customers can request a change via online
services, or by using a form.

Bankruptcy and insolvency

Customers that are bankrupt or subject to an insolvency agreement do not
qualify for the HEAS.

Customers can:

-   advise they are bankrupt, or have entered into an insolvency
    agreement by using Centrelink online services
-   withdraw a request before their assessment finalises

See Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) for more
details.

Change in relationship status

Customers must notify Services Australia if they become:

-   separated, or
-   partnered

A change in relationship status can have significant impacts for
customers and/or their partner’s loan details, depending on their
circumstances:

-   the rate of their fortnightly loan payments may increase or decrease
-   their Maximum Loan Amount (MLA) may increase or decrease
-   their property ownership may change, or
-   Services Australia may seek recovery of the loan debt

Customers can change their relationship status online, and is the
preferred option.

If customers do not have online access they can complete a Home Equity
Access Scheme variation form (SA497).

See Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) Reviews for details about change in
relationship follow ups.

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

Settle a HEAS loan

See Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan amounts for
details about repaying the HEAS loan in full.

Request an advance

See Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for
details about the HEAS Advances.

Stop fortnightly loan payments

Customers:

can request to stop their fortnightly loan payments

must nominate a date to stop the payments:

-   the date can be in the future, and
-   up to 12 months in advance

have 21 days to submit their request. If not completed within this time
frame, requests automatically cancel, and customers must make a new
request

can withdraw their request before the assessment is finalised

For nominee requests and partnered customers, consent must be provided
before a stop payment request is finalised. See Home Equity Access
Scheme consent for more details.

If the nominee or customer have provided their consent to the request,
and would like to cancel or withdraw their request, the nominee or
customer must:

-   complete a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497), and
-   include the customer and partner approval (if they have a partner)

Interest continues to accrue on the outstanding loan balance when
fortnightly loan payments stop, until the loan is repaid in full.

See Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan amounts for
details about customers wanting to repay their loan in full.

Customers can make repayments via their Centrelink online account at any
time. See Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans for more
details.

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

Start fortnightly loan payments

Customers:

-   can request to start their fortnightly loan payments. The preferred
    option is via online services
-   withdraw requests. The preferred option is via online services
-   have 21 days to submit their request. If not submitted within this
    time frame, requests automatically cancel and a new request must be
    sent
-   can withdraw their request before the assessment is finalised

If a start fortnightly payment request is made by a nominee and/or the
customer is partnered, consent must be provided before the start payment
request being finalised. See HEAS consent for more details

If the nominee or customer sent their request with consent, and would
like to cancel or withdraw their request, the nominee or customer must:

-   complete a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497), and
-   include the customer and partner approval (if they have a partner)

All HEAS payments the customer gets add to the loan balance, and
interest accrues on the outstanding loan balance

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

Change loan amount

There are 2 ways a customer can limit the amount they can borrow before
their HEAS payments stop:

-   Nominated Amount – this is an amount of equity in the property
    offered as security that the customer would like to be excluded in
    the calculation of their maximum loan amount (MLA). Reducing the
    amount of equity, lowers the system calculated MLA
-   Nominated MLA – this is an amount customers can choose to borrow up
    to before their HEAS payments stop. After the system calculates the
    customer’s MLA based on how much equity they are using (taking into
    account any Nominated Amount), the customer can then choose to
    nominate a lower MLA

Customers can:

-   choose to have both a Nominated Amount and a nominated MLA at any
    time
-   change their loan amount online, this is the preferred option. If
    customers do not have online access they can complete a Home Equity
    Access Scheme variation form (SA497)

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

Add, remove or change property

Customers can:

-   add, remove or change the property used as security for the HEAS
-   advise of a change to the value of the property used as security
-   advise of a change to insurance coverage
-   withdraw their request for a change to their property, before the
    assessment is finalised

Change fortnightly loan payments

Customers get the loan paid fortnightly, with their eligible pension (if
any)

If a customer is granted an advance on their loan in the last 26
fortnights, this may reduce the amount of fortnightly payment they can
get

Customers can get up to 150% of the maximum pension rate payable, that
includes the:

-   pension payment, and
-   loan payment

Payment options are:

-   the maximum amount that can be paid (Up to 150% of the maximum
    applicable pension rate). See Rate payable
-   a percentage of the maximum pension rate up to and including 150%,
    or
-   a fixed amount. For example, a customer can choose to get $300 extra
    per fortnight

Customers can:

-   request 1 change to their payment at a time
-   set the request to take place up to 12 months in advance from the
    date the request is made, and
-   withdraw requests

If a start fortnightly payment request is made by a nominee and/or the
customer is partnered, consent must be provided before the start payment
request being finalised. See HEAS consent for more details

If the nominee or customer sent their request with consent, and would
like to cancel or withdraw their request, the nominee or customer must:

-   complete a Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497), and
-   include the customer and partner approval (if they have a partner)

All HEAS payments the customer gets add to the loan balance, and
interest accrues on the outstanding loan balance

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

Home Equity Access Scheme variation form (SA497)

If customers are unable to use online services, they can advise changes
in circumstances using the SA497 form.

-   For partnered customers, both members of the couple must sign in
    writing their agreement to any changes in the loan
-   Both members of the couple must be aware of the terms of the loan,
    including any changes. This is regardless if the partner shares
    ownership of the real estate used to secure the loan. For example,
    where a new asset is added as security, both partners must sign the
    advice
-   If there is a third party/trust or company interest in a HEAS loan,
    the third party/trust or company must also agree to any change in
    writing

The Resources page has a link to the SA497 form.

The Resources page contains links to forms and the Equifax website.

Contents

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) reviews

Related links

Eligibility for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Security for the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loans

Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) outstanding
loan amount

Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) loan amounts

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) cancellation, restorations and
rejections

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
