
Payment statements for aged care services 065-13100040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about payment statements for aged
care services.

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

Payment statements

A payment statement is produced when a monthly claim has been finalised
and approved. It is provided to a service to show all the events and
adjustments that have affected the amount of monthly subsidies and
supplements paid.

Note: a payment statement will not be generated for inactive services.
An inactive service has no care recipients and still submits monthly
claims with a nil amount.

Payment statements contain:

The provider and service information section:

-   Provider ID
-   Provider name
-   Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   Service ID
-   Service name
-   Postal address
-   Provider/payment statement notes

The Service payment summary section

-   Subsidy and supplements
-   Adjustments for current period
-   Adjustments for previous claim periods
-   Advances and Outstanding balance Note: displays only for residential
    and flexible care services
-   Outstanding balance and ad-hoc payment Note: displays only for home
    care services
-   Paid/held over amount
-   Total amount paid to provider
-   The care recipients’ itemised entitlements section. Note: displays
    only for home care services
-   The level of care
-   Daily rates for subsidies and supplements
-   Number of paid and reduced leave days
-   Leave taken and remaining leave balances
-   Income tested care fees and refunds
-   Any adjustments from previous claim periods
-   Total entitlement available

The care recipient’s itemised payments section for flexible care
services:

-   Admission details
-   Paid care days
-   Non claimable days
-   Rate per day
-   Sub-total amount
-   Total amount

The care recipients’ itemised payments section for home care services

-   Claim entitlement type
-   Adjustment for claim month
-   Claim entitlement
-   Previous home care account balance
-   Maximum contribution amount
-   Invoice amount
-   Commonwealth (CW) Unspent amount - opt in amount
-   Income Test Care Fee (ITCF) reduction amount
-   Shortfall amount
-   Payment determination
-   Change to home care account
-   Total amount due
-   Home care account balance

The care recipient’s itemised payments section for residential care
services:

-   Payment type (including means/income tested care fees and refunds)
-   Rate effective date
-   Adjustments for claim month
-   Paid and unpaid leave days
-   Paid Care (PC) and Non claimable (NC) days
-   Rate per day
-   Sub-total amount
-   Total amount

Payment statements can be downloaded in 3 formats: CSV, XML and PDF.
Note: a PDF version of a payment statement for a residential aged care
service is not currently available through the Aged Care Provider Portal
(ACPP) and the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP). See the Resources page for
a manual workaround to this issue.

The Process page contains a table outlining payment statement functions
performed in the various aged care systems.

Payment statement notes/provider notes

Services Australia communicates with aged care services via notes that
can be added on the first page (section) of a payment statement. This
can include claiming circumstances and/or general information.

Payment statement notes are created and managed in:

-   Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) for residential care services
-   Aged Care Payment Management System (ACMPS) for home care and
    flexible care services

Ceasing paper statements

New services registered for online business will automatically be
registered for online payment statements and no further action is
required in the Aged Care Staff Portal.

Reprint a payment statement

The Process page contains a table outlining the process to reprint a
payment statement.

The Resources page contains aged care contact details and the manual
workaround to download a payment statement for a residential aged care
service in PDF format.

Related links

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Care Recipient in Context (CRiC)  

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Managing provider and service user
details  

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) - Service in Context

Payments in Aged Care programme for service providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
