
Tax File Number (TFN) for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) 065-06030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for a customer to provide a Tax
File Number (TFN) or have a valid exemption from providing a TFN when
claiming a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) or when they advise
they have become partnered.

TFN requirement

The customer and their partner, if applicable, are required to:

-   provide a tax file number on their claim form, or
-   apply to the Australian Tax Office (ATO) for either their existing
    TFN, or a new TFN

Note: TFN re-use provisions exist when a customer has previously claimed
a social security payment, and a TFN was provided and recorded on the
customer's record. Customers who have previously only claimed a family
assistance payment and are now claiming a social security payment are
exempt from these provisions.

If the tax file number is not obtained from the customer or requested
from the ATO within 28 days, the CSHC claim will be rejected. Valid TFN
exemptions must be supplied within 28 days.

Single CSHC customers who advise they have become partnered must provide
their partner's TFN to retain eligibility for CSHC. A formal request
must be sent to the customer asking for the partner's TFN. If this is
not provided by the customer or requested from the ATO within 28 days of
becoming partnered the customer's CSHC will be automatically cancelled.
Valid TFN exemptions must be supplied within 28 days.

Paper files and documentation containing TFNs must be stored securely to
guard against unauthorised access, use or disclosure. TFNs may need to
be removed or blacked out from paper records if the records are to be
sent to an external organisation or if a customer provides a document
showing their TFN and Services Australia has not requested their TFN
details. If a customer loses their TFN, the agency may, after confirming
Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO) disclose their TFN to them.
Alternatively, the customer can visit the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) website for more information.

The References page contains a link to examples of how to assess
requests for exemptions from providing TFNs. Note: the ATO does not
assess exemptions from providing TFNs to Services Australia.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO). Links on this page may be unavailable to external
audiences

Related links

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Assessing Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) claims

Completing a re-claim for a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card

Rejecting a claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
