
National Screening and Assessment Form (NSAF) 065-13060010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the National Screening and
Assessment Form (NSAF).

Historical SPARC process

The System for the Payment of Aged Residential Care (SPARC) is the
legacy aged care payment system for residential care. SPARC is a view
only system from 20 August 2022.

To view the legacy SPARC process, see the historical version.

National Screening and Assessment Form (NSAF)

The NSAF provides approval for a care recipient’s eligibility to get
government-funded care services. It also outlines the level of care the
care recipient is eligible for.

Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) assessors from conduct an assessment on
the recipient’s care needs. ACATs are teams of medical, nursing and
allied health professionals. After the assessment, ACAT assessors will
complete the NSAF. Remediation to the care recipient record in multiple
aged care systems is required if the NSAF has resulted in
duplicate/multiple/intertwined care recipient records. See Multiple
ACMPS records remediation for the process.

Services Australia receives care approval details on the NSAF
transmitted via the My Aged Care gateway.

Aged Care approval types

There are 3 types of aged care approvals. The type of approvals
delegated by an ACAT is indicated in part 6 of the NSAF. These are:

-   Home care
-   Flexible care (Short-Term Restorative Care (STRC) and Transition
    Care (TC))
-   Residential care (permanent and respite)

ACAT assessors may send through NSAFs with approvals for multiple care
types for one care recipient in a single transmission. Reassessment of
care needs can also occur, and result in subsequent transmissions being
sent.

Home Care

Services Australia receives home care approval and package details
(Approval, Assigned and Withdrawn) from the NSAF in Aged Care Management
Payment System (ACMPS) via the My Aged Care gateway.

Note: home care packages are upgraded frequently, for example from a
level 2 to a level 4 approval and package. Services Australia receives
all home care approval and package level changes from the Department of
Health via the My Aged Care gateway. Services Australia needs to receive
a new NSAF for new home care approvals and to upgrade a home care
package.

Flexible Care

Services Australia receives flexible care details from the NSAF in ACMPS
via the My Aged Care gateway. The 2 types of flexible care are
Short-Term Restorative Care (STRC) and Transition Care (TC).

Residential Care

Services Australia receives residential care details from the NSAF in
ACMPS via the My Aged Care gateway. The information in ACMPS is sent to
the Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP). The 2 types of residential care are
permanent residential and residential respite care.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for Aged Care.

Related links

Aged Care Assessment Teams (ACAT)

Aged Care forms for service providers

Aged Care Management Payment System (ACMPS)

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs)

Multiple ACMPS records remediation

My Aged Care General Service Offer (MACGSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
