
Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus 065-03030050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Age Pension claims, and combined
Age Pension and Pension Bonus claims. This includes online claims,
Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) and paper claims.

A system issue exists regarding coding DOR (Date of receipt) - The
workaround for this issue is available in Network News Update (NNU) -
Centrelink online and assisted customer claims - 'date of submission'
issue NNU 10999.

Submitting claims and documentation

Customers can make a claim for Age Pension and Pension Bonus payment by
submitting an [] online claim, with help from a Service Officer running
ACC, or by lodging a paper claim form.

A correspondence nominee (individual and organisation) can submit a
claim for Age Pension [] online on behalf of their principal. Nominees
cannot submit an Age Pension combined online claim. For more
information, see Age Pension combined partner online claim.

If the customer accepts the declaration via their online account,
'Online customer declaration accepted - Yes' will display in the
Customer Claim Summary.

If ACC is used to submit a verbal claim on behalf of a customer and a
verbal declaration is completed, 'Staff assisted verbal declaration
accepted - Yes' will display in:

-   Process Direct notes
-   Customer First Super Case
-   Customer Claim Summary

A declaration accepted online or via ACC will display as accepted in the
system where it was originally 'Confirmed' if:

-   the claim is not submitted (for example, outstanding tasks), and
-   the claim is subsequently 'Submitted' using the alternative system
    (online claim or ACC)

See Claiming Age Pension for more information.

Upon receipt of a paper claim or documentation to support a customer's
claim, scan the document to Document Tools on the customer's record.

If a customer (or their correspondence nominee) provides documentation
to support their claim, run the Request and Manage Customer Task guided
procedure to mark the corresponding task as Provided.

Verifying partner details before finalising an online claim or ACC

If a customer advises they are partnered within an online claim or via
ACC, the relationship status must be verified with both parties before
the customer's and partner's records are linked.

Verification can be provided by the partner either:

-   through the 'Partner Confirmation Logon' service on the Services
    Australia website, using the Temporary Access Code (TAC) provided at
    the end of the customer's claim,
-   verbally if the partner is present, or
-   by completing a Partner details (Mod P) form

This is not required if the customer has lodged an Age Pension paper
claim (SA002 or SA412) which has been signed by the customer and their
partner.

See Confirming a partnered relationship.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process AGE claims automatically if they meet these
criteria:

Identity is confirmed

Residency requirements met

Tax file number recorded

Employment status requirements met

No change in known relationship details

No change in known children details

Blind details are known to the agency

Claim is not a combined claim

Homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent

Savings updates of less than:

-   $20,000 for single customers, and
-   $30,000 for partnered customers

Claim results in a grant outcome

If a claim meets the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Age Pension claim work item

When an online or ACC is submitted, as a single person or Age Pension
combined partner online claim, an Age Pension claim work item is created
in Process Direct containing the claim information. The claim is
reviewed in Process Direct.

A SOA shell claim (with no claim information) is created automatically
when an Age Pension paper claim (SA002 or SA412) is scanned onto the
customer's record. If the customer and partner have lodged a joint paper
claim, the SOA shell is created on the customer's record only. Once the
SOA shell is generated, a combined claim can be created using [more
options] > Combined claim switch. This allows the Service Officer to
transform a single SOA shell created for a paper claim into a combined
customer-partner claim and then back to a single claim if necessary.

If a rejected claim needs to be opened and reassessed, reindex the
original claim or create a SOA shell in Process Direct, as appropriate.
For more information, see Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing
claims.

Claim assessment process

To identify whether the claim is an Age Pension combined partner online
claim (customer and partner), check the Claim ID numbers are the same.
Alternatively, check if keyword DUALCLM appears in the keywords options.

Age Pension with a Pension Bonus claim and Age Pension claims requiring
a property valuation need to be processed outside Process Direct.

Where an Age Pension with a Pension Bonus claim has been lodged:

-   before assessing the claim, contact the customer and recommend they
    contact a Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer if they have
    not yet done so. If not trained in Pension Bonus assessments,
    reallocate both claims as per Table 4 on the Process page
-   after finalising the Age Pension claim process the Pension Bonus
    claim in Customer Record using the Pension Bonus Claim Assessment
    script. See Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment
    (PBP)

If the customer has also submitted a separate claim for the Home Equity
Access Scheme (the Scheme), process the Age Pension and Pension Bonus
claim first. The Scheme claim is processed by the Home Equity Access
Scheme National team upon completion of the Age Pension and Pension
Bonus claim.

If a rejected claim needs to be opened and reassessed, re-index the
original claim or create a SOA shell. See Cancelling claim activities
and re-indexing claims.

Start date

From 1 July 2018, claimants who are qualified and payable for Age
Pension are generally granted from the date they submit a complete claim
with all relevant supporting documentation. See Calculating the start
day general rule.

Intent to claim provisions only apply to customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

After determining the date a claim was made, staff should assess whether
backdating provisions apply.

From 7 December 2020, employment income paid after the start date must
be assessed for the same period for which it is paid by the employer.
Where the income is too high for the customer to be payable, but the
customer will become payable within 13 weeks of the date they lodged the
claim, the start date should be moved to the earliest Entitlement Period
Start Date from which the customer is payable. Note: this may not apply
to claims with Pension Bonus entitlement. See Qualification and
assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP).

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desks
intranet page, mySupport, and the Process Direct subsite, example text
for Age Pension grant letter (Q999) for a deceased customer and a new
claim (submit and DOC) script workaround.

Related links

Age Pension combined partner online claim

Claiming Age Pension

Early claims

Incorrect claims

Inappropriate claims

Calculating start day - general rule

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Financial Information Service (FIS)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Identity Confirmation

Identifying and making referrals to the Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

Qualification for Age Pension

Qualification and assessment of Pension Bonus Payment (PBP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Residence and Portability screens

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Straight through processing

Translation of documents

Waiting periods for income support payments

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
