
Initiating recovery of a Home Equity Access Scheme outstanding loan amount 065-08020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains the role of the Home Equity Access Scheme National
team in determining the need to initiate recovery of an outstanding Home
Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme) loan amount.

Scheme loans secured by Australian real estate

Payments made to a customer under the Scheme are a loan, which is
secured by Australian real estate owned by the customer and/or their
partner.

Lodgement of a secured charge or caveat

A charge or caveat is lodged by the Commonwealth over the real estate to
protect Government outlays, and to ensure Services Australia is advised
of any changes to the land title details of the secured real estate. For
example, when there is an impending sale of the real estate being used
as security for the Scheme loan.

The customer's outstanding loan balance is subject to a compound
interest rate and continues to accrue until all monies outstanding have
been repaid. The outstanding loan amount becomes a debt.

Recovery of the Scheme loan

The Scheme loan is recovered:

-   when the real estate securing the loan is sold, or
-   from the customer's (or surviving partner’s) estate after their
    death

Customers can also make voluntary repayments, or ask to settle the loan.

There may be circumstances where the delegate may determine that the
loan is required to be repaid prior to the customer's death. This will
usually be based on individual circumstances and after consultation with
the Policy Helpdesk.

Death of a Scheme customer

If not repaid earlier, the loan is repaid from a customer's estate after
their, or their surviving partner's death.

If the surviving partner is of Age Pension age and has use of the
secured property, the loan recovery is usually sought from the surviving
partner's estate.

If the surviving partner is under Age Pension age, loan recovery is
initiated after the bereavement period, and the final instalment of the
bereavement payment has been paid.

The decision and approach to the estate regarding arrangements for the
loan repayment must factor in the surviving partner's circumstances. For
example, if the secured real estate is the surviving partner's principal
residence, the delegate has the discretion to negotiate a phased or
deferred recovery of the loan amount.

In the case of the death of a single customer, Services Australia will
usually enforce the charge on the real estate and recover the debt
immediately from the estate.

A deceased estate letter is sent out to the surviving partner, and
includes:

-   the customer’s outstanding balance, and
-   how to settle the loan if applicable

In the absence of a surviving partner the letter is sent to:

-   the executor of the estate or,
-   the executor’s legal representative

If there are no executor details or a representative, the letter is:

-   addressed to the estate of the deceased, and
-   sent to the deceased’s last known address

Once the loan is settled, a settlement letter is issued to show the loan
has been paid out.

No negative equity guarantee (NNEG)

A NNEG applies when the loan is settled. The estate is not required to
repay more than the current market value of the property/s used as
security less any mortgages or encumbrances.

The NNEG will not apply if a deceased customer had:

-   intentionally increased debt (such as mortgage) on the secured
    property which limits the Commonwealth’s ability to recover the full
    amount of the loan balance, or
-   misrepresented their circumstances while participating in the
    scheme, or
-   committed fraud

See Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme loan amounts for more
details about NNEG.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   the Home Equity Access Scheme National team, and
-   delegate discretion in unique circumstances

Related links

Home Equity Access Scheme

Home Equity Access Scheme reviews

Settlement of Home Equity Access Scheme loan amounts

Repayment of Home Equity Access Scheme loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
