
Financial assistance after death occurs 099-01020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding possible financial
assistance after a death occurs. When a person contacts Services
Australia seeking to claim assistance after the death of a customer or
non-customer, the person's circumstances will be assessed to determine
whether they qualify for financial assistance. The initial contact to
claim assistance may be made in person or over the phone.

Types of assistance

Depending on the circumstances of the deceased and their surviving
partner or carer, the types of assistance that may be available
following the death of a customer, include:

-   Payment of a lump sum bereavement payment (LBP) to the surviving
    partner
-   Payment of Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) to the surviving
    partner who receives JobSeeker Payment or Youth Allowance
-   Payment of a Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP) to the
    surviving partner
-   Partner's entitlement to keep income support payments paid to the
    deceased during the bereavement period
-   Survivor's income support payment will be reassessed to the single
    rate
-   Bereavement payment when a dependent child dies. See Initial contact
    after the death of a dependent child
-   Exemptions from mutual obligation, activity test or participation
    requirements during the bereavement period - for JobSeeker Payment,
    Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment and Special Benefit customers
-   Exemptions from some waiting periods - for JobSeeker payment and
    Youth Allowance claimants
-   Continued entitlement to income support payments for the survivor
    during the bereavement period
-   Where a customer is single, payment of pension up until the end of
    the entitlement period in which the person died

Assistance may also be available to a non-customer following the death
of their partner, once the death has been confirmed and an appropriate
payment is claimed. For example, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) or Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP).

Where a family assistance payment customer dies, the person now caring
for the deceased's children may be entitled to any payments the deceased
has not been paid and any ongoing payments.

Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer

Services Australia can also offer the services of the Financial
Information Service (FIS) Officer free of charge to people who need
financial help after a death. This service does not provide advice on
specific investments.

Payments to the executor of the estate

Any amount of a pension or allowance which has accrued and is unpaid at
the date of death, or which would have been payable if the person had
not died, may, upon application, be paid to an appropriate third party
(for example, the executor of the estate, solicitor or next-of-kin). It
is preferable to pay any amounts owing to the deceased to the executor,
as this is the person that the deceased has appointed to handle their
affairs. See Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment
was returned from financial institution for information on how to issue
the payment to the appropriate third party.

Assistance with funeral expenses

Funeral assistance is offered by various commonwealth and state
departments. For contact details and information refer to Funeral
Assistance. Note: the contact details are for assistance with funeral
expenses only, and not for other expenses such as grocery costs and
mortgage payments.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details regarding Funeral
assistance.

Contents

Initial contact after someone has died

Requests for information after someone has died

Cultural considerations when someone dies

Related links

Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Bereavement letters

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Death of a family assistance payment or Paid Parental Leave scheme
customer

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental leave scheme and bereavement

Initial contact by customers claiming Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment
(PBBP)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

Processing a claim to receive the family assistance entitlement of a
deceased person

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
