
Widow Allowance (WA) rejections, cancellations, suspensions and restorations 099-09070000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the cancellation,
suspension and restoration of a Widow Allowance (WA) payment.

Rejection of WA

New claims for Widow Allowance closed on 1 July 2018. Other payments
such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Age Pension are available. All WA
claims are automatically rejected with the reason Sunset Widow Allowance
(SWA).

Cancellation of WA

WA can be cancelled either automatically or manually. Changes in a
customer's circumstances may result in the need for a reassessment, so
all variations to a customer's circumstances need to be recorded on the
customer's records.

WA closed to new claims on 1 July 2018. If a customer in receipt of WA
loses qualification for WA and their payment is subsequently cancelled
for any period of time, they cannot reclaim WA.

If the customer still requires income support, they will need to test
their eligibility for another payment, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP).
Customers claiming JSP who would have been eligible for WA may be
eligible for a Sunset Widow Allowance (SWA) mutual obligation
requirements exemption.

Suspension of WA

If the customer is not qualified for payment temporarily, or for a
specific period, as a result of changes in their circumstances, payment
should be suspended.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of entitlement, and full
arrears are issued if payment is subsequently restored.

Restoration of WA

When restoring a payment, it is imperative to re-establish the
customer's eligibility and ensure there has been no break in
eligibility. If there have been changes in the customer's circumstances
all relevant information must be updated on their record before
restoring the payment to avoid incorrect arrears being generated.

For information on restoring WA, see Restoration of Partner Allowance
(PA) and Widow Allowance (WA).

At this time, consider whether the customer is eligible for the Age
Pension.

Suspension and cancellation reasons

Suspension and cancellation reasons can be recorded manually via the
Benefit Action (BA) screen, or automatically by the system. Automatic
cancellations occur when information provided by the customer
disqualifies them from entitlement. For instance, if the customer
provides income details that exceed the income limit, then the system
will cancel WA with reason code 'INC' as the income is too high.

It is preferable, where possible, to allow the system to automatically
cancel the WA after updating the customer's information on the relevant
screens. This enables other staff, to determine the reason for
cancellation without requesting further information, should a customer
contact us or request a review.

For a list of suspension, cancellation and rejection reasons for WA, see
Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS).

Contents

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Cancellation of Widow Allowance (WA)

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Coding a cancellation

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (job seeker)

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

How to code and action a manual review

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Manual intervention for automatic suspension and cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Restoring payments after bank account details provided

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Updating address details

Widow Allowance (WA)

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
