
Widow B Pension (WidB) 099-10000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for Widow B Pension
(WidB), and lists supplementary payments a customer may have been
eligible for. WidB was a closed payment, and there are no new grants
since 20 March 1997. WidB was an income support payment available to
certain older widows who did not qualify for Parenting Payment (PP), had
limited means of support, and lost the financial support of their
partner. WidB ceased on 20 March 2020 and all WidB customers were
transferred to Age Pension.

Date limitation

WidB ceased on 20 March 2020. There have been no new grants of WidB
since 20 March 1997. WidB customers remained eligible to receive that
payment until they were disqualified from receiving it, or they elected
to transfer to Age Pension.

The pensions income and assets tests applied to WidB. For more
information about assessing employment income, see Work Bonus and
balance for pensioners of age pension age and Employment income nil rate
period.

To qualify for WidB, a customer needed to meet certain criteria relating
to their relationship status, age and residence, or have previously been
in receipt of certain other pensions at certain dates. A customer with a
dependent child needed to test her eligibility for PP. If the claim for
PP was rejected, WidB should subsequently have been claimed.

It was also possible for some customers to qualify for WidB under the
terms of an international agreement, in which case the requirement to be
an Australian resident did not apply.

Providing they met the relevant qualification criteria, customers
receiving WidB may have also got supplementary assistance such as:

-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Pension Supplement
-   Crisis Payment (CrP)
-   Education Entry Payment (EdEP)
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA)
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
