
Undoing a death action 099-02020110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to undo a death action.

Undoing a death action performed on the wrong record

Where a death action has been recorded on the wrong customer record, it
must be corrected immediately. This will minimise the impact on both the
incorrectly deceased record and the customer record where the death
action has not yet been recorded.

Only staff at the APS5 level or above can undo a death action.

Service Officers must:

Arrange for an APS5 or above to undo the death action on the wrong
record

Complete the death action on the correct record

Check for payment issues on both records, including where a Bereavement
Payment has been paid to the wrong person

Review and action any debts or returned payments for the affected
customers. This may include:

-   returned payments from financial institutions
-   incorrect lump sum Bereavement Payments
-   other income support overpayments triggered by the incorrect death
    action

Complete the Intertwined Referral form to report the case to the Data
Quality Unit (DQU)

See the Resources page for examples of action that may be required.

Undoing a death action to complete an activity

A death action on a record may need to be undone for some activities to
be completed. For example, to process a claim that was lodged but not
processed before the customer died.

If a care receiver dies before their carer's claim for carer payment is
finalised. The death action on the care receiver's record needs to be
undone so the carer's claim can be completed. The death action is then
recoded after the claim is completed and any lump sum Bereavement
Payment paid to the carer, where entitled.

If the customer was due to lodge a reporting statement before they died,
the death action should not be undone to process the outstanding report
and stimulate the final payment. The executor of the estate or
appropriate person can apply for the final payment, which will need to
be issued through a manual process. See Requests for information after
someone has died.

If a potential debt has been identified after the customer's death, the
death action should not be undone to code information on the customer's
record to calculate the overpayment. See Requesting refunds and raising
debts for deceased customer and Recovering debts from a deceased
customer's estate.

Care receiver with incorrect death action

When a death is incorrectly actioned on a care receiver's record, for
example when they are not deceased, this will affect the carer's
payments:

-   Carer Allowance (CA) will be cancelled or reassessed, depending on
    whether the carer has other care receivers. In some cases where
    eligible, the carer may also be paid a CA Bereavement Payment, CA
    (auto) recipients of child care receivers may receive a continuation
    of CA during the bereavement period
-   Carer Payment (CP) will be reassessed for a bereavement period,
    depending on whether the carer has other care receivers. In some
    cases where eligible, the carer may also be paid a CP lump sum
    Bereavement Payment

Both CA and CP will need to be restored if the payments have cancelled.
The death action on the care receiver's record needs to be undone first,
before restoring the carer's payments. Refer to Restoration of Carer
Payment (CP) and Restoration of Carer Allowance (CA). If the carer's
payments have not cancelled, they should be checked to ensure that they
are current for the care receiver.

Incorrect date of death

If the death has been recorded incorrectly on the system, for example if
an incorrect date of death was coded, the death action can be undone and
the correct date of death recorded.

The Resources page includes links to contact details and examples of
when a death action is recorded on the wrong customer record and how to
action these.

Related links

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Requesting the return of a direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment made to an incorrect recipient

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Intertwined Centrelink records

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Payment of arrears after reassessment

Service Support Officer (SSO) role in Technical Peer Support (TPS) in
Smart Centres

Requests for information after someone has died

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
