
Death of a member of a pensioner and allowee couple 099-02020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed when a customer who is
a member of a pensioner or allowee/benefit couple dies.

When a different procedure applies

A different procedure applies when:

-   a member of an allowee couple dies
-   one member of a pensioner couple dies
-   both members of a pensioner couple die
-   the partner of a Partner Allowance customer dies
-   the partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer dies
-   a PPP customer dies

Confirmation of death

Before it can be coded on the record, the death must be confirmed.

If multiple notifications are received in relation to the death of the
same person, Service Officers must not create a new activity. Instead,
check the record and annotate the original DOC to state details are
correct and who advised.

Tell the person notifying of the death that information used for
Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare payments and services are
transferred within Services Australia. However, additional contact with
one of the agency's programs separately may be required to update
relevant details, depending on individual circumstances.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which they passed away:

-   is known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   is not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, take the customer off reporting before
recording the death action.

Lump sum bereavement payment

In all cases where a member of a couple dies, the deceased person's
entitlements are up to the day before the date of death. If there are
any payments made after death, when death action cancels the deceased's
payments, the amount of Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) issued to the
surviving partner takes the payments made to the deceased after death
into account.

For LBP purposes, if a pensioner dies and their surviving partner gets
an allowance such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or
Special Benefit (SpB), an LBP may be payable if the surviving partner is
a long-term social security recipient.

For LBP purposes if an allowee customer dies and their surviving partner
is a pensioner, an LBP may be payable if the person who died was a
long-term social security recipient.

Surviving partners receiving a pension that need them to a care for a
person will continue to get payments for the duration of the bereavement
period. At the end of this period, the customer must qualify for a
payment in their own right to continue receiving income support payments
from Services Australia. Pension payments subject to this provision are:

-   Carer Payment CP - where the deceased partner is the care receiver
-   CP (XWP) - where the deceased partner is the only or last payment
    level Carer Allowance care receiver

If the deceased person gets payments from the Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA), bereavement assistance may be paid by either Services
Australia or DVA. This depends on the type of payments received.

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

PBV is a one-off lump sum payment paid to JSP or YA survivors following
the death of their partner from 20 March 2020.

The PBV is based on a multiple of the customer's daily rate of JSP or
YA, plus an additional component if the customer is pregnant.

PBV can be paid to new claimants of JSP and YA, as well as existing
customers, and is available to YA jobseekers, students and apprentices,
as well as dependent YA customers.

Carer Allowance (CA) Bereavement Payment

If the surviving partner is receiving both CA and an income support
payment (other than Carer Payment (CP) that does not qualify them for a
bereavement payment) they:

-   are entitled to CA up to the end of the bereavement rate
    continuation period, and
-   may be entitled to a CA Bereavement Payment

See Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance
(CA).

Assessment of income and assets

If the surviving partner was a joint owner of any assets with their late
partner, full ownership of the assets legally transfers to the surviving
partner following the death of their partner. However, for social
security purposes, if assets are owned in joint names with the deceased
partner, the surviving partner is only assessed as owning 50%. The
system will continue to assess that the surviving partner owns 50% of
the asset until the surviving partner advises of the transfer of assets.

If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income stream, then
it is to be assessed from the date that it is first entitled to be
received. A lump sum arrears payment received by the reversionary
beneficiary is assessed as income from an income stream when:

-   accrued between the death of the primary beneficiary, and
-   the reversionary beneficiary commences to get regular payments

This means the income is assessed over the period to which it relates
and may result in a debt for that period. Effective from 9 May 2018,
where the assessment of the lump sum arrears result in a debt during the
bereavement period for the surviving spouse, consider waiver provisions
contained under Class of Debt, Section 1237AB(1) of the Social Security
Act 1991. The legislative instrument 'Social Security (Waiver of Debts -
Bereavement Period) Specification 2017' permits this action if all
provisions are satisfied.

Note: any debt outside the 14 week bereavement period cannot be waived
under the legislative instrument. The legislative instrument is not
retrospective. This means that any of these debts that occur before 9
May 2018 cannot be waived under class of debt waiver provisions.

Conduct a bereavement review when the transfer of the deceased's assets
and/or income to the survivor is likely to affect the survivor's rate.

An automatic bereavement review will be started if an allowee customer
dies and their surviving partner gets a pension. If the surviving
partner is an allowee, a manual review must be coded for 16 weeks after
the date of death.

If the surviving partner starts work, or is currently working, Working
Credits or the Work Bonus may enable them to keep some of their income
support payment while they are working.

If their income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and some of that
income is employment income, they may remain current at nil rate for up
to 6 fortnights and retain certain benefits.

If the person's deceased partner was working and had any Working
Credits, these credits cannot be transferred to them.

Payment returned from financial institution

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution on the
deceased person's record, reissue the payment.

The Resources page has links to:

-   the Services Australia website for details on what to do following a
    death including burial assistance
-   Payment and Service Finder
-   the publication, 'Needing help after someone has died?' (HD001)

Related links

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Bereavement reviews

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Death of a member of an allowee couple

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of both members of a couple

Death of one member of a pensioner couple

Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental leave scheme and bereavement

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Social work services

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Working Credit

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
