
Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer 099-02020070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the bereavement provisions that apply for
customers receiving Partner Allowance (PA) when their partner dies. The
provisions are slightly different to those for other allowee couples.

Qualification for continuation of PA

A Partner Allowance (PA) customer qualifies for continued payment of PA
during the bereavement period if they satisfy both of the following
criteria:

-   their deceased partner was a pensioner, a long-term social security
    recipient, or received Service Pension, Veteran Payment or Income
    Support Supplement (ISS) at the time of their death, and
-   the customer was a long-term social security recipient at the time
    of their partner's death

Qualification for LBP

The PA customer qualifies for a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) if
their deceased partner was a long-term social security recipient at the
time of their death. That is, the deceased partner must have been
receiving a pension, social security payment, Service Pension, Veteran
Payment or Income Support Supplement (ISS) as a long term social
security recipient at the time of their death.

Cessation of partner's payment

Payment of the deceased partner's pension/benefit should be made up to
and including the day before death. If payments have been made after
this date, the amount of the lump sum is reduced accordingly.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the person passed away is:

-   known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After stimulating the payment and before recording the death action,
remove the customer from reporting (where possible).

Requirement to apply for another payment

Continued payments of PA are subject to the lodgement of continuation
forms (SU19BP). The surviving partner needs to apply for another social
security payment during the bereavement period to avoid delays in
payment as payment of PA ceases at the end of the bereavement period.

Asset and income updates

If the surviving partner was a joint owner of any assets with their late
partner, full ownership of the assets legally transfers to the surviving
partner following the death of their partner. However, for Social
Security purposes, if assets are owned in joint names with the deceased
partner, the surviving partner is only assessed as owning 50 per cent.

The system will only read that the surviving partner owns 50 per cent of
the asset, and this is not updated until the surviving partner advises
of the transfer of assets.

If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income stream, assess
from the date it is first entitled to be received. A lump sum arrears
payment received by the reversionary beneficiary, accrued between the
death of the primary beneficiary and when the reversionary beneficiary
commences to receive regular payments, is assessed as income from the
income stream. This means the income is assessed over the period to
which it relates and may result in a debt for that period if the
customer has been in receipt of an income support payment.

Effective from 9 May 2018, where the assessment of the lump sum arrears
result in a debt during the bereavement period for the surviving spouse,
consider waiver provisions contained under Class of Debt, Section
1237AB(1) of the Social Security Act 1991. The legislative instrument
'Social Security (Waiver of Debts - Bereavement Period) Specification
2017' permits this action if all provisions are satisfied.

Note: any debt outside the 14 week bereavement period cannot be waived
under the legislative instrument. The legislative instrument is not
retrospective. This means that any of these debts that occur before 9
May 2018 cannot be waived under class of debt waiver provisions.

If the customer's deceased partner had any working credits, these
credits cannot be transferred to the customer.

Returned payments

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution on the
deceased person's record, reissue the direct credit or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS).

Multiple notifications of death

Where multiple notifications are received in relation to the death of
the same person, do not create a new activity. Instead, check the record
and annotate the original DOC to state details are correct and who
advised.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on death and bereavement, the Payment and Service Finder,
links to relevant forms and publications and a link to the Local
Activities Database for information on burial assistance.

Related links

Working Credit

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment returned
from financial institution

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
