
Death of a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer 099-02040030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to record the death of a Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) customer and how to ensure final payments are correct when
the death is confirmed.

PPS final payment

The estate of a deceased PPS customer is entitled to receive the full
payment due to the customer for the fortnight in which the customer
died. This final payment is usually made into the deceased PPS
customer's bank account, which is accessed by the executor of their
estate. However, in some cases it may be more appropriate to pay the
final instalment directly into the customer's estate (including the
Public Trustee if the customer dies intestate), or to the person who is
paying for the funeral. Before action can be taken, the death must be
confirmed.

Family Tax Benefit

If the deceased customer was receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
dependent child in their care, a claim for FTB should be invited from
the customer's partner or the person now caring for the child.

Reissue of returned payment

A payment returned from a financial institution on a deceased person's
record can be reissued.

Double Orphan Pension

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) may also be payable to the new carer if the
child's other parent is also deceased, a long term prisoner,
institutionalised or unable to be contacted or if the child is a
refugee.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Needing help after some has died? (HD001) publication and the Local
Activities Database.

Related links

Death of a single pensioner

Death of a family assistance payment customer

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Suspension of payments

Restoration of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
