
Initial contact after a stillbirth 099-01010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a person advises the death of a
stillborn child.

Payments available

Families may be eligible for the following payments for a stillborn
child:

-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) if the customer is not eligible for PPL
    for the child
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Family Tax Benefit is not payable for a stillborn child.

Stillborn children delivered on or after 1 January 2021

From 1 January 2021, there is a single rate of SBP. The single rate is
paid for each stillborn child delivered on or after 1 January 2021. If a
customer has a multiple birth and one of the children is stillborn, the
customer may receive:

-   SBP for the stillborn child, and
-   PPL for the other child(ren)

If there is any doubt with identification, or insufficient details are
provided by the customer or a third party, no action should be taken
until further confirmation of death for a child can be obtained.

Customers are not required to register the child's birth with the
relevant State/Territory department for PPL, SBP and DAP.

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Either PPL or SBP can be paid for a stillborn child. If the customer is
not eligible for PPL or withdraws their PPL claim, a claim for SBP can
be assessed.

[]Customers who have had an early claim for FTB and/or PPL assessed, can
provide information about their stillborn child by using the:

-   ‘Add newborn child’ service in their Centrelink online account, or
-   ‘Add child’ service in the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers completing the Add newborn service may be asked to supply a 6
month income estimate from the date of delivery for the Stillborn Baby
Payment where:

-   they have competed an early claim including PPL, and
-   indicate within the Add Newborn that they no longer intend to claim
    Parental Leave Pay

[] Customers should be encouraged to claim online, but they can claim
PPL or SBP by lodging the Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008) issued
to parents by the hospital. This contains a doctor/midwife declaration
which is used as confirmation of the stillbirth.

Customers who have lost or were not issued the FA008 by the hospital may
lodge the Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008m) which can be downloaded
from the website or issued by a Service Officer. Note: the FA008m does
not contain a doctor/midwife declaration so other suitable confirmation
of the stillbirth will need to be provided.

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

[] Fathers or partners can claim online or lodge a Claim for Dad and
Partner Pay (FA080).

Effect of PPL and DAP on other payments

PPL and DAP are treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of
payment for income support payments (ISP). Customers who receive an ISP
should be made aware that claiming PPL or DAP may cause their ISP to
reduce in rate or even cancel.

Customers cannot receive JobKeeper Payment for the same period they
receive PPL or DAP.

Confirmation of stillbirth

For the customer's claim to be finalised, confirmation needs to be
provided via:

the completed doctor/midwife declaration on the FA008

other suitable confirmation such as a letter (usually on hospital
letterhead) from the doctor/midwife who attended the birth, or another
appropriate hospital representative, or a report from a qualified
medical practitioner familiar with the case. The letter must:

-   confirm the doctor or midwife's name and qualification, and
-   has a signature (this may be the appropriate hospital
    representative, doctor or midwife), and
-   provide the details of the parent and child, and the date and place
    of birth

For DAP claims, confirmation provided for the PPL or SBP claim can be
used

The Resources page contains links to the FA008m and FA080 and to the
Bereavement/DOP Helpdesk.

Related links

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Completing the Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008)

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Process Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Social work services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
