
Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) 099-06020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to work out the LBP.

Eligibility for LBP

An LBP is payable to certain customers when their partner or a person
they are caring for dies. It is a one-off payment that is paid on top of
any other bereavement assistance that may be payable.

Death of a partner

For surviving partners, the LBP is the difference between:

-   the combined member of a couple rate payable to the couple in the
    bereavement period had the partner not died, and
-   the surviving partner's new single rate

The way the LBP is worked out depends on the following:

-   When Services Australia is notified of the death and when the death
    is recorded. If the member of a couple rate has continued during the
    bereavement period, the LBP is not paid for those fortnights
-   Whether the couple were living together. For example, if they were
    separated due to illness the lump sum is calculated using the member
    of a couple rate they would have received if they were living
    together
-   The calculation is different if the surviving partner dies within 14
    days of their partner and the agency is notified of their deaths at
    the same time
-   The couple rate, illness separated rate or the survivor's new single
    rate when calculating the LBP, includes the basic rate of payment as
    well as any fortnightly add-ons such as Rent Assistance,
    Pharmaceutical Allowance, Incentive Allowance, Pension Supplement or
    Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement
-   If the deceased also received Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and the
    survivor is expected to be granted FTB, Rent Assistance (RA) is not
    included in the survivor's new single rate. This is because RA will
    be paid with FTB once the claim is finalised
-   The Coronavirus Supplement is not included in the combined member of
    a couple rate, illness separated rate or the survivor's new single
    rate

Carer Payment (CP) customers

An LBP is payable to certain Carer Payment (CP) customers when the
person they were caring for dies.

If a care receiver dies, the carer may receive a LBP when either:

-   the care receiver was not partnered, or
-   the care receiver's partner was not getting a social security
    payment, a DVA Pension or an Income Support Supplement

If the carer is entitled to an LBP, the amount payable is the lesser of:

-   7 times the partnered maximum basic pension rate, and
-   7 times the CP customer's actual last instalment before the care
    receiver's death

Carer Allowance (CA) customers

If an adult care receiver dies and the carer was getting Carer Allowance
(CA) and an income support payment (other than Carer Payment) that does
not qualify them for a bereavement payment, the carer(s) may qualify for
a CA Bereavement Payment.

The CA Bereavement Payment is equal to up to 7 instalments of CA and is
paid as a lump sum to the carer on notification of the death of the care
receiver.

If a child care receiver dies, and the carer was in receipt of CA, a
bereavement payment for the carer may be payable:

-   If the child met the definition of an FTB child immediately before
    their date of death the carer may be entitled to 14 weeks of
    bereavement payment, paid as a lump sum
-   If the child did not meet the definition of an Family Tax Benefit
    (FTB) child, the carer may be entitled to 4 weeks of bereavement
    payment, paid as a lump sum

The bereavement payment is paid at the CA rate paid immediately before
the child's death.

Manual calculation of LBP

In some cases the LBP needs to be worked out manually.

Even when the system calculates the LBP, a manual calculation must be
done when the system result appears unreasonable.

A manual calculation is also required if the LBP is more than the tax
free amount. If a portion or all of the LBP is above the tax free
amount, this difference is taxable income and a tax adjustment is
required.

LBP and Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) is a one-off lump sum payment to the
surviving partner who is claiming or receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
or Youth Allowance (YA) following the death of their partner.

Eligibility for LBP remains for JSP and YA customers who are long-term
social security recipients and whose partner was a long-term social
security or pension recipient. Some customers may therefore be eligible
for both PBV and LBP, but they can only receive one of the payments.

If a customer is eligible for both PBV and LBP, they should always be
paid LBP initially.

If the PBV amount will likely be higher than the LBP, a Partner
Bereavement Payment application (SA490) is to be issued inviting the
customer to request to be paid a PBV. On the form the customer must make
a written request relinquishing their LBP entitlement in writing before
they can be paid PBV. The Resources page contains a link to the Partner
Bereavement Payment application (SA490).

When the SA490 form is processed, customers who have been paid LBP and
wish to receive PBV instead will require an adjustment to the
bereavement payment. This will be made by offsetting of LBP already paid
with the PBV. The customer is then paid a net amount of PBV, where PBV
entitlement is more than LBP.

Extra care must be taken to only invite customers whose PBV amount is
higher than the LBP amount already paid. If PBV is lower than LBP, then
an overpayment may occur.

A JSP or YAL customer cannot relinquish their PBV to receive LBP. The
exception to this rule are JSP or YA customers who transfer to another
Income Support Payment (e.g. Disability Support Payment (DSP) or Carer
Payment (CP)) that qualifies them for LBP. The PBV paid can be offset
against the LBP to reduce the PBV qualification debt.

The Resources page contains contact details for the DVA Clearance Team
(SCS), examples of LBP calculations and links to the Bereavement payment
taxation exemption job aid and the LBP calculator.

Related links

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculation of Defence Force Support Allowance (DFISA)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Qualification for ABSTUDY Lump Sum Bereavement Payment

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Assessing entitlement to Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Death of both members of a couple

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
