
Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Bereavement Allowance (BVA) 099-03050010

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Centrelink system codes used to record a
decision to cancel or suspend BVA or to reject a claim for BVA. A
customer letter generates because of this action. The code allows the
correct reason for the decision to be included in the letter.

Suspension, cancellation and rejection reasons

Reasons can be recorded manually, or automatically by the system.
Automatic cancellations occur when information provided by the customer
disqualifies them from entitlement. For example, if the customer
provides income details that exceed the income limit, the system will
cancel or reject BVA as the income is too high.

It is better to let the system cancel or reject BVA after updating the
customer's information on their record. This makes it easy for other
staff to see the reason for cancellation or rejection without requesting
more information.

If it is necessary to suspend a customer's BVA manually, follow the
appropriate process/es. This includes issuing the correct request or
notice to customers. For example, a request for information should
clearly detail:

-   the payment type that the request relates to, for example BVA
-   what information the customer needs to provide
-   the type of action the customer must take
-   when the information should be provided or when action should be
    taken (noting that this must be reasonable)
-   what happens if the information is not provided or the required
    action is not taken in the specified timeframe, and
-   the section of the relevant Act under which the request has been
    made

Code manual suspension after the specified response time. Contact the
customer to advise of making an unfavourable decision. Complete the
following steps immediately after a manual process:

Issue a manual advice if an advice did not automatically issue. The
advice must clearly state the payment type as BVA, the date of effect,
the relevant section of the legislation and outline the reason their BVA
was suspended. The advice must also include the customer's review and
appeal rights

Code a manual review for a Service Officer to follow-up the suspension
at a later date

Record a DOC on the customer's record, ensuring that it meets Online
Document Recording (ODR) standards for significant decisions and
includes what action the customer must take before the payment can be
restored. For more information see:

-   Online Document Recording (ODR) Resources page for Act References
-   Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
    ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Note: do not reject a withdrawn claim because it is deemed never to have
been made.

Related links

Cancellation of Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes

Rejecting a claim for Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Cancellation, suspension and restoration of Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Suspension of Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

How to code and action a manual review

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
