
Death of both members of a couple 099-02020080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed where both members of
a couple die and both were receiving Centrelink payments.

On this page:

Bereavement payments when both members of a couple have died

If both members of a couple die together, the older partner is deemed to
have died first and the younger partner is regarded as the 'survivor'
when assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (PBV).

If advice of the death of both members of a couple is received at the
same time but they did not die at the same time, the deaths should be
actioned in the order they occurred.

If the person identified as the 'survivor' (for the purpose of assessing
eligibility), is entitled to a LBP or PBV it may be paid to an
appropriate person, such as the executor of the estate or the person who
is liable to pay the funeral expenses.

Note: this procedure is to be used when the agency is notified of the
deaths of a couple at the same time. If both members of a couple die
within the bereavement period and we are advised separately and in the
correct sequence, an appropriate person may apply to receive any
payments that would have been paid to the survivor.

Death must be confirmed before death action finalised

Before the death action can be finalised on the record, the death must
be confirmed. If multiple notifications are received in relation to the
death of the same person, Service Officers must not create a new
activity. Instead, check the record and annotate the original DOC to
state details are correct and who advised.

Instalments paid in the name of deceased person

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution and recorded
on the deceased person's record, the direct credit or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) can be reissued to the executor of the estate if
entitlement to the payment exists. See Replacing payment made to a
deceased customer where payment was returned from financial institution.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the customer passed away:

-   is known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   is not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, the customer should be taken off
reporting before recording the death action.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on death and bereavement, the Payment and Service Finder,
links to forms and publications and a link to the Local Activities
Database.

Related links

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of one member of a pension couple

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Social work services

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
