
Assessing enh1ment to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) 099-06010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines which customers are entitled to an LBP. An LBP is
payable to certain surviving customers when their partner dies or when a
person they are caring for dies. It is a one-off payment in addition to
any other bereavement assistance that may be payable.

Death of a partner

Generally, the surviving member of a couple is entitled to an LBP if, at
the time of their partner's death, each member of the couple was either
a pensioner for LBP purposes or a long-term Social Security recipient.

To qualify for an ABSTUDY LBP, receipt of ABSTUDY Living Allowance is
also taken into account. See Qualification for ABSTUDY LBP.

Rent Assistance (RA) is included in LBP calculations for both the
previous combined member of a couple rate and the survivor's new single
rate.

Amount of LBP

No lump sum is payable if the survivor's new single rate is more than
the previous combined member of a couple rate. If the first entitlement
period end date for reassessment to the new single rate is within the
bereavement period, arrears may be paid from the date of death.

If the survivor's new single rate is zero, they may still be eligible
for an LBP due to the single income or assets tests being applied. This
may be the case even if their payment is cancelled.

The LBP is only payable to a surviving partner if Services Australia is
notified of the death in time to adjust the customer's payments before
the end of the bereavement period. This is because the LBP is the
difference between the couple's member of a couple rate and the
customer's single rate during the bereavement period. All components of
the rate are included in the calculation of the LBP.

DVA customers

Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) may be responsible for paying the
lump sum bereavement payment.

If the surviving partner is a DVA only customer, DVA assesses
entitlement to the LBP. See Initial contact after the death of a member
of a couple and the surviving partner is a DVA recipient.

For partnered customers who also receive Defence Force Income Support
Allowance (DFISA) payments, the amount of DFISA lump sum bereavement
payment that is due to the surviving partner is calculated by Services
Australia and transmitted to the DVA system for payment. See Calculation
of DFISA. In these cases, a manual follow up will be created
automatically when death action is undertaken on the primary payment and
directed to the DVA Clearance Team (SCS).

Carer Payment (CP) customers

Death of a care receiver

The carer(s) may qualify for bereavement assistance in the form of a 14
week extension of CP.

In some cases, the carer may also qualify for a lump sum bereavement
payment:

-   If they are caring for a child with a severe disability or severe
    medical condition and that child dies.
-   If a child was in a short term or episodic care situation,
    regardless of the end date of that care period.
-   If an adult they were caring for dies and the adult was not a member
    of a couple or their surviving partner was not in receipt of a
    social security benefit, social security pension, Service Pension,
    Veteran Payment or Income Support Supplement (ISS) when the person
    died.
-   If an adult they were caring for dies and the adult was the partner
    of the CP customer. Note: in these circumstances the LBP is paid (if
    entitled) using the death of a partner calculation, not the death of
    a care receiver calculation.

Death of a care receiver who is permanently institutionalised

Qualification for CP ceases for the carer. Payment of CP continues for
14 weeks from the date of admission to the institution. This is
regardless of the end date of the short term or episodic care period for
the CP child.

If the care receiver dies during the 14 week period and the CP customer
and their care receiver were a couple, section 198AAA of the Social
Security Act ceases to apply and section 237 may apply instead. That is,
a new 14 week bereavement period may commence and the carer may be
eligible for an LBP if all aspects of s237 are met. The References page
links to the legislation.

If the care receiver and the CP customer are not members of a couple,
the carer continues receiving CP for 14 weeks from the date of admission
to the institution but is not entitled to a further 14 week bereavement
period or a lump sum bereavement payment.

Death during a period of hospitalisation or temporary cessation of care

If a carer is eligible for CP under the hospitalisation provisions, or
continues to be eligible under the temporary cessation of care
provisions, the bereavement provisions for CP still apply if the care
receiver dies during this period.

Death shortly after grant of CP

An LBP may be made even if the care receiver dies before the carer's
first payday.

Carer Allowance (CA) customers

Death of an adult care receiver

If their carer was getting CA and an income support payment other than
CP that does not qualify them for a bereavement payment, the carer(s)
may qualify for a CA Bereavement Payment which is paid as a lump sum. CA
is cancelled at the end of the bereavement rate continuation period.

The CA Bereavement Payment is an amount equivalent of up to 7
instalments of CA and is paid as a lump sum to the carer on notification
of the death of the care receiver.

If there is shared care, each carer will receive a CA Bereavement
Payment based on the percentage of CA shared care they provided prior to
the care receiver’s death. However, if the care provided is shared care
but only one carer is receiving CA and the carer receives one hundred
percent of the rate of CA payment, then that CA carer will be paid the
full rate of the CA Bereavement Payment.

There is no entitlement to the CA Bereavement Payment if a carer
notifies of the death outside the (14 weeks) bereavement period.

Death of a child care receiver

If their carer was getting CA, a bereavement payment for the carer may
be payable. If the child:

-   met the definition of an FTB child immediately before their date of
    death, the carer may be entitled to 14 weeks of bereavement payment,
    paid as a lump sum
-   did not meet the definition of an FTB child, the carer may be
    entitled to 4 weeks of bereavement payment, paid as a lump sum

The bereavement payment is paid at the CA rate paid immediately before
the child's death.

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer

FHA customers may be entitled to an LBP if their partner dies and at the
time of their partner’s death:

the person had been getting FHA for 52 weeks continuously, or

the person had been getting FHA at the start of the previous 52 weeks
and they did not lose social security recipient status for more than 6
weeks of the previous 52 weeks, and

immediately before the partner died they were:

-   receiving a social security pension
-   receiving a Service Pension
-   receiving a Veteran Payment
-   receiving an Income Support Supplement (ISS), or
-   a long term social security recipient (including receiving FHA), and

the person’s new single rate is less than the combined rate the couple
were receiving prior to the death, and

Services Australia is notified of the death in time to adjust the
customer’s payments before the end of the bereavement period

FHA is a time limited payment and is payable for a cumulative period
only. On 1 August 2018, the cumulative period was extended from 3 years
(1,095 days) to 4 years (1,460 days). The amount of bereavement payment
is not affected by the amount of time remaining on the deceased
partner’s payment ‘clock’, including when they had less than 14 weeks
FHA eligibility remaining on payment.

JobSeeker Payment and Youth Allowance customers

From the 20 March 2020, a new Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) one-off
lump sum payment was introduced for JobSeeker Payment and Youth
Allowance customers when their partner dies.

Some JobSeeker Payment and Youth Allowance customers may be eligible for
both PBV and LBP; but they can only receive one of the bereavement
payments,

If they are eligible for both PBV and LBP, they must lodge an SA490
Partner Bereavement Payment Application relinquishing their LBP
entitlement in writing before they can be paid PBV.

If they have been paid LBP and they want to receive PBV instead, after
the Partner Bereavement Payment application (SA490) is processed, the
bereavement payment will be adjusted by automatically offsetting the LBP
with PBV.

-   If the PBV is more than the LBP, a top-up will be paid
-   If the PBV is less than the LBP, the customer will incur an
    overpayment

Once the customer has been paid PBV, they cannot change their mind or
forgo it to receive LBP. Exception: when they transfer to another income
support payment that is backdated to the partner’s date of death and
they qualify for LBP.

Persons in prison or undergoing psychiatric care for a crime

Bereavement payments cannot be paid to a person who is in prison or
undergoing psychiatric care for a crime. However, if they are acquitted,
bereavement assistance may then become payable even if some time has
passed.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, relevant forms,
the LBP Calculator and the Bereavement payment taxation exemption job
aid.

Related links

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

Qualification for ABSTUDY Lump Sum Bereavement Payment

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Death of a Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer or partner

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
