
Death of a single social security benefit customer 099-02020130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to be followed when a single
social security benefit customer dies.

When a different procedure applies

A different procedure applies when a:

-   single pensioner dies
-   family assistance customer dies, or
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer dies

Notification provisions relating to the death of a single customer

Under the Social Security Administration Act the following people need
to notify Services Australia within 28 days when a customer or care
receiver dies:

-   nominees
-   carers receiving Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
-   partners receiving a Centrelink payment or service

This does not override the rules for payments after death for a single
social security benefit customer.

If the customer’s death does not need to be notified under any provision
of the Act, the following can give the date of death:

-   funeral director
-   care facility
-   executor of the estate

Services Australia should be told as soon as possible.

To avoid any debt to the deceased customer's estate, the death needs to
be recorded before the end of the entitlement period in which the single
social security benefit customer died.

Death must be confirmed before death action finalised

Before the death action can be finalised on the record, the death must
be confirmed.

If multiple notifications are received in relation to the death of the
same person, do not create a new activity. Instead, check the record and
annotate the original DOC to state details are correct and who advised.

Final payments

When a single social security benefit customer dies, in most cases
payment should only be made up to the day before the date of death.
Unlike a single pensioner, the estate is not entitled to payment up to
the end of the entitlement period in which the person died.

The following rules are applied to make the final payment to a deceased
social security benefit customer.

If a customer dies on:

-   a day that is not an Entitlement Period End Date (EPED), they are
    paid up to the day before they died (for example. EPED is 13
    January, and customer dies on 5 January, they are entitled to be
    paid up to the 4 January)
-   an EPED - no additional money will be paid (for example, EPED is 13
    January and customer dies on 13 January - if payment has already
    been made for the date of death, it will not be an overpayment)

These different rules allow for difficulty in recalling payments that
have already been processed.

If the deceased customer receives any payment, there may be an
overpayment to the deceased customer's estate. This includes payments
for a period after the date of death.

If there was a previous requirement to lodge a continuation form, the
form must be lodged, if possible. This will notify of any changes to
income and assets and stimulate the payment. The executor of the estate
could sign the form on behalf of the deceased social security benefit
customer. If the informant is unaware of any income or asset changes,
the reporting statement should still be processed to allow the payment
to be stimulated.

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution, and
recorded on the deceased person's record, the direct credit or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS) can be reissued to the executor of the estate.
See Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was
returned from financial institution.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the customer passed away
is:

-   known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   not known, the payment must still be stimulated

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
the Payment and Service Finder and information on death and bereavement.
It also contains links to the 'Needing help after someone has died?'
(HD001) pamphlet and the Request for Verification form (SS257) form,
Advice of death form (SA116) and the Local Activities Database.

Related links

28 day rule for bereavement

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Death of a single pensioner

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Initial contact after someone has died

Actioning notification of the death of a student

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Social work service referral

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments

Reporting requirements for job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
