
Death of a member of an allowee couple 099-02020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed when Services
Australia is advised of the death of a member of a couple. At the time
of death both members of the couple were receiving a social security
benefit or allowance.

Other procedures apply

Other procedures apply if:

-   the surviving partner is not in receipt of a Centrelink or
    Department of Veterans' Affairs income support payment
-   the surviving partner is in receipt of Parenting Payment Partnered
    (PPP)
-   one member of the couple is a pensioner and one is an allowee
-   both members of the couple are pensioners
-   the surviving partner receives Partner Allowance
-   a PPP customer dies

Confirm a death

Before it can be coded on the record, the death must be confirmed.

When death is confirmed and multiple notifications have been received in
relation to the death of the same person, Service Officers must not
create a new activity. Instead, check the record and annotate the
original DOC to state details are correct and who advised.

The person notifying of the death should be advised that information
used for Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare payments and services is
transferred within Services Australia. However, additional contact with
one of the agency's programs separately may be required to update
relevant information, depending on the circumstances.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the period in which the customer passed away:

-   is known, this must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   is not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, the customer should be taken off
reporting before recording the death action.

Surviving partner's eligibility

If both members of the couple were long-term social security recipients
at the time of the death, it is intended that the surviving partner
receives at least the amount that would have been paid to the couple
during the bereavement payment period.

For the surviving partner, bereavement assistance may include some or
all of the following:

-   A Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP). This represents the difference
    between the couple's previous member of a couple rate of payment and
    the surviving partner's new single rate of payment over the
    bereavement payment period
-   Payment of the combined rates up to and including the date of death
-   Payment of the single rate from the day after death if the agency is
    notified of the death within the bereavement period. If the member
    of a couple rate of payment has continued, the LBP is reduced

During the bereavement period, the surviving partner may need to lodge
reporting statements to advise the agency of changes in circumstances.
[] These may be lodged online, via phone self service, faxed or posted.
The customer can be exempt from mutual obligation requirements during
this time.

Surviving partner in receipt of CA

If the surviving partner was receiving Carer Allowance (CA) and an
income support payment (other than Carer Payment) they may be entitled
to a CA bereavement payment if their partner was:

-   the deceased care receiver, and
-   either not in receipt of an income support payment, or was receiving
    a social security benefit but was not a long term benefit recipient
    at the time of death

Payment returned from financial institution

If a payment has been returned from a financial institution, and
recorded on the deceased person's record, the payment can be reissued.

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

PBV is a one-off lump sum payment paid to a JSP or YA customer following
the death of their partner on or after the 20 March 2020.

The PBV is based on a multiple of the customer's daily rate of JSP or
YA, plus an additional component if the customer is pregnant.

PBV can be paid to new claimants of JSP and YA, as well as existing
customers, and is available to YA jobseekers, students and apprentices,
as well as dependent YA customers.

Assessment of assets

If the surviving partner was a joint owner of any assets with their late
partner, full ownership of the assets legally transfers to the surviving
partner following the death of their partner. However, for Social
Security purposes, if assets are owned in joint names with the deceased
partner, the surviving partner is only assessed as owning 50 per cent.

The system will continue to assess that the surviving partner owns 50
per cent of the asset, until the surviving partner advises of the
transfer of assets.

If the surviving partner is granted a reversionary income stream, it is
to be assessed from the date that it is first entitled to be received. A
lump sum arrears payment received by the reversionary beneficiary,
accrued between the death of the primary beneficiary and when the
reversionary beneficiary commences to receive regular payments, is
assessed as income from the income stream. This means the income is
assessed over the period to which it relates and may result in a debt
for that period.

Effective from 9 May 2018, where the assessment of the lump sum arrears
result in a debt during the bereavement period for the surviving spouse,
consideration should be given to waiver provisions contained under Class
of Debt, Section 1237AB(1) of the Social Security Act 1991. The
legislative instrument 'Social Security (Waiver of Debts – Bereavement
Period) Specification 2017' permits this action if all provisions are
satisfied.

Note: any debt outside the 14 week bereavement period cannot be waived
under the legislative instrument. The legislative instrument is not
retrospective. This means that any of these debts that occur before 9
May 2018 cannot be waived under class of debt waiver provisions.

If joint assets are recorded, a bereavement review should be coded for
16 weeks after date of death. See Bereavement reviews.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information, claim form and the Payment and Service Finder for burials
assistance information, links to forms and publications.

Related links

Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Calculating Partner Bereavement Payment

Actioning notification of the death of a student

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Bereavement reviews

Death of a member of a pensioner and allowee couple

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of a customer in receipt of Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)

Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer

Death of a customer and their partner is not in receipt of a Centrelink
or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) income support payment

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) jobseeker)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of both members of a couple

Death of the partner of a Partner Allowance customer

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

Social Work Services

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer when payment was returned
from financial institution

Suspension of payments

The Working Credit Initiative

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Restoration of payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
