
Change of circumstances for Widow Allowance (WA) customers 099-09060000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures applicable when a current Widow
Allowance (WA) customer advises a change in their circumstance.

Closure of Widow Allowance (WA)

From 1 July 2018, no new claims for Widow Allowance can be granted.

If a customer advises of a change in their circumstances which results
in loss of entitlement, they will need to claim a different income
support payment, such as JobSeeker Payment.

If the customer's circumstances change again, and as a result they meet
the WA eligibility criteria again, they will be unable to reclaim WA.

Payment should not be cancelled, as the favourable decision overrides
the adverse decision when a customer notifies multiple events within 14
days, and:

-   the first notifiable event results in an adverse decision, and
-   the second notifiable event results in a favourable decision which
    nullifies the earlier event

Notification obligations

WA customers are obliged to advise Services Australia, usually within 14
days, of any event or change in circumstances that could affect their
payment.

Once a customer has signed their claim form (confirming, among other
things, that they have read and understood what changes they must
advise) they are bound by the notification provisions.

Notifiable events

Customers are advised what they must notify in their grant notification
letter and on the back of each reassessment letter sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes a customer must advise. As
circumstances vary for each customer, this list is not exhaustive.

Changes of circumstance that may require review or update to a
customer's record include any change to:

-   income or assets, including commencing employment
-   contact details including changes to address and/or telephone number
-   accommodation details, including changes to address and rent
-   relationship status
-   residence status

At this time, consider whether this customer is eligible for the Age
Pension.

Consequences if fail to notify

Widow Allowance (WA) customers may incur an overpayment if they fail to
notify a change of circumstance which results in a loss of entitlement.

As WA closed to new claims from 1 July 2018, if the customer's WA is
cancelled they will not be able to reclaim the payment.

If the customer still requires income support, they will need to test
their eligibility for another payment such as JobSeeker Payment.

Check and update contact details

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Related links

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (job seeker)

Commencing or returning to self-employment for JobSeeker Payment, Youth
Allowance and Austudy

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Widow Allowance (WA) customer going overseas

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Cancellation of Widow Allowance (WA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
