
Assessing enh1ment to a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) 099-19100838

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines which customers are entitled to a Partner
Bereavement Payment (PBV).

Entitlement to PBV

A one-off PBV may be payable to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth
Allowance (YA) customers when their partner dies. PBV is available to
both new claimants and existing customers.

To receive PBV:

-   the customer must be receiving JSP or YA, the rate of JSP or YA must
    not be nil
-   both the customer and their deceased partner must have been an
    Australian resident when the partner died. Customers paid JSP or YA
    under the New Zealand (NZ) 10 year residence exemption are not
    eligible for PBV, because they are NZ non-protected Special Category
    Visa (SCV) holders
-   the customer, their correspondence nominee or a third party must
    notify of the partner's death within the 14 week bereavement period
-   the customer and the deceased person were a member of a couple when
    their partner died
-   the customer must not have re-partnered when they notify of the
    death
-   if pregnant and the pregnancy due date is more than 14 weeks after
    the partner's death, then Services Australia can be notified of the
    death at any time until the child is born or pregnancy ends, during
    this extended bereavement period

If the customer is also eligible for a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment
(LBP), they must relinquish the LBP in writing. This includes customers
who have already been paid LBP and wish to receive PBV instead.

Amount of PBV

The PBV is based on a multiple of the customer's daily rate of JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA), plus an additional component if
the customer is pregnant.

Offsetting of PBV

PBV offsetting allows bereavement payment adjustments without the need
for debt raising to occur.

PBV can be offset in the following situations:

-   If a customer is eligible for Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) and
    PBV, has received LBP and later chooses to receive PBV, then the
    amount of PBV paid is offset by the amount of LBP. This is because
    the customer is not entitled to receive both payments. The offset
    may result in a net payment, a potential debt or nil amount
-   If the customer has received PBV at the non-pregnant rate and later
    provides evidence of pregnancy, then the second amount of PBV paid
    is offset by the original amount of PBV. This is a top-up of PBV

If a customer is eligible for LBP and PBV, and is paid PBV, they cannot
later choose to receive LBP. This is because by choosing to receive PBV,
they have relinquished their entitlement to LBP. The LBP cannot
therefore be offset by PBV.

Note: where a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) customer
who has received PBV is granted another income support payment that
qualifies them for LBP, then LBP can be paid with the new income support
payment as it is paid under different bereavement provisions. However,
the PBV cannot offset the LBP. The PBV will be an overpayment as it is
not part of the benefit transfer process.

Persons in prison or undergoing psychiatric care for a crime

Bereavement payments cannot be paid to a person who is in prison or
undergoing psychiatric care for a crime. However, if they are acquitted,
bereavement assistance may then become payable even if some time has
passed.

The Resources page contains a link to the Bereavement Payment Taxation
job aid, offsetting examples and links for the Jobseeker Boutique
Bereavement Team (JBBT).

Related links

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Processing Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) claims

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker)

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Job seeker online claim appointment

Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when
their partner dies

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payment

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
