
Confirming concession card enh1ment and issuing interim vouchers 101-06070000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about confirming concession card
entitlement and issuing interim vouchers (confirmation of concession
card entitlement) to eligible customers. Concession providers may also
access the Centrelink Confirmation eService (CCeS) to accurately
determine a cardholder's entitlement.

On this Page:

Confirming concession entitlements

Customers may contact to advise that they have experienced difficulties
when attempting to access concessional rates provided by service
providers, for example:

-   at a pharmacy or Medicare Australia office for Pharmaceutical
    Benefits Scheme (PBS) prescription medicines, or
-   another service provider using CCeS electronic validation processes

In addition there may be an inconsistency between what the customer has
been told and what is on their record.

In cases where a concession provider does not utilise the services of
CCeS, it also may be necessary to manually confirm concession
entitlement periods.

Customers can use the digital wallet in the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app or the myGov app wallet. See Resources for a link.

It allows customers to show their concession card using their smart
device. It is at the discretion of the concession provider whether they
accept the digital card so it is important that customers have their
physical card with them.

Run the Confirm Concession Entitlement guided procedure to accurately
determine the customer's concession entitlement. This will:

-   produce a letter for the customer confirming their concessional
    entitlement, and
-   refresh the customer record overnight and resend concessional
    information to Medicare Australia

The confirm concession entitlement letter may be printed centrally or
locally. The customer may opt to attend the service centre to collect
the letter or have the letter posted to their mailing address. At the
customer's request, this information can be faxed directly to a
concession provider.

Refreshing and resending concession data to Medicare Australia ensures
information is updated in real time for electronic validation by
concession providers. Customers must also be reassured as to their
correct entitlements because a pharmacy or Medicare Australia are not
the only concession providers with whom customers may interact.

Interim Vouchers

An interim voucher provides a current card holder with verification of
entitlement to a Health Care Card (HCC), Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC), Pensioner Concession Card (PCC), ex-Carer Allowance (child)
Health Care Card (EHC) or Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) in
situations where a customer urgently needs their concession card. This
includes:

-   Released prisoners who may need to access a doctor on release, or
    travel some distance home from prison and require access to travel
    concessions
-   An eligible customer who is temporarily residing overseas and
    subsequently returns to Australia, for example, missionaries serving
    overseas. These customers are entitled to a HCC while in Australia
    and for 6 weeks after a temporary departure. They can be issued an
    interim voucher to cover the period of their stay in Australia.
    Periods default to 14 days but may be extended up to 3 months
-   A pension customer who was residing overseas and subsequently
    returns to live in Australia, is eligible for the PCC to be issued
    when they return. As most of these customers are managed by
    International Services and reside in ENV I, a concession card will
    not be automatically issued. See Return to Australia procedures for
    service centre and Smart Centre staff for pension payments
-   A card holder for the use of their children when they are
    temporarily in the care of a non-custodial parent. Note: certain
    information relating to both the custodial and non-custodial parent
    must be excluded from the interim voucher. The name and CRN of the
    child/ren are to be recorded on the interim voucher. 'For Child Use
    Only' will be displayed in the address field

If a customer is eligible for a concession card and urgently needs an
interim voucher, it can be issued by a Service Officer to the customer.
Interim vouchers are not be mailed to the customer because they require
a customer’s signature. Note: To help people affected by the
Coronavirus, interim vouchers may be created or issued for longer
periods, printed locally and posted to the customer’s home or postal
address

Eligibility for an interim voucher

An interim voucher can only be issued to a valid card holder and cannot
be issued between the lodgement of a claim and the determination of that
claim, even if the customer appears to be in urgent need of concessional
entitlement.

When a customer is granted their payment or concession card, an interim
voucher may be issued immediately.

Issuing an interim voucher

The Concession Card Reissue guided procedure is used to issue the
voucher.

The Service Officer must ensure that the customer satisfactorily
confirms their identity. See Authenticating a customer. Signature checks
should only be conducted if the Service Officer doubts the customer's
identity. For example if they have no identity documents and cannot
answer questions about previous addresses, bank accounts.

Issuing interim voucher for a period longer than 14 days

An interim voucher can be issued for any period of a maximum of 3 months
up until the card expiry date. Generally it is issued to cover the
customer for a period of 14 days. By this time the customer should
receive the original or replacement card in the mail.

The exceptions to this rule where the interim voucher may be issued for
a period longer than 14 days are:

-   There is a continuing problem, with the system failing to issue
    cards
-   A pension customer who was residing overseas and subsequently
    returns to live in Australia, is eligible for the PCC to be issued
    when they return. Most of these customers are managed by
    International Services and reside in ENV I so a concession card will
    not be automatically issued. See Return to Australia procedures for
    service centre and Smart Centre staff for pension payments
-   An interim voucher issued to a card holder (custodial parent) for
    the use by their dependent children when in the care of a
    non-custodial parent. Interim vouchers can only be issued to the
    customer. Under no circumstance can they be issued directly to the
    non-custodial parent. The custodial parent's address must not be
    recorded on an interim voucher issued for use by the non-custodial
    parent. In cases of family and domestic violence or other sensitive
    family circumstances, a social worker may be required to facilitate
    the provision of the interim voucher to the non-custodial parent
-   An interim voucher issued to some customers whose payment has been
    cancelled due to employment income but the customer remains eligible
    for an extension concession card and their card has been lost,
    stolen or destroyed
-   An interim voucher issued to customers whose records are saved
    Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) cases

Personal details on an Interim voucher

Interim vouchers displaying a different name to that recorded on the
system should not be issued to a customer. If a customer requests that
an interim voucher be issued because the name stated on their
automatically issued concession card is different to the name they use
with concession providers, check the customer's record. The system
defaults to display the recorded current Legal (LGL) name on a
concession card. Make any updates before issuing a replacement card or
interim voucher.

Partnered customers are able to request to have their concession card
reissued without their partner’s name listed. This may be for privacy
concerns the customer may have.

Customers may nominate preferences for display addresses where they have
more than one address recorded, including a preference for no address to
appear on the concession card.

Effect of absence from Australia on concession entitlement

When an eligible customer departs Australia permanently, their
concession entitlement is cancelled on the date of departure, regardless
of what time of day the customer departs. For temporary absences,
concession cards issued by Centrelink are portable for up to 6 weeks
from departure, subject to continuing eligibility.

For further details, including resetting portability periods when
customers return to Australia after an absence and reclaim requirements,
see Portability of concession cards.

If a customer contacts because their concession entitlement has been
cancelled due to an overseas absence, and the datalink has not yet
updated the record to show the customer as having returned to Australia,
see the Process page in Return to Australia procedures for service
centre and Smart Centre Call staff for pension payments for guidance.

Medicare Safety Net queries

If a customer contacts querying their entitlement to the lower Medicare
Safety Net threshold as a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A recipient,
Service Officers should refresh the FTB Part A Validation (FAV) screen.

The Resources page contains a link to the Confirmation of Concession
Card entitlement (SS055) form, links to mySupport, the digital wallet
and using the myGov app.

Contents

Concession cards for eligible children temporarily in non-custodial
parent's care

Related links

How to reissue concession cards

Preferences for concession cards

Concession Entitlement System

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) - Your Health

Authenticating a customer

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Deduction and Confirmation programmes

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
