
Age qualifications for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or a Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) 101-06040040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to children and youths under
18 who will generally only qualify for concession entitlement as a
dependant on their parent's concession card (that is if the parent
qualifies for and is granted a card). Some children and youths under 18
years of age may qualify for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) in
their own right or their foster carers for a Foster Child Health Care
Card (FST) depending on their circumstances.

Age qualifications

0-15 years - Children under 16 should be covered by their parent's
Health Care Card (HCC) through entitlement to Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
or an income support payment. The exceptions are foster children or
children residing in an Approved Care Organisation (ACO). For further
information see Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children.

Children under the age of 16 years and in receipt of an income support
payment in their own right which does not include an automatic HCC are
not FTB children and may qualify for a LIC in their own right.

16-18 years - Secondary students under 19 may only qualify for a LIC if
they are not a FTB child.

Note: it is not a requirement under the FTB child definition, for a
person to actually receive FTB payments for a child. An adult who has
responsibility for a child can request cancellation of the FTB payment,
but this will not enable the child to become eligible for the grant of a
LIC in their own right.

19-24 years - Full-time students and unemployed persons may qualify for
a LIC in their own name, although their carers may continue to receive
FTB for them.

25 years and over - Customers 25 years and over may qualify for a LIC.

EHC qualifications

Previous qualification as CA (child) - A full-time student between 16
and 25 may qualify for an Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card
(EHC) if the claimant has a disability or medical condition that
previously qualified their carer for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) on the
day before the claimant turned 16. There are no age requirements for LIC
qualification for any children in one of the following categories:

-   they are not an FTB child of an individual, that is they reside in
    an Approved Care Organisation (ACO)
-   they are an Australian Apprentice (apprentice or trainee)
-   they are a foster child

Post-secondary students and unemployed persons

From the 1st January, 2019, If the customer is in receipt of Youth
Allowance, Austudy (student or apprentice), or ABSTUDY Living Allowance,
they will automatically be issued a Health Care Card (HCC).

Individuals undertaking apprenticeships

There is no age restriction for an Australian apprentice (apprentice or
trainee) to qualify for the LIC.

An individual under 19 years of age who is undertaking a combination of
secondary studies and an apprenticeship is not eligible for a LIC
because they are regarded as a secondary student for LIC purposes.

Children who are in the care of an individual

A child who is a foster child, ward of the state, refugee or orphan, and
is in the care of an individual who is not their natural or adoptive
parent, is considered to be an FTB child of that individual, and
therefore cannot claim a LIC.

Children in the care of institutions

A child who is a foster child, ward of the state, refugee or orphan and
is in the care of an institution such as an ACO, is not in the care of
an individual who is an Australian resident. Therefore, the child is not
a FTB child, as institutions are not natural persons and cannot be
Australian residents. Regardless of what payment the institution may be
receiving for the child's care, a HCC is not automatically issued to
cover the child.

However, children in the care of organisations are able to qualify for a
LIC in their own right as long as no individual is being paid FTB for
the care of the child. The Claim for a Health Care Card (SS050) must be
completed in the name of the child and not in the name of the
organisation or a worker from that organisation.

Children in foster care

A child is considered to be in foster care where:

-   the child is not the natural or adopted child of the carer, and
-   the carer is responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and
    development of the child

Foster care refers to both formal (care is mediated by a state or
territory welfare authority) and informal (a relative such as a
grandparent or friend assumes care of a child in a private agreement)
care arrangements.

A foster carer is not required to receive FTB for a foster child in
order for the child to obtain a HCC. A Foster Child Health Care Card
(FST) can be claimed regardless of whether a foster child appears as a
dependant on any other concession card. See Health Care Cards (HCC) for
foster children.

Legal responsibility rests with the State Government

Where a LIC or Foster Child Health Care Card (FST) has been claimed on
behalf of a child for whom legal responsibility rests with the State
Government, it may be necessary to create a person (PER) record (as
distinct from a child (CHI) record) for that child.

Some State Government organisations have requested nominee status for
these children to ensure their entitlements are correctly received. A
nominee can only be appointed to a customer with a PER record and cannot
be attached to a CHI record.

The Resources page contains examples regarding students and LIC
eligibility. It also contains a links to the LIC income test, Claim for
a Health Care Card (SS050), LIC information and information about Health
Care Card entitlement for grandparents and carers.

Related links

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC)

Payment rates and thresholds

Health Care Card (HCC)

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Preferences for concession cards

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Apply for payment or concession card options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
