
Appointment Based Service 101-21082648

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage customer contact.

Appointment Based Service

When a customer contacts, promote digital services and try to resolve
their enquiry. If this cannot be resolved and the customer needs to be
seen face-to-face, offer an appointment at their local service centre.

Encourage customers to book an appointment before visiting a service
centre. This helps to avoid queuing and supports customers to be seen
quickly.

To connect a customer with their local service centre, they can choose
from either a phone call (outbound call) or a face-to-face appointment.

Note: Office Locator on the Resources page has the most current
information on the face-to-face service offer at a customer’s local
service centre.

Nominees: Correspondence nominees (NOC) and Correspondence/Payment
nominees (NOB) have permission to access the appointment based service
on behalf of the customer and perform activities or updates for the
customer.

Face-to-face walk-in

Customers who are vulnerable or distressed may still be seen as a
walk-in at their local service centre without an appointment.

Service Officers can refer customers to a service centre for
face-to-face walk-in where:

-   the enquiry must be completed face-to-face, or
-   an appointment is not available or appropriate, or
-   staff identify customers as being vulnerable, distressed or at risk

Reminders or advices about appointments

Customers can view and reschedule their appointments by accessing their
Centrelink online account through myGov or the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app.

View or reschedule an appointment

See View, reschedule or cancel an appointment in the Centrelink
Appointment System.

Contact in relation to a claim

If a customer is contacting in relation to an intention to claim an
income support payment, ensure all their contact details are current.

The Resources page contains contact details, a complete list of
appointment types and parameters, and time display issues to consider
when booking and reviewing appointments.

Related links

Using self service

Centrelink Appointment System

Booking appointments in the Centrelink Appointment System

Create and manage appointment profiles in the Centrelink Appointment
System

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Complete and finalise appointments in the Centrelink Appointment System

Job seeker online claim appointment

Updating address details

View, reschedule or cancel an appointment in the Centrelink Appointment
System

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
