-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines LIC eligibility criteria and concessions
available to LIC holders.

LIC entitlement

The LIC entitles the customer and their dependents (their partner and
any Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children or regular care children) to
Commonwealth health concessions such as cheaper pharmaceuticals. The LIC
is granted for a period of 12 months unless entitlement is lost.

Eligibility for a LIC

To qualify for a LIC the customer must be in Australia in order to lodge
a valid claim and satisfy the residence requirements and the Health Care
Card (HCC) income test. LIC is not subject to an assets test. Customers
currently entitled to other concession cards may also apply for a LIC.

Low Income Health Care Cards have no age specific requirements. Normally
children under 16 would be included on parents or guardians FTB
eligibility. The exception are foster children residing in an Approved
Care Organisation (ACO).

A child who is a foster child, ward of the state, refugee or orphan and
is in the care of an institution such as an ACO, is not in the care of
an individual who is an Australian resident.

Children in the care of organisations are able to qualify for a LIC in
their own right as long as no individual is being paid FTB for the care
of the child.

Dependants must meet certain age qualifications to be eligible on their
parent's LIC card claimants in receipt of a Prescribed Education Payment
are eligible to claim LIC regardless of their status as a dependent.
These payments are:

-   VCES
-   Postgraduate Awards Scheme

Self-Employment Assistance participants who do not receive an income
support payment may also be eligible for a LIC and should be advised to
claim a LIC. See Self-Employment Assistance for further information.

Note: the Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) does not automatically issue
the customer a Health Care Card (HCC). For this reason staff should be
inviting customers applying for, or who have been granted a Disaster
Income Recovery Subsidy (DIRS), to claim a LIC

Digital card

Customers can access their digital wallet in the myGov app or on the
Express Plus Centrelink app. It allows customers to present their
concession card using their smart device. It is at the discretion of the
concession provider whether they accept the digital card so it is
important that customers have their physical card with them.

The Resources page contains links to the digital wallet, using the myGov
app, forms, the LIC income test, concessions available for LIC
cardholders and A guide to concession cards (CO153) brochure.

Contents

Age qualifications for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) or a Foster
Child Health Care Card (FST)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Cancellation of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

How to reissue concession cards

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Rejecting a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claim

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC)

Restoration of a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE) to access archived Low
Income Health Care Card (LIC) data

Related links

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Dependents listed on a customer's concession card

Extra concession information

Fraud

Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards

Preferences for concession cards

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
