
Silver Service phone line for Specified Personnel at Agent sites 101-07030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Silver Service priority phone line is
used by Specified Personnel at rural and remote Agent sites.

On this Page:

Silver Service

Silver Service is a dedicated phone line for rural and community Agents.
This is a priority service.

Specified Personnel at Agent sites have phone lines registered solely
for Silver Service use.

Agent sites must nominate a phone number owned by Services Australia
which they use to connect with the Silver Service. This will 'authorise'
the phone number.

When the Silver Service is called from the 'authorised' phone, the
telephone system will recognise the number and place the call in the
correct queue.

When using this service:

calls can only be made by Specified Personnel

the number must not to be given to customers

Proof of Record Ownership (PORO) may be conducted, but this will occur
by the Agent Specified Personnel:

-   asking the customer questions, and
-   relaying the responses back to the Service Officer

the 'authorised' phone must be used

the correct Silver Service phone number must be used

If Specified Personnel contact a Smart Centre:

-   advise them of the Silver Service line, and
-   tell them to telephone their Zone Coordinator if they are unclear
    about the Silver Service arrangements

Agent Specified Personnel are responsible for identifying when to use
the Silver Service line. They will contact for the following:

-   complex queries, for example transactions that the Specified
    Personnel cannot help the customer with using self service
-   identity confirmation
-   obtaining myGov linking codes

Authenticating Specified Personnel

Service Officers must authenticate Specified Personnel before helping
with any customer enquiries.

Specified Personnel must provide the following:

-   Agent site location and Office Locator code
-   verbal confirmation that they are Services Australia Specified
    Personnel at that Agent site
-   their full name (including first and last name)

The Service Officer must verify the information in Office Locator under
Teams at (site name), then click on Confidentiality Agreement.

This process must be completed before the Service Officer progresses the
enquiry. If the Service Officer has any concerns about the validity of
the caller or if the caller is not able to provide the Office Locator
code, they should ask further questions. Office Locator includes
information to support authentication such as:

-   opening hours
-   contact phone numbers and
-   Street/postal address.

If the Service Officer still has concerns, call the Agent site using the
authorised phone number. This is found in the contact details for that
site in Office Locator.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

Accepting identity documents via Silver Service

Initiating a call to the Silver Service Line for Identity Confirmation
is limited to Specified Personnel at Agent sites only. It is not
acceptable for customers or Specified Personnel at Access Points to call
Silver Service for enquiries.

Service Officers can receive identity documents verbally from Specified
Personnel at an Agent site. Specified Personnel, not the customer, must
provide the detail to the Service Officer.

Using Silver Service to issue a myGov Linking Code

Customers with a myGov account can get help from Specified Personnel to
get a myGov Linking Code.

Customers need to provide an approved photographic identity document for
a myGov Linking Code. See Using the myGov Staff Linking Application to
help customers access services via myGov.

Assisting with complex enquiries

Agent Specified Personnel will help customers to access self service
options or main business lines where:

-   it is identified that the customer is registered, and
-   it is suitable to use the phone

They will call the Silver Service line if:

-   they are unable to assist the customer, or
-   the customer has special needs, or
-   the type of enquiry warrants priority assistance. For example, a
    death notification

Unless there are extenuating circumstances, Agent Specified Personnel
should not call the Silver Service line when a customer wants to:

-   update general information. For example, a phone number or an
    address
-   find out their reporting date or how their claim is progressing
-   report income
-   check their eligibility for an Advance Payment

Proof of record ownership (PORO)

Service Officers will confirm PORO to avoid:

-   inadvertent disclosure of personal information
-   breach of privacy and
-   intertwining customer records/data

Services Officers must ask the Agent Specified Personnel questions in
order to complete PORO.

The Agent Specified Personnel will:

-   ask the customer for the information, and
-   relay the responses back to the Service Officer

Service Officers should not ask the Agent Specified Personnel to hand
the phone to the customer.

Service Officers must ensure that the correct record is located. See
also Authenticating a Centrelink customer.

Do not release Information if there is doubt about the customer's
identity.

Inadvertent Access

Privacy and confidentiality provisions administered by Services
Australia must be followed at all times. This includes times when staff
accidentally accesses a Services Australia record of a person they know.
If during the course of their duties staff inadvertently access the
information of a person in whom they have a personal interest, they must
record the incident on the Inadvertent Access Register, see Inadvertent
access and authorised access.

The Resources page contains links to the myGov Linking Application, the
myGov intranet page, Office Locator and the Confirming your identity
(SS231) form.

Related links

Using the myGov Staff Linking Application

Coding identity documents

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Alternative Identity

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Disclosing information to parents of Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Disclosing information to third parties

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Answering calls in Centrelink

Disclosing information to a nominee

Commonwealth Ombudsman

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Identifying a staff member

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
