[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Digital Assistants provide online support for
Services Australia customers and the myGov website.

Digital Assistants

Digital Assistants are an automated tool that require no staff
interaction.

Digital Assistants reduce demand on staff in service centres and Smart
Centres and the myGov Helpdesk by providing:

-   immediate responses to general enquiries, including links to online
    guides and other related information when appropriate
-   an enhanced digital service available 24/7, and
-   a digital channel to help in sourcing information, privately

The Digital Assistant provides online support for Services Australia
customers on:

selected Services Australia website pages, helping customers with:

-   pre-approved responses to general questions about payments and
    services, and
-   how to do business with Services Australia online. The Digital
    Assistant is accessed via the Assistant icon on the right of the
    selected pages on the Services Australia website. Mobile devices may
    show the icon at the bottom of the page

authenticated Centrelink online claims, helping customers with:

-   pre-approved responses to general questions about payments and
    services, and
-   many payment specific questions relating to online claims. The
    Digital Assistant is accessed by selecting the Launch the digital
    assistant link within the online claim

the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, helping customers with:

-   pre-approved responses to app related functions, and
-   general questions about payments and services. The Digital Assistant
    is accessed via a button at the bottom of the app home, profile and
    inbox screens

A fourth Digital Assistant is available to provide online support on the
myGov website:

myGov Digital Assistant helps customers with:

-   pre-approved responses to general questions, for example setting up
    a myGov account, information about linking codes and linking Member
    Services
-   how to update name and/or gender, and
-   basic information about the myGov Member Services. The Digital
    Assistant is accessed via the Assistant icon on the right of the
    myGov web pages, in both the unauthenticated and authenticated myGov
    pages

If staff receive queries about the Digital Assistants, see the Resources
page for responses to Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) and links to
Digital Assistant-enabled pages on the Services Australia website.

The Digital Assistants Team analyse customers' questions, review, update
answers, and add new questions to improve the Digital Assistant
experience.

The Resources page contains a link to FAQs and links to Digital
Assistant-enabled pages on the Services Australia website.

Related links

How users create a myGov account and link services

Services Australia website

Using Centrelink self service

Accessing and using myGov accounts

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting myGov

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
