-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Economic Support Payment to eligible
customers to help stimulate economic activity.

Economic Support Payments

There were four Economic Support Payments paid to eligible social
security, Farm Household Allowance, Family Tax Benefit and veterans'
customers (including card holders). There were different eligibility
criteria for the different payments.

The first and second Economic Support Payments were $750 each. The third
and fourth Economic Support Payment was $250 each.

The Economic Support Payment:

-   is exempt from taxation and does not count as income
-   is not be used to offset debts, including child support debts
-   is not be recoverable as a debt, except for where it is determined
    to have been claimed fraudulently

There was one payment per eligible customer for each round. For example,
if a person qualified for the first payment in multiple ways they only
received the payment once.

First $750 Economic Support Payment

The customer must have been:

-   normally living in Australia and
-   received an eligible payment or concession card between 12 March
    2020 and 13 April 2020

Second $750 Economic Support Payment

A second $750 Economic Support Payment was paid to customers who:

-   received an eligible payment or concession cards on 10 July 2020,
    and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 10 July 2020

Third $250 Economic Support Payment

A third $250 Economic Support Payment was paid to customers who:

-   received an eligible payment or concession cards on 27 November
    2020, and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 27 November 2020

Fourth $250 Economic Support Payment

A fourth $250 Economic Support Payment was paid to customers who:

-   received an eligible payment or concession cards on 26 February
    2021, and
-   did not receive the Coronavirus Supplement at a rate greater than $0
    for the period 26 February 2021

Receiving the Economic Support Payment

Customers:

-   did not need to lodge a claim
-   who lodged a claim for one of the eligible payments or concession
    cards on the designated eligibility date, and the claim was
    subsequently granted, received this payment
-   who lodged a claim for one of the eligible payments or concession
    cards after the test date/period, and the start date was
    subsequently back dated to a period that covered the test date
    date/period, will received this payment
-   who claimed Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as instalments or a lump sum
    who lodged a claim after the test date/period, and the claim was
    granted and the period included the test date/period, will received
    this payment
-   who claimed FTB via lump sum, submitted their claim by the end of
    the relevant financial year. If special circumstances existed, the
    customer was granted an extension to the 12 month timeframe, but no
    later than 30 June of the following financial year (that is, the
    extended lodgement year)
-   who did not receive payment on the test date/period because they
    were suspended were not immediately eligible. The payment was paid
    if their payment was restored and the period covered the test
    date/period. Customers who received some payments continued to
    qualify for their Pension Concession Card, even if their payment was
    stopped. These customers will received the Economic Support Payment

Waiting periods and payment preclusion periods

Customers who served a waiting or preclusion period during the test
date/period did not receive the Economic Support Payment. This included
customers who were serving an Income Maintenance Period (IMP),
Compensation Preclusion Period or a waiting period after the application
of a cancellation for a Work Refusal failure or a third mutual
obligation failure.

If the waiting or preclusion period was reduced or waived and the
customer received an eligible payment that covered the test date, they
qualified.

Customers who were in a nil rate period (CZR) due to employment income
were eligible to receive the payment.

Overseas

An eligible customer must have been normally residing in Australia
during the test date/period to have been eligible to receive the
Economic Support Payment.

If a customer receiving an eligible payment or concession card was
overseas for an approved reason they received the payment.

Customers who received an eligible payment or concession card but were
living overseas permanently or temporarily overseas for an unapproved
reason longer than 6 weeks did not receive the payment.

Payment information

The Process page has further payment information on:

-   Payment delivery dates
-   Payment of Economic Support Payment and FTB
-   Payment notification
-   Payment not yet received but entitled
-   Customers with a pending new claim on the second Economic Support
    Payment test date
-   Income managed customers
-   Raising overpayments and debt recovery

The Resources page has a Checking for Economic Support Payment
qualification task card with more specific details and examples on
determining a customer's entitlement to the Economic Support Payment.

The Resources page has links to further Economic Support Payment details
and a link to the Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption System.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
