
Health Care Card (HCC) not renewed/issued for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers 101-06020020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the circumstances where a Health Care Card (HCC)
may, or may not, automatically issue to a customer.

Automatically issued HCCs

HCCs are issued automatically to the following customers who are in
Australia and their residence information is correctly recorded:

-   Customers receiving an eligible income support payment
-   Carers receiving Carer Allowance (child) receive a HCC in the
    child's name only
-   Customers receiving Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Customers entitled to receive the maximum legislative rate of FTB
    Part A as instalments (or for whom Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
    rate is reduced only by the Maintenance Income Test), irrespective
    of whether or not the customer opts to receive a lower amount of FTB
    Part A under More Choice for Families (MCFF) options
-   Customers who would be eligible for the maximum rate of FTB Part A
    except that they only have the care of a Regular Care Child. Note:
    where reconciliation shows that an instalment recipient would have
    been eligible for the FTB HCC (but their agreed estimate exceeded
    the lower income threshold) it may be possible to obtain the HCC
    retrospectively
-   For automatically issued Pension Concession Cards, see Pension
    Concession Card (PCC)

Dependent of partner

A HCC is not automatically issued to a customer who is shown as a
dependant on their partner's concession card. A customer in this
situation who seeks a HCC should be advised to complete and lodge an
application for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC). Note: since 1 July
2009, partnered customers have been able to request to have their
concession card reissued without their partner's name listed. This may
be for privacy concerns the customer may have.

Reasons for non-renewal

A HCC may not renew or issue for the following reasons:

FTB has cancelled

FTB Part A rate has reduced from maximum rate due to

-   the income test. Note: customers whose rate has been reduced by the
    maintenance income test are still entitled to receive a HCC
-   customer failing the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for all children
    in care. Note: for customers that have failed the MAT for all
    children and still require a HCC, see Process

Payment delivery method changed from instalment to end of year lump sum

Customer is no longer receiving an eligible income support payment

A system fault has caused the card not to issue

Residence requirements

Although a customer's partner does not need to meet residence
requirements for FTB to be paid, under Social Security Law, the partner
needs to meet the residency requirements for HCC purposes. This includes
being noted as a partner on the customer's HCC issued via the FAO
system. Proof of the partner's residency needs to be provided. Note:
since 1 July 2009, partnered customers have been able to request to have
their concession card reissued without their partner's name listed. This
may be for privacy concerns the customer may have.

Foster carer

If a customer is a foster carer and automatic HCC has not been issued,
see Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children.

Related links

How to reissue concession cards

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Health Care Card (HCC)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
