
Cape York Initiative in Business Hub 101-20073126

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Business Hub is used for Cape York Cashless
Debit Card purposes.

On this Page:

Secure communication channel

Business Hub is a framework for exchanging secure electronic
communications between Services Australia (the agency) and external
parties. It is accessed via the agency’s website.

For the purpose of Cashless Debit Card, the Business Hub is utilised as
a secure communication channel between the agency and a referring
authority, the Family Responsibilities Commission, for Cashless Debit
Card under the Cape York Initiative.

Cashless Debit Card referring authority

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) referring authorities are determined by
legislation. The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) may make a
decision to refer a customer for the CDC where it is beneficial to the
customer or their family.

Customers may be referred to ensure identified priority needs of the
customer and their family are being met. Customers can also volunteer
through the FRC to participate in the CDC program.

Business Hub interactions

The following interactions are available the Family Responsibilities
Commission:

-   Mutual Client Search for Income Management and the Cashless Debit
    Card
-   Personal Information Disclosure (PID)
-   Notice to Commence Income Management or Cashless Debit Card
-   Revocation of Income Management or Cashless Debit Card
-   View current expenses
-   Requests for Further Information

Daily Reports

Daily Reports provide the Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) with
a copy of all the interactions completed in the Business Hub the
previous business day.

The FRC are automatically notified via a Daily Report when a Cashless
Debit Card customer has had a change in circumstances actioned on their
record. This can include things such as a change of address, payment
suspension etc.

The Resources page contains links to contact details

Related links

Actioning Business Hub requests

Exchange of information with Income Management and Cashless Debit Card
referring authorities

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative

Personal Information Disclosure for the Cashless Debit Card Cape York
Initiative

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
