
Actioning a review for Third Party Organisations (TPO) 101-09030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to search and complete reviews for TPOs. This
is to make sure the TPO is complying with the policy/terms, and
continues to meet eligibility and approval criteria of their
contract/agreement with Services Australia. In this procedure, TPO means
businesses, merchants and participants.

Reasons for TPO Program Assurance Reviews

Reviews are conducted to:

-   make sure the TPO is complying with its obligations under the
    contract/agreement
-   protect customers from any TPO actions in breach of the
    contract/agreement that may disadvantage them
-   protect customer privacy
-   follow up complaints and feedback about TPOs from customers, welfare
    agencies, other government agencies and regulatory bodies
-   help TPOs better manage their relationships with the agency and our
    customers
-   help TPOs fulfil the obligations of their contract, and
-   make sure the TPO still meets the eligibility and approval criteria

Before conducting a review

-   Check the Australian Business Number/ Australian Company Number
    (ABN/ACN) and that the entity details are current. See Legal
    Entities Information
-   Conduct all relevant background checks, including licence checks, if
    the TPO has had a general activity or previous non-compliance
-   Check if the business has additional conditions attached to its
    approval, or if the record has a general activity with instructions
    from the assurance team
-   Request a DaC Usage Report for the program under review. Refer to
    the task card on the shared drive

Selecting TPOs to review

Reviews can be selected randomly or as part of a strategy targeting
certain merchant types.

The Deduction and Confirmation Branch Program Assurance team:

-   selects these reviews. See Review process for TPOs. Extra reviews
    can be added manually to the list. For example, in response to a
    complaint or part of a follow-up
-   may set targets and KPIs

There are certain criteria for selecting reviews based on:

-   Random sampling based on a computer algorithm
-   TPOs not reviewed in the last 12 months
-   TPOs previously non-compliant
-   Percentage of excluded goods and services annual turnover
    (BasicsCard)
-   Income Management TPOs risk factors by service reason
-   Centrelink Confirmation eServices TPOs by business category risk
-   Centrepay businesses by Service Reason

Manual reviews can be selected based on:

-   Customer complaints received, including those recorded in the
    Customer Feedback Tool
-   Complaints made by external organisations
-   Public denunciations, and 'tip-offs'
-   Evidence of excessive BasicsCard fallback transactions
-   Analysis of BasicsCard transaction data
-   Analysis of Centrelink Confirmation individual user access via the
    DAC usage report
-   Geographic location, and/or
-   Data triggered events

Risk ratings

Risk levels of TPOs are based on a combination of factors including
trends of compliance/non-compliance:

-   If the TPO sells excluded goods or is a consumer lease provider
-   If customers will be disadvantaged should the TPO cease operation,
    and
-   If there may be damage to the agency's reputation

Provision of information

The agency should give the TPO reasonable notice (up to 5 business days)
before the review and can request information, such as:

-   examples of advertising material that may be in use
-   current list of contacts for the organisation
-   TPO business and registration details
-   current list of registered Centrelink Business Online Services Users
    for the organisation
-   customer consent or deduction authority, in an agency approved
    format
-   transaction information including itemised receipts (for TPOs who
    sell excluded goods)

TPO Program Assurance review

There are Workflow Question Sets and a breach application table for each
program. Refer to them while conducting the review. The table contains
questions that align with the questions in the Organisation review
workflow. Each question links to a clause in the contract/agreement. The
spreadsheet also explains how to assess systemic/non-systemic breaches
and when to apply exclusions to breaches.

The workflow consists of Baseline Check questions. These are the
‘background checks’ of the review. Baseline questions are conducted on
all businesses. They are the only check needed for businesses with no or
low usage (except for Centrepay). Always proceed with the review after
the baseline check unless the business voluntarily withdraws from the
program.

Depending on the program being reviewed, there are certain themes that
can be selected. In some cases, the Deduction and Confirmation Branch
Program Assurance team will advise which themes need to be selected upon
loading these reviews to the system.

The BasicsCard workflow will have the following themes:

-   Baseline checks
-   Merchant Obligations
-   Excluded Goods
-   Prohibited Transactions

Centrelink Confirmation eServices and Electronic Verification of Rent:

-   Baseline checks
-   Business detail
-   Consent
-   Privacy/Security

Income Management:

-   Baseline checks
-   Business detail
-   Fees/Deduction
-   Privacy/Security

Centrepay:

-   Baseline checks
-   Data Integrity
-   Business compliance
-   Electronic inputs
-   Business satisfaction responses
-   Assurance Triggers

These questions are designed to identify if the TPO is complying with
the contract/agreement and still meets the eligibility and approval
criteria. A positive 'yes' response means that the TPO is not complying
with the clause of the contract to which the question applies.

There are notes in the table to help the reviewer see if there has been
a breach of the contract/agreement and what to do if there is a breach.

If establishing a breach while conducting a review, the reviewer should
provide detailed comments in the notes section of the workflow or on a
DOC.

The Workflow Question Sets and breach application table are on the
shared drive for reviewers. This is the Third Party Programmes Team
shared drive.

ICT Security Portal (ISP) access

To get access to the Organisation review workflow, a reviewer needs to
request access to the CM3UPD resource via the ICT Security Portal.

The Resources page contains FAQs about the Organisation review workflow,
risk ratings and review methods, how to request access via the ICT
Security Portal and work items. It also contains links to external
websites and attachments.

Related links

Review process for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Program Assurance Review reports for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Re-reviews for non-compliant Third Party Organisations (TPO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
