-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assist an Income Management
Contact Officer (IMCO) in actioning requests generated by the relevant
Income Management (IM) and enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)
program through the Business Hub or Unified Government Gateway (UGG).

On this Page:

Secure communication channels

Business Hub

Business Hub is a framework for exchanging secure electronic
communications between Services Australia (the agency) and authorised
external parties. It is accessed via the agency’s website.

For the purpose of the enhanced Income Management program, the Business
Hub is utilised as a secure communication channel between the agency and
approved referring authorities for:

-   Cape York enhanced Income Management

Unified Government Gateway

The Unified Government Gateway (UGG) is a framework for exchanging
secure electronic communications between Services Australia and external
parties. It is accessed via Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS)
on the agency's website.

For the purpose of Income Management, the UGG is utilised as a secure
communication channel between the agency and approved referring
authorities for:

-   Child Protection Income Management
-   Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

These referring authorities are in the process of transitioning from
Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS) to Business Hub platform.

Relevant Operational Blueprint files will refer to CBOS, UGG and
Business Hub as referral platforms during this transition period. No
further action required from staff in relation to this transition.

Note: new notice referrals received from 4 September 2023 will be
applied as enhanced Income Management. Continuation notice referrals
will allow customers to remain on the Income Management program.

Referring Authorities

Referring authorities are determined by legislative instrument. The
following referring authorities may make a decision to refer a customer
for enhanced Income Management or Income Management programs where it
may be beneficial to the customer or their family;

-   The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) – customers may be
    referred for enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM) to ensure
    identified needs of the customer and their family are being met
-   A State or Territory Child Protection Authority – Referring
    Authorities can refer customers for Child Protection Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management which may help support
    families with the wellbeing of their children
-   An Approved Supporting People at Risk Referring Authority- Referring
    Authorities can refer customers for Supporting People at Risk Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management which may help support
    individuals and/or families at risk

Business Hub and Unified Government Gateway interactions

The following interactions are available to referring authorities:

-   Mutual Client Search for Income Management or enhanced Income
    Management
-   Personal Information Disclosure (PID)/Disclosure Of Information
    (DOI)
-   Notice to Commence Income Management or enhanced Income Management
-   Revocation of Income Management or enhanced Income Management
-   View current expenses
-   Requests for Further Information

Daily Reports

Daily Reports provide the referring authorities with a copy of all the
interactions completed in the Business Hub or Unified Government Gateway
the previous business day.

The referring authorities are automatically notified via a Daily Report
when an Income Management or enhanced IM customer has had a change in
circumstances actioned on their record. This can include things such as
a change of address, payment suspension etc.

The Resources page contains links to contact details.

Referrals from the Family Responsibilities Commission

The Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC) have the option of
requesting the agency to manage a portion of customer's income support
and family assistance payments if they believe the customer may benefit
from the program.

Referrals from an approved Child Protection Authority

Approved State or Territory Child Protection Authorities have the option
of requesting the agency to manage 70 percent customer's income support
and family assistance payments, if they believe the customer will
benefit from Income Management or enhanced Income Management. Customers
referred under Child Protection Income Management will have their
priority needs ranked by the State or Territory Child Protection
Authority.

Referrals from approved SPaR Referring Authority

The Approved Supporting People at Risk referring authority have the
option of requesting the agency to manage 70 percent of a customer's
income support and family assistance payments, if they believe the
customer will benefit from Income Management or enhanced Income
Management.

Personal Information Disclosure/Disclosure of Information

Approved referring authorities will provide the agency with details of a
person to identify if the person meets the requirements to be considered
to participate in the Income Management or enhanced Income Management
program. This is known as a Personal Information Disclosure (PID) for
Cape York or a Disclosure of Information for Child Protection and
Supporting People at Risk.

Outline of IMCO role

This procedure is for Income Management Contact Officers (IMCO) only.

The Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) has a role in checking for
any 'unprocessed' activities. These will occur when a referring
authority cannot match the customer to a record or the eligibility
result is 'no'. These requests are actioned via the TPISO screen.

Most requests received through the Business Hub or Unified Government
Gateway are auto-processed by the system and the relevant information is
applied automatically to the customer's record. However, this procedure
assists with the manual processing of Business Hub requests which is
required when auto processing fails.

The procedure will explain how IMCOs can:

-   locate outstanding requests
-   action Mutual Client searches with a 'no' match result
-   action a Personal Information Disclosure (PID) or Disclosure of
    Information (DOI)
-   action a Notice to Commence Income Management or enhanced Income
    Management received
-   action a Revocation of Income Management or enhanced Income
    Management received
-   view PIDs or DOIs that have been submitted by an approved referring
    authority through Business Hub
-   view current requests made by an approved referring authority
    through the Business Hub to view a customer’s expense allocations

System screens to access information

The Third Party Information Summary - Organisation (TPISO) screen is
used by Services Australia staff to view all requests/actions completed
through the Business Hub by an approved referring authority. At default,
the screen will show both finalised and outstanding requests. The TPISO
screen can be accessed through the organisation record.

The Third Party Information Summary (TPIS) screen exists on the customer
record. This screen will only display completed Business Hub and Unified
government Gateway actions against the individual customer.

An IMCO will need to check the TPISO screen daily.

Related links

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Enhanced Income Management processing for Income Management Contact
Officers

Exchange of information with Income Management referring authorities

Cape York enhanced Income Management

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
