-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding Pensioner Concession Cards
(PCC).

Customers entitled to a PCC

The PCC entitles the customer and their dependants to concessions, which
is funded by:

-   Commonwealth, State and Local governments, and
-   some private organisations

For information on concessions available through Commonwealth, State and
Local governments and private organisations, see Extra concession
information.

PCCs are issued for a period of 2 years. The expiry date on a customer’s
PCC is the end of the month in which the customer was born. PCCs are
automatically re-issued a month before the customer's birthday every
second year.

Note: Services Australia will no longer send PCC travel vouchers to
Western Australian and Victorian residents from 1 January 2020. From
this date, information relating to reissuing travel vouchers will no
longer be in effect. For more information, see Public transport - state
and territory.

Customers who receive the JobSeeker Payment (JSP) under the Wife Pension
transitional rate are eligible for the PCC.

A PCC is automatically issued for a 2 year period to:

Customers who receive a social security pension

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customers, who were granted on or
after 1 July 2006 and who have a partial capacity to work as assessed by
an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (Job Seeker (JSK) only)
customers who have a partial capacity to work as assessed by an ESAt

A single JSP or YA (JSK only) customer who is the principal carer of a
dependent child

Customers aged over 60 years of age, will retain their entitlement to
the PCC when transferring to another 1 of these payments, if they:

-   are receiving JSP, Partner Allowance (PA), Widow Allowance (WA),
    PPP, Sickness Allowance (SA), or Special Benefit (SpB), and
-   have been in receipt of 1 or more of these payments (or a social
    security pension) for a continuous period of not less than 39 weeks
    ending immediately before the qualification day

Customers whose pension payment was cancelled 1 January 2017 because of
changes to the pension assets test

Qualifications for a PCC

To qualify for a PCC, a person must generally be in Australia and an
Australian resident.

If a person is residing outside Australia, they are usually not entitled
to a PCC, even if they are receiving a current social security pension.

PCCs:

-   Are not issued to customers who are living outside Australia, and
-   Cannot be issued to these customers who return to Australia
    temporarily

Note: a customer who is temporarily residing overseas and returns to
Australia temporarily, for example, a missionary, is entitled to a PCC.
It is important to confirm if an absence or return is temporary in
nature.

The exception to this rule is for a person who is paid under the
Agreement with New Zealand (NZ) can receive a PCC if:

-   They are physically present in Australia even though they are not
    residing in Australia

Qualifications for a non-pensioner PCC

Customers who had their pension cancelled (CAN/ASS) on 1 January 2017 as
a direct result of changes to the pension assets test are automatically
eligible for a non-pensioner PCC.

-   Recipients of a non-pensioner PCC do not need to be receiving a
    social security pension to qualify for the card
-   The card is not subject to an income assets test
-   The regular PCC residence and portability provisions apply

The non-pensioner PCC replaces the non-income tested Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC) and is valid from 9 October 2017. From 9 October 2017,
the LIC is no longer valid. Customers who received a non-income tested
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) on 1 January 2017 can continue
to use the CSHC.

Note: entitlement to the non-pensioner PCC is directly linked to a 1
January 2017 date of effect for the changes to the assets test for
pensions.

Where a pensioner payment is cancelled:

-   With a date of effect of 31 December 2016 or earlier, or 2 January
    2017 or later,
-   They are not entitled to a non-pensioner PCC or non-income tested
    CSHC

These customers may claim a LIC or CSHC and will be subject to the
relevant income test requirements. For information on how a customer can
claim an income tested card see:

-   Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Customers paid under the Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Customers who receive their entire payment as a HEAS loan are not
eligible for a PCC. These customers should be encouraged to claim a
Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC).

See Home Equity Access Scheme for information on how to identify a
customer as a HEAS-only recipient.

The exception to this is for customers who had their pension cancelled
(CAN/ASS) on 1 January 2017 as a direct result of changes to the pension
assets test.

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS) - PLS-only customers:

-   Who are grandfathered (GRF) for the grandfathering type 2017
    Rebalance Assets Cards (RAC), as per the Grandfathering Summary
    (GFS) screen
-   Are automatically eligible for a non-income tested CSHC from 1
    January 2017 and a non-pensioner PCC from 9 October 2017

For more information, see Non-income tested (NOI) concession cards.

PCC entitlement extension

Where a customer receives nil payment due to the income test and some of
that income is from their (or their partner’s) employment:

-   The customer is able to remain current at a nil rate for up to 6
    consecutive fortnights
-   If they otherwise still qualify for their income support payment

During an employment income nil rate period, customers, including those
on Age Pension can retain their PCC.

Customers eligible for working credits will be entitled to the PCC where
the customer is in an employment income nil rate period.

Customers who have received some income support payments may continue to
be qualified for their PCC after their payment has ceased. See Extended
Entitlement to Concession Cards for more information.

Effect on entitlement if customer is imprisoned

Customers whose income support payment is cancelled following their
incarceration also lose their entitlement to their PCC.

Stimulus reporting customers granted pension

For stimulus reporting customers who are granted a pension and who are
not already in receipt of a PCC:

-   The PCC will only be issued when the customer meets the reporting
    requirements for the first entitlement period, and
-   The pension is payable

Listing of dependent children on a PCC

Dependent children are included on their parents' PCC.

A young person aged under 16 years can be considered a dependent child
if:

-   The adult has legal responsibility for day to day care, welfare and
    development of the child, either alone or jointly with another
    person, and the child is in the adult's care, or
-   The child is not a dependent child of someone else and is wholly or
    substantially in the adult's care, and
-   They are in full time education, and
-   They do not have income that exceeds the child earning limits -
    permissible limits. See the letter 'C' on the Rates and Thresholds
    page

A young person aged 16 years to 21 years of age inclusive, can be
considered a dependent child if:

-   They are wholly or substantially dependent on the PCC holder, and
-   They are not in receipt of a social security pension or benefit, or
    not a participant in a labour market program, and
-   They do not have income that exceeds the child earning limits -
    permissible limits. See the letter 'C' on the Rates and Thresholds
    page, and
-   They are undertaking full-time education at a school, college or
    university, and
-   They are not the partner of the PCC holder

Note: if a dependent child has not been automatically listed on a
customer's PCC, refer the customer record to the Level 2 Policy Help
Desk for an override to be implemented.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks -
Online Query.

Listing of a partner on a PCC

A PCC will not include the name of the cardholder's partner as a
dependant of the cardholder if the partner does not satisfy residence
requirements. The partner must meet one of the following:

Be a New Zealand citizen. The holder of the card must be in Australia
receiving a social security pension or benefit solely because of the
international agreement between Australia and New Zealand.

Be in Australia and meet one of the following:

-   An Australian resident
-   A special category visa holder residing in Australia
-   The holder of a qualifying visa

Customers may choose whether the PCC displays their partner's name. For
further information, see Preferences for concession cards.

Transfers from one payment to another

When a customer transfers from one payment to another, and retains
entitlement to the same type of concession card, a new card is not
automatically issued to the customer. For example, when a customer
transfers from Disability Support Pension (DSP) to Age Pension. As the
customer was entitled to a PCC whilst on DSP, a new card will not be
issued to the customer, unless the customer requests a new card.

Any new card issued after the transfer activity is processed, will
display the primary payment that is current at the time of issue. This
includes the reissued card, which is sent 1 month before the expiry date
of the current card.

An exception to this is if a customer is transferring from standard
pension to Blind Pension. A new card will be issued due to the physical
appearance of the card being slightly different by inclusion of a
tactile indicator. This is a small hold drilled in the lower left hand
corner of the card.

Digital card

Customers can use the digital wallet in the app or the myGov app wallet.
See a link on the Resources page. It allows customers to show their
concession card using their smart device. It is at the discretion of the
concession provider whether they accept the digital card so it is
important that customers have their physical card with them.

PCC rail vouchers

All States and Territories with rail services have automated rail travel
booking systems and do not need pensioner travel vouchers. For contact
details see the State and territory contact details in Extra concession
information.

PCC delivery

PCCs are generally sent to the customer's postal address and display the
customer's residential address. However, customers may have more than 1
address entered on their electronic record (for example, a term address)
and so they can nominate the postal and/or display address for their
card.

The Resources page contains:

-   concessions available for PCC cardholders
-   links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk
-   information on the Customer Confirmation eService (CCeS)
-   links to the digital wallet, and
-   using the myGov app

Contents

How to reissue concession cards

Related links

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) concessions

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Extra concession information

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Processing Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claims

Deduction and Confirmation programmes

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Preferences for concession cards

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

Override entitlement processing for concession cards

Home Equity Access Scheme

Portability of concession cards

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
