
Reconnect 101-07020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Reconnect, which is an
initiative funded by the Department of Social Services.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the department’s Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the department’s commitment to the safety of children and
young people.

Early intervention services

Reconnect provides a range of community based early intervention
services aimed at reconciling families and other support for young
people aged 12 to 18 years who are homeless or at risk of becoming
homeless. The Newly Arrived Youth Support Services (NAYSS) were
incorporated into Reconnect as Newly Arrived Youth Specialists. The age
range for those services extends to 21.

Participation in this program by the young person is voluntary.

Objective of Reconnect

The objective of the program is to improve the level of engagement of
homeless young people or those at risk of homelessness with family,
work, education, training and the community.

The potential outcomes of the Reconnect program are:

-   family reconciliation
-   improved relationship with parents and other family members
-   engage or maintain young person in education, training and/or
    employment and with their community
-   improve young person's experience of independence where this is
    appropriate
-   work in close partnership with the community including participation
    in Indigenous communities

Referrals to Reconnect

If Services Australia staff identify young people and families who may
benefit from a referral to Reconnect, they should provide them with
information on the Reconnect program. If applicable, refer them to a
Services Australia social worker, who will make the referral to
Reconnect if appropriate.

Locations for Reconnect services are listed on the Department of Social
Services Website. See the Resources page for link.

Referrals back to Services Australia

Reconnect can also refer young people to Services Australia. Reasons for
referral may include:

-   the young person is claiming Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    due to unsuccessful attempts at family reconciliation
-   the young person is living independently and having difficulty with
    their business with Services Australia
-   the young person is needing to renegotiate their Job Plan if they
    are managed by Services Australia

If the young person is claiming UTLAH, Reconnect needs to be included in
the UTLAH assessment if they have referred the young person to Services
Australia.

The Resources page contains a link to information about Reconnect on the
Department of Social Services website.

Related links

Employment Services Providers and referral to other participation
programs (complementary referrals)

Social work service referral

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
