
Household Stimulus Package 101-03060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the bonus payments making up the Household
Stimulus Package (HSP) announced on 3 February 2009 by the Australian
Government to support eligible families, students and farmers. These
bonus payments are in addition to the Economic Security Strategy (ESS)
payments and comprise a number of different bonus payments. These
payments are no longer available, this page has been kept for
information purposes only.

Household Stimulus Package

The majority of the HSP payments were paid automatically in 2009 to
eligible Family Tax Benefit and income support payment recipients.
Payments have been made after the 2009 period to some recipients who
have had an assessment reassessment completed for the financial year
2008-09 (for example, a FTB lump sum claim completed). The automatic
payments of HSP ceased from 3 September 2016.

HSP assessments may be triggered by the FTB reconciliation process or
completion of a FTB lump sum claim that has been pending income. In this
instance a manual follow up (MFU) will be created for specialist staff
to check entitlement to the payment.

Recipients may still be eligible for HSP payments in strictly limited
and rare circumstances. In these cases, a manual payment may be made by
specialist staff only.

The circumstances a recipient could be entitled are:

-   they lodged a claim in the required two year period for the 2008-09
    financial year,
-   have not received the HSP payment previously (that is, for that
    particular child/ren), and
-   they were otherwise entitled to a FTB payment at the relevant dates
    in 2009.

HSP assessments are processed by the Families Ongoing Entitlement Team
and enquiries can be emailed to the team. Service Officers are not
permitted to take payment action themselves. The Resources page contains
a link to contact details for Families Ongoing Entitlement team.

Back to School Bonus

A payment of $950 paid for each eligible child:

to recipients eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A with an
eligible FTB child between the ages of four and 18 (inclusive) on 3
February 2009, or

under the Household Stimulus Package Administrative Scheme when a
recipient was entitled to FTB Part A for an FTB child aged between 4 and
15 years of age, and that child entered their ongoing care during the
period 4 February 2009 - 31 March 2009, and one of the following
applied:

-   the recipient was entitled to FTB Part A for the child at some time
    during the period 1 November 2008 - 2 February 2009, and there were
    special circumstances relating to why the recipient was not entitled
    to FTB Part A for the child for 3 February 2009 (for example, due to
    a temporary loss of care of the child), or
-   the recipient was entrusted with the ongoing care of a child under a
    formal foster care arrangement, or
-   a non-parent carer recipient (such as a grandparent) was entrusted
    with the ongoing care of a child due to an inability or failure of
    the child's parents to provide care for the child

recipients under 19 years of age and receiving Carer Payment (CP) or
Disability Support Pension (DSP) on 3 February 2009

Single Income Family Bonus

A payment of $900 per family paid to:

recipient eligible for FTB Part B on 3 February 2009, or

under the Household Stimulus Package Administrative Scheme when a
recipient was entitled to FTB Part B for an FTB child aged under 16
years of age, and that child entered their ongoing care during the
period 4 February 2009 - 31 March 2009, and one of the following
applied:

-   the recipient was entitled to FTB Part B for the child at some time
    during the period 1 November 2008 - 2 February 2009, and there were
    special circumstances relating to why the recipient was not entitled
    to FTB Part B for the child for 3 February 2009 (for example due to
    a temporary loss of care of the child), or
-   the recipient was entrusted with the ongoing care of a child under a
    formal foster care arrangement, or
-   a non-parent carer recipient (such as a grandparent) was entrusted
    with the ongoing care of a child due to an inability or failure of
    the child's parents to provide care for the child

Training and Learning Bonus - Family Tax Benefit

A payment of $950 paid for each eligible child to:

-   recipient eligible for FTB Part A with a full-time student between
    the ages of 19 and 24 (inclusive) on 3 February 2009

Note: For FTB recipients who had a shared care or blended care
arrangement, this amount was apportioned based on the FTB shared care
and/or blended family percentage.

Training and Learning Bonus - Students

A payment of $950 paid for each eligible student qualifying under one of
the following categories:

Administrative Scheme

If the recipient received one or more of the following payments in
Semester 1 2009 and had not already received a HSP:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students and Australian Apprentices only)
-   Austudy
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance who were over 16 or if independent (any
    age), including ABSTUDY boarders where term payments are made and
    Residential Cost Option students
-   Veterans Children's Education Scheme (VCES)
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training
    Scheme (MRCAETS)

Student payments

If the recipient was receiving one or more of the following payments in
respect of 3 February 2009:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) (students and Australian Apprentices only)
-   Austudy
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance who are over 16 or if independent (any
    age), including ABSTUDY boarders where term payments are made and
    Residential Cost Option students
-   Veterans Children's Education Scheme (VCES)
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training
    Scheme (MRCAETS)
-   Sickness Allowance
-   Special Benefit (under Age Pension age as at 14 October 2008 and did
    not receive an Economic Security Strategy (ESS) payment).

Education Entry Payment (EdEP) Temporary Supplement

Recipients who qualified for an EdEP on or after 1 January 2009 and were
in receipt of one of the following payments:

-   YA
-   Newstart Allowance (NSA)
-   Sickness Allowance (SA)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) partnered
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Partner Allowance (PA)
-   Department of Education, Skills and Employment, Pensioner Education
    Supplement (PES)

Note: the Training and Learning Bonus - (EdEP) Temporary Supplement
ceased from 30 June 2010. Only recipients who commence a course on or
before 30 June 2010 were eligible to be paid the EdEP Temporary
Supplement.

Training and Learning Bonus - Postgraduate Scholarship Holders

A one-off payment of $950 payable to:

students who were undertaking full-time study in a higher education
degree by research program (masters or doctorate degree) in Semester 1
2009 and receiving for Semester 1 2009:

-   an Australian Postgraduate Award (APA), or
-   an Australian Postgraduate Award (Industry) (APA(I)), or
-   National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) PhD
    Scholarship, or
-   any other scholarship with a value of at least $20,427 in the 2009
    calendar year, and

living in Australia at the date of claim, and

a citizen or permanent resident of Australia

Farmers hardship payment

A payment of $950 to all eligible Exceptional Circumstances Relief
Payment (ECRP) or Farm Help Income Support (FHIS) recipients as of 3
February 2009.

A zero rate of entitlement for the payment period including 3 February
2009 resulted in non-eligibility.

Payment delivery dates

Payment of the HSP bonus payments commenced 11 March 2009. Generally HSP
payments coincided with a recipient's usual payment payday. Some
recipient were eligible to receive more than one type of bonus payment.
The Resources page contains information about the HSP payment delivery
dates.

Payment of HSP and FTB annual lump sum claims

For recipients who claimed their FTB annually as a lump sum payment,
entitlement to the HSP payment was assessed when their 2008-09 actual
income was received from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and their
lump sum FTB payments were made, if tax returns were lodged by 30 June
2011.

The Resources page contains information about the HSP payment delivery
dates.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
