
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document outlines how customers can nominate preferences for the
mailing and/or display addresses on their concession card, and if their
partner's details appear on the card. They can also request the issue of
non-priority concession cards, and ask that delivery of their concession
card be suppressed.

Name on concession cards

Concession cards display the legal name only of the cardholder and any
partner.

Due to the physical size of concession cards (wallet size) there are set
name conventions that are applied when cards are printed:

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) and most Health Care Cards (HCCs) -
cards display:

-   the card holder
-   any partner, and
-   dependent children (only partner may be supressed)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) - cards display the card holder
only

Ex Carer Allowance child Health Care card (EHC) - cards display the
ex-Carer allowance child only

Foster Child Health Care card (FST) - cards display the foster child
only

The name conventions for the PCC and Health Care Card HCC are slightly
different.

The Resources page contains 3 tables explaining the set name conventions
for PCCs, HCCs and CSHCs.

Address preferences

Concession cards will normally be mailed to a customer's POStal address
and show their HOMe address. Where a customer has more than one address
recorded on the Centrelink computer system (for example: term address),
they can:

-   nominate a preference as to which address should be shown on the
    concession card, and
-   choose to have the card mailed to an address other than the default
    postal address.

Allowable addresses include:

-   home
-   postal
-   temporary, and
-   term addresses

Customers can also ask that no address (suppressed) be printed on the
card.

Note: when discussing address suppression with customers, tell them that
not displaying their address on their concession card may cause problems
when they want to claim concessions from certain types of concession
providers. Some concession providers require a residential address to be
on a card to grant a concession. For example, concessions on council
rates or state government subsidies may only be given to residents of
certain areas.

Dependent preferences

Cards display the first name and surname of the card holder and partner
(where applicable), and the first name only of any dependent children
(where applicable). As there are different types of cards available, the
names displayed on the card differ from one card to another.

Customers may choose whether their partner's details appear on the
concession card, such as for privacy reasons.

Any concessions offered to the concession card holder may also apply to
other individuals named on the card. However, access to concessions is
at the discretion of the provider. In order for a customer to access
concessions for their partner, they will generally need to present the
concession card displaying their partner's details.

Customers who already have a concession card of their own and take on
the care of a foster child may choose to:

-   suppress display of child's address details on the Foster Child
    Health Care Card (FST HCC), or
-   suppress delivery of the FST HCC

These options are available as Preferences for concession cards.

Checking preferences

Details of any current or historical card preferences can be viewed on
the Concession Card Preference Summary (CCPS) screen.

Non-priority cards

Customers will automatically receive the concession card associated with
their priority concession. A priority concession card is the card that
will generally provide the customer with the most concessions. If the
customer is entitled to both a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) and
Health Care Card (HCC), the PCC is the card that will be issued to the
customer.

To receive a non-priority card, the customer must request that the card
be delivered. They can choose to have the card delivered as:

-   a one off issue, or
-   an ongoing automatic issue

Where the customer receives no advantage over the benefits afforded by
their existing card, Service Officers should explain this to the
customer.

Note: if the customer insists on also receiving the non-priority card,
it should be issued.

Suppress the delivery of a concession card

A customer can choose to have delivery of a concession card suppressed.
This may be to:

-   stop the delivery of a non-priority card that is being delivered on
    a continuous (that is: automatic) basis, or
-   suppress the issue of the concession card associated with their
    priority concession.

The Resources page contains name conventions and examples of card print
out for:

-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
-   Health Care Cards (HCC), and
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Related links

How to reissue concession cards

Concession Entitlement System

Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
