
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for a customer to add or withdraw
their consent for a business to obtain the customer's details and
concession entitlements through CCeS. It provides details on the process
to transfer customer consent from one CCeS business to another, when
there is a change in ownership or business operations.

Overview of CCeS

Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) is a secure online service that
provides an efficient and effective method for businesses to confirm a
customer's entitlement to a concession, rebate or service it provides to
Services Australia and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers.

Businesses must apply and be approved by the agency to use CCeS. For
more information about CCeS, see Centrelink Confirmation eServices.

Once approved, customers can provide their consent to a business to
confirm their entitlement to a concession, rebate or service using CCeS.
Businesses cannot use the service without customer consent. The business
must verify the identity of the customer prior to obtaining consent and
before using CCeS.

Customer consent

In accordance with the Privacy Act 1988, it is mandatory for a business
to obtain consent from the customer prior to enquiring into their
details and concession entitlement.

The customer’s consent is the legal basis to allow:

-   the business to make enquiries into the customer's details through
    Services Australia so it can assess the customer’s concession
    entitlement.
-   Services Australia to disclose the customer’s details to the
    business.

Customer consent is voluntary and customers may withdraw their consent
at any time without having to give any reason to the business or the
agency.

Businesses can obtain customer consent in writing, verbally or
electronically. When obtaining consent, businesses must use wording
substantially in a form as notified by the agency, or otherwise
contained in the CCeS Procedural Guide. An example of the standard
consent wording and consent requirements is available in the CCeS
Procedural Guide. See the Resources page for a link.

A record of the customer consent must be maintained by the business for
the agency's verification, should this be required.

Additional person consent

Businesses must collect consent from each individual customer before
they access their personal information. If eligibility for a concession,
rebate or service is based on the confirmed information of multiple
customers (for example, all household members listed on a housing
application, or parental income for a students application) each
customer must provide their own informed consent for the business to use
CCeS.

Disclosure of customer information

There may be situations where a business must provide customer
information from CCeS to a third party. For example, where they provide
a concession on behalf of a second business and are being audited. This
secondary disclosure is only permitted if the customer provides their
consent (in the consent record) to have their information disclosed to
the third party for the secondary purpose. See the CCeS Procedural Guide
for the extra wording that must be included in the consent record when
disclosing information to a third party.

Adding consent

When a customer has given their consent for a business to verify their
details and concession entitlements using CCeS, there is no requirement
to update the Centrelink record unless consent has previously been
withdrawn.

Withdrawing consent

A customer who has given consent for a business to enquire about their
details and concession entitlements via CCeS, can withdraw their consent
at any time. Customers do not need a reason to withdraw their consent.
To withdraw consent, customers should notify the business that they have
withdrawn their consent for the business to use CCeS to confirm the
customer's concession entitlement.

If a customer does not wish to contact the business to withdraw their
consent, the customer can then notify Services Australia either verbally
or in writing to block the business' access. The customer will need to
provide the full name of the business to the agency to do this.

The customer can choose to withdraw their consent with one business or a
number of businesses where consent has previously been granted.

Transfer of customer consent from one CCeS business to another

Where a CCeS business notifies the agency that its ownership or
operations are being transferred to a new or different business, and
that new business wishes to continue to provide customers with the
concession, rebate or service provided by the business, the agency may:

-   allow customer consent to be transferred to the new business
-   decide that customer consent must not be transferred. This means the
    business must obtain new consent from each customer before it can
    use CCeS to confirm concessional entitlement

The new business must also be approved to use CCeS or apply if required.

Requests to transfer customer consent must be made in writing from an
authorised officer of the business. A Program Manager from the Third
Party Programs team will assess the request and make a decision to
approve or reject it. See the Resources page for a link.

If the agency agrees to the transfer of consent, businesses must comply
with the requirements outlined in the CCeS Policy. This includes writing
to all impacted customers, at least 14 days before the transfer of
business operations, to notify customers that:

-   the new business will be providing the concession, rebate or service
    to customers from a specific date
-   the new business will continue to use the customer’s consent,
    previously obtained by the old business, to use CCeS to obtain
    information from the agency to confirm customer eligibility for the
    concession, rebate or service, and
-   if the customer does not consent to the new business obtaining
    information from the agency, they may tell the old business that
    their consent is withdrawn. When this happens, the business must
    notify the new business that the customer’s consent is withdrawn.

The agency has developed standard wording for businesses to use in
communications to their customers. See the Resources page.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk, the CCeS intranet
page, and to relevant CCeS pages on the Services Australia website,
Third Party Programs Team.

Related links

Centrelink Confirmation eServices

Registration for Income Management deductions, Electronic Verification
of Rent (EVoR) or Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

Add or remove characteristics for Centrelink Confirmation eServices
(CCeS) businesses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
