
Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST HCC) or Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) 101-06040050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess if an adult claimant for
a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)
or Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) satisfies the
residence requirements to qualify for the concession entitlements. The
assessment includes whether the customer is residentially qualified to
lodge a legal claim for the concession card and if they are required to
serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

Residence requirements for LIC

To satisfy residence criteria for a LIC, the customer must meet all of
the following:

-   be an Australian resident, the holder of a Special Category visa
    (SCV) residing in Australia or the certain temporary visas that
    qualify customers for some payments
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident, the holder of an SCV residing in
    Australia or the holder of a specified visa subclass that qualifies
    them for SpB to continue to qualify for the card, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the grant date of the customer's first qualifying residence visa or
specified visa subclass that allows eligibility for LIC.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   they hold or have held a special category visa 444 or visa subclass
    115,117,835 or 837, or
-   they hold a temporary partner visa (subclasses 309 and 820), or
-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Note: if the holder of a SCV or temporary partner visa (subclasses 309
and 820) is granted a permanent visa on or after 1 January 2019, they
will become subject to a 4 year (208 week) NARWP for the LIC. The
calculation of the NARWP still commences from the application date for
temporary partner visa (subclasses 309 and 820), and does not restart
upon commencement of the permanent visa.

Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

Residence requirements for FST

To satisfy residence criteria for an FST the claimant must meet all of
the following:

-   be an Australian resident or the holder of a Special Category visa
    (SCV) residing in Australia
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged, and
-   remain an Australian resident or the holder of an SCV residing in
    Australia to continue to qualify for the card

The FST is not subject to the NARWP.

For residence requirements that apply to the FST foster child, see
Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children.

Residence requirements for EHC

To satisfy residence criteria for an EHC the claimant must meet all of
the following:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the grant date of the customer's first permanent residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

Note: if a LIC or EHC claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the
customer lived on Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and
coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming a payment or concession are generally required to have been an
Australian resident and physically in Australia for the required
duration of the NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods
before the payment or concession is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming LIC may
have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily for 3
weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the absence extends the
NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

It is not a requirement that the period of residence required for the
NARWP occurred immediately before claiming.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

If the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need to
be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to movement
information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
