
Renewing the Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC) 101-06030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how ex-care recipients for Carer Allowance
(child) (CA) may be eligible for a Health Care Card (HCC) once they turn
16 years of age.

Customer turning 16 years old

A child, whose condition attracted Carer Allowance (CA) (child) for
their carer, will no longer qualify for a CA HCC once they turn 16,
despite having the same condition and facing the same pharmaceutical
costs.

Carers of potential claimants will receive a letter when the carer
receiver is 15 years 9 months to advise the care receiver may have new
card entitlement as an ex-care recipient when they turn 16.

Review of eligibility

If granted, customers will be reviewed every year to determine whether
they retain entitlement to the Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care
Card (EHC).

A review activity is created 11 months following the date of initial
grant or renewal set to mature on the date of expiry of the current
card.

When a customer is selected for review, a letter is issued to them,
which advises that:

-   their card will be cancelled, and
-   they must contact Centrelink if they want to renew their card

If the customer does not contact Centrelink and renew their card before
the expiry date, then they do not receive a new card.

A review is needed each year until a customer reaches the age of 26, or
loses qualification, whichever event occurs first.

Renewal process

The renewal process for the EHC does not need the lodgement of a form
and there is no renewal form for the card. The renewal can be processed
based on information provided verbally by the customer. If the customer
does not want to provide the information verbally, tell them to
complete:

-   an [A self service option is available for customers] online claim
-   a customised Claim for Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card
    (EHC) (SS490). It is issued once First Contact Concessions, Carers
    and Seniors (FCCCS) is completed, or
-   an Application for a Health Care Card for former recipients of a
    Carer Allowance Health Care Card (SS456). This can be used to renew
    the card

Lodged within 91 days

Twelve month renewals can only be processed if the claim is lodged
within 91 days of the expiry date. If not, the customer is required to
reclaim.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia Website for
information about the ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)
and the online claim form (SS456).

Related links

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
