
Extra concession information 101-06080000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on concessions available from other
government departments or agencies to further assist customers. The
procedures contained in this sub-topic provide contact details for
customers to access information on concessions available in each state.

On this Page:

Referral process for possible eligible customers

State authorities and organisations have advised that they are
occasionally receiving inappropriate referrals from Services Australia.
This topic and procedures are not to be used to determine a customer's
entitlement or eligibility for a concession from a service provider.

Types of concessions

Pensioner Concession Card (PCC), Health Care Card (HCC) and Low Income
Health Care Card (LIC) holders may be entitled to concessions from
federal, state/territory and local governments and from private
businesses. Some of these concessions may also be available to the
cardholder's partner and dependants.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders may access reduced costs
for prescriptions under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).
Cardholders may also be entitled to additional concessions from States
and Territories.

Cardholders are generally eligible for the listed concessions. In some
cases, dependants of PCC and HCC holders (partners and children) may
also be eligible for concessions:

PCC and HCC holders, their dependants, and CSHC holders receive:

-   prescription medicines listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
    (PBS) at the concession rate, and
-   additional benefits for out-of-pocket, out-of-hospital medical
    expenses above a certain threshold through the extended Medicare
    Safety Net

To contact the agency:

-   Medicare general enquiries
-   PBS general enquiries

PCC, HCC and CSHC holders, and potentially PCC and HCC dependants,
receive bulk-billed General Practitioner consultations, at the
discretion of the provider.

-   PCC holders and their dependants receive assistance with certain
    hearing services such as hearing tests and hearing aids. Contact
    Australian Government Hearing Services
-   PCC holders can receive a discount on mail redirection through
    Australia Post

State/territory government, local government and private concessions

Not all card types attract the same concessions, and the concessions
available to cardholders may also vary between different states and
territories.

Some state based concessions may not be available to cardholders who are
travelling through or temporarily residing in that state. Customers
should directly contact the individual concession providers prior to
travelling.

Some concession providers need a residential address on a card in order
to grant a concession. For example, concessions on council rates or
state government subsidies may only be given to residents of certain
areas.

What to advise customers regarding eligibility for concessions

Eligibility for any state, local government or other concessions is at
the discretion of individual concession providers. If a customer asks
whether they may be eligible for one of the listed concessions, they
should be advised to contact the concession provider. As the agency does
not administer these concessions, only advise the customer that they may
be eligible.

Some links to state and territory concession information can be found in
the Resources page.

Types of concessions available

State and territory government, local government and private providers
have concessions available to certain cardholders for the following
services:

Health

-   dental
-   optical
-   hearing services
-   home care
-   ambulance

Cardholders should contact the ambulance service in the relevant
State/Territory as ambulance concession cover varies between providers.

Household

-   local council rates
-   electricity/gas/water rates
-   housing

Education

-   school fee relief
-   Technical and Further Education (TAFE)
-   state government education allowances
-   training programs

Transport

-   taxi fares (see the Taxi Subsidy Scheme)
-   road transport registration fees
-   driver's licence
-   public transport fares
-   regional rail travel concessions
-   PCC holders are eligible for specific concessions on regional rail
    networks

General

-   telephone services, including line rental
-   entertainment
-   shopping

Great Southern Rail Concessions

The Great Southern Rail has been rebranded as the Journey Beyond Rail
Expeditions.

Free travel on Journey Beyond Rail Expeditions is no longer available.
PCC holders can contact Journey Beyond Rail Expeditions for information
on what concessional fares may be available.

Changes to PCC free travel vouchers from 1 January 2020

Services Australia will no longer send PCC travel vouchers to Western
Australian and Victorian residents from 1 January 2020.

From this date, information relating to reissuing travel vouchers will
no longer be in effect. For more information, see Public transport -
state and territory.

Digital card

Customers can use the digital wallet in the app or in the Digital wallet
on the Express Plus Centrelink app. See the link on the Resources page.
It allows customers to present their concession card using their smart
device. It is at the discretion of the concession provider whether they
accept the digital card so it is important that customers have their
physical card with them.

The Resources page contains a links to contact details, external
websites and a guide to concessions available for cardholders and in
some cases their dependants.

Related links

Concession Entitlement Validation Online Enquiry

Concession cards and information

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (HCC)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Health Care Card (HCC)

Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
