-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for staff assisting customers
enquiring about the CDBS that commenced 1 January 2014 and replaced the
Medicare Teen Dental Plan.

CDBS eligibility requirements

CDBS provides eligible children and teenagers aged 0 to 17 years
inclusive, with access to benefits for basic dental services, over 2
consecutive calendar years.

The amount is indexed annually and is currently capped at $1052 for
2023.

The eligibility criteria for CDBS must be met every calendar year. If
the whole amount is not used in the first year the remaining cap balance
can only be used in the second calendar year if they continue to meet
the eligibility criteria for CDBS.

To be eligible for CDBS a child/teenager meet the following criteria for
at least one day in the calendar year:

aged 0 to 17 years inclusive

eligible for Medicare, and

the child/teenager’s parent or guardian receives:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   Parenting Payment (PP), or
-   Double Orphan Pension (DOP), or

the child/teenager’s parent or guardian's partner receives FTB Part A or
Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP), or

a child/teenager receives:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   ABSTUDY
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Carer Payment (CP)

Where FTB A is claimed as a lump sum, eligibility for CDBS is for the
calendar year immediately following the financial year for which the FTB
Part A lump sum relates. The Resources page contains an example of
eligibility for FTB Part A lump sum claimants.

Qualifying payments also include Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
payments for the Veteran's Children Education Scheme (if the child is
over 16) and the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education
and Training Scheme (if the child is over 16). This information will be
provided from DVA to Medicare for the purposes of CDBS.

Note: customers also need to be eligible for Medicare.

See the Resources page for a link to CDBS information including eligible
payments.

Role of Centrelink and Medicare

The Centrelink system automatically checks to see if a child/teenager
meets age and payment eligibility requirements for CDBS entitlements,
and transfers age and payment eligibility details to the Medicare
system.

Eligibility for a child/teenager is determined using client data from
Centrelink, Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) and Medicare. Medicare
generate CDBS notifications of eligibility in January of each year with
notifications being sent for newly eligible children/teenagers
throughout the year.

Checking eligibility

Customers do not need to take their notification of eligibility to the
appointment to be able to claim for a dental service.

[] Customers can check their eligibility and remaining CDBS benefit cap
amount for the child/teenager by accessing their Medicare online account
using myGov, Express Plus Medicare app or by calling CDBS.

Dentists can also check the eligibility and remaining benefit cap for
the child/teenager online via the Health Professional Online Services
(HPOS).

Requesting a notification

Customers requesting a notification need to be directed to Medicare.
Notifications:

-   will be automatically issued up until 31 October each year, and
-   can be generated at the request of the customer from 1 November each
    year

If Centrelink Service Officers receive enquiries about CDBS, they can
confirm eligibility to a CDBS qualifying payment, and direct any other
queries to CDBS.

The Resources page contains:

tables of examples of CDBS enquiries

frequently asked questions

links to:

-   contact details for CDBS
-   Services Australia website
-   the myGov website, and
-   Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Related links

Patient eligibility for Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) in
Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
