
Medicare card number collection for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net 101-06100000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Centrelink staff about the
collection of a customer and/or their dependant's Medicare card
number(s) upon request from Medicare.

On this Page:

Purpose of Medicare card number collection

The purpose for collecting Medicare card numbers is to improve the
integrity of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS). With later
development of an online capability, pharmacies will be able to validate
the PBS concession entitlement of their customers at the point of sale
through Medicare Australia. Centrelink's role is to assist with the
validation of the customer's entitlement to PBS concessions.

The request to Centrelink from Medicare for Medicare card number
information will only occur when Medicare are unable to match their
Medicare /Centrelink records. Centrelink's process of requesting
Medicare card numbers from its customers for Medicare is almost
completely automated.

Identity Confirmation

When a request is received from Medicare, Centrelink performs a check to
see if a valid Medicare card number is currently recorded for Identity
Confirmation purposes. If a valid number is recorded, a passive consent
letter is sent to the customer asking them to contact only if they do
not wish their Medicare number to be released to Medicare. If a response
is not received from the customer within 14 days, passive consent is
recorded and the card number is sent to Medicare.

Where a customer:

-   has no Medicare card number recorded for Identity Confirmation
-   has an invalid Medicare card number recorded, or
-   a previous request for a Medicare card number has been made
-   a check is performed to see if the customer lives in a remote area

Where:

-   the customer does not live in a remote area, and
-   either an invalid Medicare card number or no Medicare card number
    has been recorded
-   an automatically generated letter requesting the customer to
    complete and return their Medicare card number is issued. These
    requests may include a request for the Medicare card number(s) for
    the customer's dependant(s).

Remote Areas

Where a customer lives in a remote area, an online document will be
recorded on the Centrelink computer system that will allow the
agent/remote service team(s) to follow up with the customer.

Although a customer can have multiple Medicare cards, any Medicare card
number can be supplied by the customer for this purpose.

Customers can choose to supply their Medicare card number even though no
request has been made by Centrelink.

Customer declines to provide Medicare card number

The emphasis on customers to provide their Medicare card number is
completely voluntary. Customers can decline to supply their Medicare
card number, and can decline permission for their Medicare card number
to be sent to Medicare. Where a customer declines to provide their
Medicare card number, or does not provide their consent to their
Medicare card number being sent to Medicare, there is no adverse effect
on their Centrelink entitlements, that is, no cancellations, suspensions
or other penalties. However, the customer may receive a less efficient
experience at the pharmacy when attempting to purchase PBS medicines.

Sending information to Medicare

Centrelink sends a nightly batch to Medicare with concession
information. Data sent to Medicare is generated by the Concession
Entitlement IT Cluster.

Note: an individual's Medicare number can also be used for establishing
a link with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

Contents

Requesting Medicare card numbers from customers for the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Remote community customers Medicare card number collection for the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Recording Medicare card numbers for the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS) and Medicare Safety Net

Related links

Establishing a link for an individual between Centrelink and the
Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
