
Re-reviews for non-compliant Third Party Organisations (TPO) 101-09030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details on how to complete a re-review for a
Third Party Organisation (TPO) after they have been found to be
non-compliant in a previous completed review.

TPO in this file is defined as businesses/merchants/participants.

On this Page:

Issue of remedy notice

When a TPO is found to be non-compliant, a remedy notice is issued.

The remedy notice describes how the TPO has breached the
Contract/Agreement and asks the TPO to correct or cease the
non-compliant practice. This is known as the 'remedy action'.

Depending on the circumstances and the Programme, the TPO is given a
period to complete this action. This is known as the 'remedy period'.

Depending on the seriousness of the breach, other sanctions may be
imposed such as a show cause letter (potential of revocation) or an
intent to suspend/suspension letter.

Review of remedy notice

The TPO is reviewed again to check they have complied with the remedy
notice and taken the remedy actions they have been asked to undertake or
complete within the remedy period. This review is known as the
re-review.

The date of the re-review is 10 business days for all programs, except
for Income Management:

-   BasicsCard (BCD) - 10 business days
-   Centrelink Confirmation e-Services (CCeS) - 10 business days
-   Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR) - 10 business days
-   Income Management Schedule 4 (IM4) - 30 business days
-   Income Management Schedule 5 (IM5) - 30 business days
-   Centrepay - 10 business days

If the remedy notice is sent by post, an extra 8 business days should be
allocated to the remedy period.

The days given to remedy a breach should be 'business days'. See the
Resources page for a link to tool to assist in calculating business
days.

If there is no response to a remedy notice, a show cause letter (also
known as a potential revocation letter) must be issued to the TPO. It
asks the TPO to explain why the agency should not withdraw its approval
to participate or use a particular programme. When a show cause letter
is issued, a re-review will be created which is linked to the first
review. Once a response is received, this re-review can be completed. If
the TPO is found to be non-compliant after the result of a show cause
letter, this will generate another re-review, linked to both the
original review and the show cause outcome. Note: currently this
function does not exist in the Centrepay assurance workflow. If a show
cause letter (or intent to withdraw letter) is issued for Centrepay,
place the review on hold until a response is received from the TPO and
only complete the re-review once the outcome is established.

The reviewer should seek to contact the TPO five days before the remedy
period is due to ensure the TPO responds within the required time frame.
A reminder should be set in the reviewer's calendar to ensure follow up.

Centrepay: In most instances for Centrepay, the sanction to be applied
is suspension. Issue an intent to suspend letter. In some circumstances,
where it is more appropriate (depending on the circumstances), a show
cause letter (potential of revocation), can be issued. Depending on the
circumstances, a suspension letter can be issued without sending an
intent to suspend letter first.

If there is no response to the intent to suspend letter, a referral
should be made to the Business, Online and Assurance Team. Either full
suspension or partial suspension will be imposed until the TPO can
remedy its breach/es, or the TPO may have its approval withdrawn.

If there is no response to the show cause letter (or the response is not
satisfactory - that is, the remedial action does not provide assurance
the TPO will be compliant), the TPO may have its approval withdrawn.

As part of the remedial action for BasicsCard Merchants, the reviewer
should refer Merchants to watch the BasicsCard video. The Resources page
contains a link to the BasicsCard video.

TPOs with Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) can be referred to
watch the CCeS obligations VOD

TPOs with Centrepay can be referred to watch the Centrepay VOD.

Role of the reviewer

The reviewer can change the remedy period if deemed appropriate.

The reviewer at the end of the remedy period will review whether the TPO
has complied with the remedy notice.

If a TPO replies before the remedy period due date, the date of the
re-review can be changed and the re-review can be finalised before the
due date.

A decision should be made on the follow up re-review result within 10
business days (30 business days for Income Management) of all evidence
being gathered that will inform the decision.

If a TPO has been re-reviewed and found compliant, it may be selected
for a full review within the next 12 months. These are called
'previously non-compliant' selections. They are not re-reviews. Not all
previously non-compliant TPOs will be reviewed within 12 months. It will
depend on the seriousness of the initial breach and is at the discretion
of the reviewer or the program team (or the TPO could be selected
randomly).

Once the re-review has been completed with a compliant outcome, a Q833
letter should be issued. If the re-review results in withdrawal of
approval, then a withdrawal of approval letter must be issued with the
relevant outcome in the assurance workflow.

The Resources page contains useful contact details, BasicsCard Merchant
Approval Framework Procedural Guide, and a link to the Services
Australia website for BasicsCard.

Related links

Review process for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Actioning a review for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Programme Assurance Review reports for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
