-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Financial Information Service (FIS), how to
refer customers to FIS and the duties of an FIS Officer.

About FIS

FIS provides free, independent and confidential information, tools and
resources to help people make informed decisions about their current and
future financial needs. FIS provides services to people who need help
and support to manage financial transitions and the financial impacts of
significant life events.

FIS is available to everyone. A person does not need to be in receipt of
a Services Australia payment to access FIS or to have an appointment
with a FIS Officer.

FIS can assist people who are at risk of, or experiencing, financial
vulnerability. This includes:

-   Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders
-   people from a culturally and linguistically diverse background
    (CALD), including migrants and refugees
-   people living in a rural or remote area
-   young people, including students starting work
-   women returning to the workforce

FIS does not provide financial planning, financial advice or financial
counselling.

Duties of FIS Officers

FIS Officers:

-   provide education and information about financial matters
-   help people understand their financial affairs and options and make
    better plans for the future by saving and using credit sensibly, and
-   help to build people’s confidence across a range of financial
    matters like redundancy payouts and superannuation

FIS Officers can help people to understand:

-   financial concepts such as social security, tax, superannuation,
    budgeting, debt, investment and insurance
-   financial options when starting or returning to work
-   information and options regarding a lump sum payment such as
    redundancy, inheritance, early access to superannuation and
    compensation, including redress under the National Redress Scheme
-   retirement planning including accommodation options and how
    different retirement income products work
-   costs and financial options for aged care
-   general financial literacy

FIS Officers:

-   can provide people with information and referrals to other services
    or groups tailored to the person’s circumstances. For example,
    Social Workers, financial counsellors, providers of the No Interest
    Loans Scheme (NILS) or SaverPlus program
-   are not financial planners, advisors or counsellors. They do not
    advise people about how to invest their money. They do not deal with
    other agencies or businesses on behalf of people. They do not
    schedule appointments for the sole purpose of updating customer
    income or asset information or processing of claims

Accessing FIS

FIS provides a range of information services via:

-   FIS dedicated phone service
-   video chat appointments
-   face to face appointments
-   free information and education webinars
-   community outreach

A person does not need to meet any specific criteria to be referred to
FIS. However, staff should ensure a FIS referral is the most suitable
option for the person’s needs.

Reasons for a referral to FIS can include:

information or assistance when starting or returning to work. For
example:

-   how does tax and income tax work
-   information on wages and salary
-   understanding superannuation and why it is important

financial support for people who are financially vulnerable, or at risk
of becoming so. For example:

-   considering accessing early release of superannuation
-   different types of loans and how to use credit well
-   different types of financial investments, risks and returns
-   financial support or information following cessation of the Cashless
    Debit Card or changes in income management or enhanced Income
    Management program

about to receive, or have received, a lump sum. For example:

-   compensation
-   redundancy
-   total permanent disability
-   payment under the National Redress Scheme
-   inheritance or property settlement

planning to, or about to retire, and wanting to understand options such
as:

-   superannuation
-   income streams
-   annuities
-   allocated pensions
-   Pension Bonus Scheme/Home Equity Access Scheme
-   options for retirement accommodation, granny flats and downsizing

general financial information following a significant life event. For
example:

-   newly separated, and wanting to understand financial matters that
    come with this change of circumstance
-   becoming a parent, or a carer

The Resources page includes contact details and links to the FIS webinar
page on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Social work services

Aged Care Specialist Officers (ACSOs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
