
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student turns 16 102-06020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines whether a student is still eligible for payment
under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme when they turn
16. If they are not eligible, the document also outlines other payments
that may be available to them.

On this Page:

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

AIC is payable in respect of students who undertake approved studies and
are isolated from their nearest appropriate state school or meet special
needs or deemed isolated criteria.

Students must satisfy the eligibility conditions for AIC and they and
the applicant should assess the most beneficial alternative payments
that may be available.

Age criteria

If the student undertakes study at:

-   primary or ungraded level, AIC students are eligible to the end of
    year in which they turn 19 years of age
-   secondary level, 16 year old AIC students can continue to qualify
    for AIC to the end of the year they turn 19 years of age, or they
    can transfer to ABSTUDY Living Allowance or Youth Allowance (YA) at
    any time if it is more advantageous for them

Tertiary studies

Students may be eligible for AIC where they are isolated from state
secondary schooling but choose to undertake tertiary study instead. Only
TAFE or vocational education and training level courses qualify as
tertiary study for AIC students.

Previously, tertiary students were only eligible for AIC until their
16^(th) birthday. After state and territory government increased school
leaving ages and introduced higher minimum education and training
participation ages and requirements, the AIC policy for tertiary
students was changed to align receipt of assistance to those higher ages
or requirements.

If an eligible student undertakes tertiary study as an alternative to
secondary school study, their entitlement end date will be the day they
have met the minimum education and training participation age or
requirement for the state or territory (generally around the student's
17^(th) birthday).

Tertiary students who are no longer eligible for AIC need to claim
either ABSTUDY or YA.

Most beneficial payment

To determine the most beneficial payment, consideration to the following
is required:

-   Most families receiving AIC and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
    student will generally be better off remaining on these payments
    over YA, even where the student could receive the YA Away from Home
    rate and Rent Assistance (RA)
-   FTB may be paid in addition to AIC where as other payments including
    YA, ABSTUDY Living Allowance and other income support payments are
    income tested for customers aged 16 years or over and will no longer
    qualify for FTB
-   YA is available for dependent students who need to live away from
    home to study, and is subject to the Parental Income Test (PIT).
    Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming
    Youth Allowance (YA) outlines eligibility. FTB Part A is subject to
    parental income tests
-   AIC Basic Boarding Allowance, Second Home Allowance and Distance
    Education Allowance are non-means tested. Only the AIC Additional
    Boarding Allowance (ABA) is means tested, that is, is subject to a
    Parental Income Test and the level of the student's boarding costs
-   Students boarding or living in a second home away from parents may
    be entitled to YA or ABSTUDY Away from Home rate as well as Rent
    Assistance
-   Most state and territory governments provide assistance for isolated
    students that in some cases, is tied to eligibility for AIC

The Resources page contains a list of scenarios and circumstances
relating to an AIC student turning 16 years.

Related links

Age requirements for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining the Entitlement End date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Eligibility for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
