
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect on Additional Boarding Allowance (ABA)
for an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme student if their
parents/guardians return to or commence work.

On this Page:

Parental Income Test (PIT)

The Parental Income Test (PIT) is normally applied to determine
eligibility for ABA. All other AIC allowances are free of means testing.

When the PIT applies, assessment is normally based on the parental
income for the financial year ending on 30 June of the year preceding
the study year for which benefits are sought (i.e. the base tax year).
However, in some circumstances it can be based on the parental income
for the financial year ending on 30 June in the study year for which
benefits are sought (i.e. current tax year).

Where the student's parent(s) or guardian(s) have commenced or returned
to work, this could result in parental income for the current tax year
increasing. If parental income for the current tax year is more than 25%
higher than the parental income for the base tax year and also more than
25% higher than the Parental Income Free Area, the assessment of ABA
eligibility and entitlement from 1 October is based on the parental
income for the current tax year.

The Parental Income Test (PIT) waiver provisions

The PIT may be waived if special assessment applies because one or both
of the student's parents (i.e. the applicant or the applicant's partner)
is getting an Australian Government income support or equivalent
payment, or is in receipt of a Health Care Card (HCC). Where one or both
parent(s)/guardian(s) have commenced or returned to work, this could
result in a change to their eligibility for an Australian Government
income support or equivalent payment or HCC. If no parent/guardian
continues to receive one of these payments or hold a HCC, special
assessment would no longer apply and the student's eligibility for ABA
would need to be assessed under the PIT.

Related links

The Parental Means Test (prior to 1 January 2016)

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY

Assessing and coding parental income for ABSTUDY, Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
