
About Change of circumstances 102-02000000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirement of Centrelink customers to notify
if they have a change in circumstances and the process of notification.
Any changes of circumstances relating to their eligibility or
entitlement to payment notification must be made within 14 days after
the event occurred (28 days for notification of bereavement, or if the
customer is overseas).

Government intent

Centrelink customers are required to notify of any changes to their
circumstances to ensure that Centrelink have complete and correct
contact information, so that customers can receive correct entitlements.

On this Page:

Notification requirements

Failure to notify a change in circumstances may result in cancellation
or suspension of payment and in some cases a failure may be imposed.

Updating customer details

A customer's address and telephone details must be checked by a Service
Officer at every contact, and updated if required.

Customer records must be kept current and up-to-date. Customers are
obliged to have ongoing contact with Centrelink to ensure that when
changes occur there are no payments made to the customer to which they
are not entitled.

Methods of notifying

A customer may notify a change of circumstances in writing, by attending
a service centre, by phoning Centrelink or, in certain circumstances, by
using the self service facilities.

Service Officers must take care to record the receipt of all
correspondence and detail all phone conversations on the customer's
record by documenting all contact details clearly. This is particularly
important as disputes can later arise about whether Services Australia
was advised and in what detail.

Notification to one Centrelink section is legal notification by the
customer to Centrelink as a whole, and means that the customer has
fulfilled their obligation to notify.

Notification across Services Australia programs

Customers should be advised that information used for their Centrelink,
Child Support and Medicare payments and services is not routinely
transferred within Services Australia. The customer may need to contact
either Centrelink, Child Support or Medicare, to update relevant
information.

Related links

Changing address or rent details

Changing name, sex and/or gender details

Changing relationship status, dependent child or family details

Changes associated with age (CLK)

Helping parents return to work

Cancellation, suspension, rejection and restoration (CLK)

Ceasing, commencing or returning to employment (CLK)

Ceasing, commencing or returning to self-employment (CLK)

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Portability of payments

Portability of add-ons

Incarcerated Customer Services

Returning to Australia

Discretion to extend portability period

Centrelink Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

Service Profiling and Service Updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
