
ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas 102-11090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for a Service Officer to decide if
ABSTUDY is payable to a customer, and for how long, while they are
overseas. It also explains the actions the Service Officer and the
customer are to take before the customer's departure.

Initial contact

All staff are responsible for handling the portability interview. The
ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing staff are responsible for handling any
departure coding for the following:

-   students and Australian Apprentices who are going overseas to
    undertake approved study or work (including work placements that are
    part of their approved study)
-   customers who clearly do not satisfy an approved reason
-   customers leaving to live in another country

In all other cases, if a customer has indicated their overseas travel
meets the initial criteria for an approved reason, the case must be
referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS) to assess
entitlement and code the departure, as only designated staff within CIS
have the delegation to complete the assessment.

Note: do not refer overseas full-time study (OFS) cases to CIS.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot be used for
assessing portability entitlement for ABSTUDY.

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer is leaving Australia to live in another country, ABSTUDY
payments will stop from the earlier of the date of departure and:

-   for students, the last day the customer satisfies the activity test
-   for Australian Apprentices, the date their Commonwealth Registration
    Number is cancelled

Temporary absence - approved reason for travel

If an ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice leaves Australia
temporarily, payment may continue if they are absent for an approved
reason only and for a specific negotiated period:

for a temporary absence of any length (but unlikely to be more than a
few weeks) to attend a training camp with Australian Defence Force
Reserves

for a specific negotiated period (not more than 6 weeks):

-   to attend to an acute family crisis
-   for medical treatment not available in Australia

Customers will be activity test exempt while absent for these reasons.
The allowable absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.

ABSTUDY is only portable overseas if travelling for an approved reason
as listed above. It is not portable for general portability such as a
holiday etc.

Note: ABSTUDY may also continue outside Australia for the duration of
approved overseas study or work. Further information is below.

Temporary absence - approved overseas study or work

Before making a decision about whether ABSTUDY can be paid for overseas
study or work, determine if:

-   students continue to satisfy the ABSTUDY student qualification
    criteria
-   Australian Apprentices continue to have a current Commonwealth
    Registration Number
-   the overseas study (including work placement) or work will
    contribute to, and be credited towards, a full-time course or
    apprenticeship in Australia

Note: do not refer these cases to CIS.

The customer must:

-   advise their date of departure from Australia, and return date (if
    known), and
-   provide written advice from their Australian educational institution
    or State Training Authority confirming proof of the reason for their
    absence

Generally, a customer who is studying externally (for example, by
correspondence or online) will not need to attend a campus overseas to
complete units of their approved course. However, external students can
access extended portability under overseas study provisions if they can
demonstrate their primary reason for going overseas is to undertake
studies that form part of the course. This could be a residential
component at an overseas institution or an overseas work placement
provided it is part of the Australian course.

A student or Australian Apprentice granted portability for overseas
study or work can continue to receive ABSTUDY for the duration of the
approved absence. The approved period may include additional travel time
to allow them to prepare for the study/work and/or to finalise their
affairs and return to Australia.

Relocation Scholarship for students undertaking approved overseas study

ABSTUDY students may be eligible for Relocation Scholarship when they
undertake approved overseas study provided they meet all other
eligibility criteria for the scholarship. See Relocation Scholarship
(RS) eligibility and Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding.

Supporting documentation

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably
before their departure.

If it is accepted the customer is leaving for an approved reason, they
will be required to provide supporting documentation on their return. If
the documentation is not acceptable or not provided, a debt will be
raised.

If a customer provides supporting documentation relating to a previous
temporary absence which was not for an approved reason at the time, do
not run the Review officer script as a decision on their portability has
not yet been made. Refer the case:

-   for overseas study for students and Australian Apprentices, to the
    ABSTUDY Smart Centre Processing Team
-   in all other cases, to CIS

ABSTUDY will stop from the date of departure if the reason for leaving
Australia is not acceptable or the customer does not provide proof of
the reason either before or after the absence.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Customer advises change of departure or return date

If a customer travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and they then depart Australia more than 3
days before or more than 3 days after the advised date, any specific
negotiated period of portability approved for the original date of
departure will cease to apply. The customer's approved reason for travel
outside Australia may no longer be valid. Payments will stop when the
customer's actual date of departure is confirmed by the Immigration
Datalink.

Customers must advise of any change in their departure details prior to
travel if they wish to be paid during the absence. Service Officers can
assess if the approved reason still applies and record the new departure
date and reason again.

Return to Australia

The return rule for ABSTUDY means where a customer has been granted an
approved overseas study absence, a brief return to Australia (up to 6
weeks) within the approved study period does not interrupt the
portability period for the course of study overseas. No new decision is
required in such cases.

However, if a student or Australian Apprentice studying or working
overseas decides to extend the length of their overseas course (for
example, wants to continue studying overseas for an extra semester) the
customer must apply to have their payment continue and provide new
supporting evidence.

For approved reasons other than overseas study, customers who are unable
to return to Australia by the end of the specific negotiated period must
contact CIS or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is
required, this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly
extended up to the maximum portability period. If they are still
required overseas at the end of the maximum portability period, there is
discretion to extend the period of portability under certain
circumstances.

Any change to the length of an absence for an approved reason must be
referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS) for further
assessment and coding.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer notified
or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not
be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers must advise of
a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex, the
system will prompt them to contact the agency.

The website lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving
Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Secondary school students

A secondary school student studying outside Australia is eligible for
ABSTUDY if:

-   the overseas education institution is equivalent to an approved
    education institution in Australia, and
-   the overseas course is at secondary level and meets the workload
    provisions set down for secondary school students

Secondary school students who attend a boarding school or hostel, whose
allowances are paid to the boarding institution and depart overseas for
a non-approved reason, are not entitled to ABSTUDY for the period they
are outside Australia. This is regardless of if they commence study
within the first 3 weeks of a term. ABSTUDY is only payable for the
period they are in Australia.

Prior to 1 January 2019, where the boarding school or hostel the student
is attending has a no refund policy, no overpayment will be raised
against the boarding school or hostel, even though the student is not
eligible for ABSTUDY during the period they were outside Australia.
Where the secondary student was receiving a residual payment, an
overpayment may be raised for the period they are outside Australia for
a non-approved reason.

Periods of assistance for secondary school students studying overseas

If the student:

-   is participating in an international educational exchange programme
    which is recognised by the relevant State or Territory education
    authority - the period of study at the overseas institution
-   accompanies a parent/guardian who is employed by the Commonwealth of
    Australia (for example, a member of the Australian Defence Force) -
    the period of the overseas posting
-   is studying overseas for any other reason - ABSTUDY entitlement is
    for a maximum of 12 months from the first date of attendance at the
    overseas education institution

Attendance: The normal ABSTUDY attendance provisions apply to secondary
school students studying overseas.

Rate: Secondary school students may qualify for Living Allowance as
independent or at the Away From Home rate and School Fees Allowance
Group 2 if their circumstances overseas would meet the requirements for
these rates if the student were in Australia.

Secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and Doctorate level students

A secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and Doctorate level student
studying or undertaking a work placement outside Australia is eligible
for ABSTUDY if the following criteria are met:

The student is enrolled on a full-time or concessional study load basis
in an approved course at an Australian higher education institution
which:

-   approves the overseas study or work placement, and
-   is prepared to credit the results of the work placement or study at
    the overseas education institution towards the approved course

The student meets the study load requirements in respect of the approved
Australian course

A work placement (if undertaken) forms part of the student’s full-time
Australian course, regardless of whether credit is given for the
placement

Periods of assistance for secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and Doctorate students studying overseas

There is no limit to the period of assistance for secondary non-school,
tertiary or Masters and Doctorate students who are undertaking approved
overseas study, provided they meet other eligibility and reasonable time
conditions.

Rate: secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and Doctorate students
approved for ABSTUDY while studying overseas are entitled to:

-   the Away From Home rate
-   Fares Allowance if their circumstances overseas would entitle them
    to Fares Allowance if these conditions were experienced in
    Australia. Note: this refers to travel within the overseas country.
    Fares Allowance to travel between Australia and the overseas country
    is not available

The Resources page contains examples and links to contact details for
CIS and the Services Australia Website for information about payments
while outside Australia and travelling overseas with medicine.

Contents

Student studying outside Australia

Related links

View/Update overseas travel online

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences due to acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Returning to Australia

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Away from home rate for ABSTUDY

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
