
Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System (NSS) 102-10010180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for
payments on the Newstart System (NSS). It contains a list of the CAN,
SUS and REJ codes. Refer to relevant procedures for processing details.

Payment status

Services Australia (the agency) uses codes when a decision to cancel or
suspend a payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded on the computer
system. A description of the code is used in correspondence with the
customer about their income support payment.

Payments may be rejected, cancelled or suspended in the NSS system due
to specific eligibility requirements not being met, and/or a variety of
other reasons.

Suspension or cancellation

A payment cannot be suspended pending investigation (INV). Before a
payment is suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be satisfied
that there is sufficient evidence that the customer is either:

-   not qualified for the payment, or
-   the payment is not payable

If there is not, information must be requested from the customer via a
notice under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

If the customer provides the requested information, their retrospective
and/or continuing entitlement should be assessed.

If the customer fails to comply with the notice by not providing the
requested information, the decision maker may, after considering all the
available evidence, decide to suspend or cancel the payment.

The Resources page contains more information about the legislative basis
for suspending or cancelling payments.

If the decision to suspend payment is made, prompt action should be
taken to give the customer a notice of decision, which details the
reason for the suspension and their review and appeal rights.

If a decision is made to manually suspend a customer's payment in
conjunction with the above, a manual review should be coded by the
Service Officer to follow up the suspension at a later date.

Vulnerable and at risk customers

If a vulnerable and at risk Special Benefit (SpB) customer remains
without income support payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an
automatic suspension or cancellation, the customer may be eligible for
manual intervention.

Note: customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative. Any Manual Follow-up (MFU) generated for customers in this
situation should be cancelled.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer by phone before
finalising the decision.

There is no need to contact customer if:

-   rejecting their claim Failed to respond to correspondence (FRC) or
    Failed to supply documents (FSD)
-   the customer has been advised verbally or in writing of their
    requirement to provide further information, and
-   the customer is not vulnerable or at risk

The Resources page contains a table outlining the legislative basis for
suspending or cancelling payments and a historical list of cancellation,
suspension and rejection reason codes.

Related Links

Codes for ABSTUDY cancellation, suspension and rejection

Codes for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme cancellation,
suspension and rejection reasons

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Double Orphan Pension
(DOP)

Cancellation and rejection codes - Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Income stream reviews

Restoration of Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy for full-time students
and Australian Apprentices

Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) and
Special Benefit (SpB)

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
