
Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) 102-15010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines information for customers who are enquiring about
repayment of Financial Supplement Loans (FSL) after the loan has been
transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

On this Page:

Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)

SFSS was a voluntary loan scheme which gave eligible tertiary students
the option of borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they
studied.

The term 'Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS)' refers to the
program name of the Scheme. 'Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)' is the
product of the Scheme. In other words, students applied for the product
(FSL) and received this through the program (SFSS).

Bank arrangements

The funds for FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(CBA). When the student applied for a FSL, at any branch of the CBA, the
student entered into a loan contract with the CBA. The contract period
commenced on the day the CBA accepted the FSL application and ended on 1
June of the fifth year after the year the loan was taken out.

Students are liable for the full amount received from the CBA. Interest
on the loan was paid by the government, but the student is liable for
the Consumer Price Index (CPI) adjustment that is applied to the loan on
1 June each year.

End of loan contract period

All loans were administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until
the end of the contract period. At the end of the contract period, the
outstanding loan was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO). The loan then becomes a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable
through the taxation system.

CPI adjustments continue to be applied every year (on 1 June) while
there is an outstanding FSL balance with the ATO.

After transfer to the ATO, Services Australia no longer kept records of
any repayments or CPI adjustments made to the debt balance. The customer
should be advised of the amount that was transferred to the ATO. The
final balance on all outstanding loans will now show as zero on Services
Australia's system. This does not mean that the loan has been zeroed
off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO for
recovery through the taxation system.

Referring customers to the ATO

The customer can continue to make voluntary repayments. Repayments must
be made to the ATO and will not attract an early repayment bonus.

The customer should be referred to the ATO website for accurate
information regarding their debt. Customers can visit the ATO website
for further information on requesting information on their FSL.

Note: enquiries concerning loans that have been transferred to the ATO
should generally be referred to the ATO. In some cases, customers may
dispute the balance of their loan that was transferred or have general
requests for information (such as details of repayments within the
contract period). These enquiries can be dealt with by Services
Australia Service Officers.

The Resources page contains information about contacting the ATO, ATO
procedures for handling FSL debts, information about repaying FSL debts
via Pay As You Go (PAYG) arrangements, and a link to information on
repayment thresholds and rates on the ATO website.

Related links

Dealing with disputed Financial Supplement loan (FSL) repayments

Accessing details of Financial Supplement loans (FSLs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
