
Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) 102-03020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Inter-environment Change of Address
(ICoA) facility is used to transfer records between environments.

Inter-environment transfers

The Centrelink computer system divides Australia into a series of
geographically based environments. When a customer changes their address
from one environment to another, their computer file record must also be
transferred.

ICoA allows an inter-environment transfer to commence, be scheduled and
then checked at a later time to monitor the status of the transfer. The
most typical situations for which ICoA is required are:

-   A counter enquiry - where the customer notifies change of address
    which is administered in a different environment
-   A phone appointment booking - when the customer has pre-existing
    records in a different environment
-   During an appointment/at first point of contact - when the customer
    has pre-existing records in a different environment and a transfer
    is required before claim processing in a new Service Centre

Note: environment Y is not geographically based. It is a 'view only'
environment where logically deleted and inactive deceased records from
all other environments are stored when it is unlikely there will be any
ongoing business requirement for the record. Transfer to environment Y
occurs automatically and records will not be transferred back to active
environments. See Environment Y for inactive deleted and deceased
customer records.

Situations which prevent a scheduled transfer from occurring are listed
on edit screens. Once the edits are fixed by the user, or cease to
exist, the customer’s record is automatically transferred.

The Resources page has a link to Office Locator.

Contents

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) inter-environment change
of address

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) transfer of a customer record

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) transfer of a child record

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
completed transfers

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
scheduled transfers

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
started transfers

Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility problem escalation
process

Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility hints

Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility edits

Related links

Changing address or rent details

Changing address for customers in care of a state guardianship authority

Environment Y for inactive deleted and deceased customer records

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Changing personal details of nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
