
Prison admission process and claims during incarceration 102-12000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details on assessing payments for customers on
admission and during incarceration.

Situations that constitute being in gaol

A social security payment, Parenting Payment (PP), Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES), Mobility Allowance (MOB) or Carer Allowance is not
payable to a person in gaol.

A person is considered to be in gaol when:

-   lawfully detained in prison while under sentence because the person
    has been convicted of an offence, and is not on parole or licence
-   lawfully detained in a place other than a prison while under
    sentence because the person has been convicted of an offence, and is
    not on parole or licence
-   undergoing a period of custody in prison pending trial or sentencing
    for an offence

Where a person has been convicted, the place of detention includes a
psychiatric institution, remand centre, youth training centre, community
correctional centre, police cell/watch house or weekend detention.

Where a person is pending trial or sentencing for an offence, their
custody must be in a prison facility to be considered in gaol.

A customer subject to a home detention order may be considered to not be
in gaol.

A person may be lawfully detained on a full time or part time basis. If
a person is detained on a part time basis (also known as periodic
detention or weekend detention), they may be eligible for a partial
payment.

Customers are considered in gaol, and therefore ineligible for payment,
for any period in which they are detained for a full 24 hour period from
midnight to midnight.

A magistrate or judge will specify the conditions of the home, periodic
or weekend detention order. This will vary depending on a customer's
circumstances. These conditions outlined in the detention order need to
be reviewed carefully before determining if a social security benefit or
pension is payable.

Leave of absence

Customers can be granted leave from prison for a variety of purposes
(attending a funeral, counselling, work release etc) and are not
eligible to receive a social security payment.

Person in psychiatric confinement

Psychiatric confinement includes:

-   confinement in a psychiatric section of the hospital, or
-   any other place where 'persons with psychiatric disabilities' are
    confined

A Social Security payment is not payable to a person who is undergoing
psychiatric confinement, except in very limited circumstances. This
includes people charged but not convicted. In these cases, the person
must be undertaking a course of rehabilitation and:

-   is being assessed for mental fitness to stand trial, or
-   has been found unfit for trial due to mental impairment (no
    conviction recorded), or
-   has been found not guilty due to mental impairment (no conviction
    recorded), or
-   has been found guilty, but no conviction has been recorded

The Customer in Psychiatric Institution (SA379) form must be completed
in all cases where a customer is seeking to be paid DSP while in
psychiatric confinement related to a criminal offence. See, Payability
of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in psychiatric
confinement for a criminal offence.

Note: for customers who are in psychiatric confinement and in receipt of
Suspending, cancelling, or restoring Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payments, refer the case to the SRSS Helpdesk.

Data received by Services Australia

Services Australia does weekly data matching with corrections services
departments in every state and territory to:

-   identify customers who are imprisoned, and
-   automatically apply and remove a prison (PRI) temporary write off

Date of effect

If a customer is imprisoned or placed in psychiatric confinement, the
date of effect of the suspension is the day after they entered custody.
The customer does not lose entitlement until they have spent the whole
day (midnight to midnight) imprisoned.

Effect on payments, services and programs

Circumstances where a customer's payment should be cancelled

See Cancellation of Payments.

Suspend the social security payment if the customer will temporarily not
qualify for their payment due to imprisonment, generally less than 13
weeks (less than 12 weeks for Parenting Payment (PP)). Some variations
are:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy payments
-   Customer no longer an Australian Apprentice
-   ABSTUDY payments
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) payments
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

For Suspending, cancelling, or restoring Status Resolution Support
Services (SRSS) payments customers, refer the case to the SRSS Helpdesk.

If the release date is unknown, suspend the customer’s Social Security
payments.

Carer Payment

If the incarcerated customer is a carer or care receiver, the carer's
qualification for payment may continue and the temporary cession of care
provisions applied. See:

-   Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment
    (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Care receiver is absent and
-   Coding a one-off absence for Carers Allowance (CA)/ Carer Payment
    (CP) when the care receiver is absent

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Shared Care

Imprisoned or confined individuals can receive FTB, if their FTB child
is still in their care.

Consider:

-   whether a shared care arrangement exists, or
-   if a change of care has occurred

There is no time limit on continuing to pay FTB if the child is still in
the individual's care.

If the change of care is temporary (less than 4 weeks), the customer may
remain entitled to payment for the child. If the customer is not
entitled to FTB, cancel the payment and cancel their income support
payment (if applicable). See Resources for FTB scenarios.

Debts

If an imprisoned or confined customer has a child in their care and has
an FTB debt arrangement, they may have their debt due date extended.

FTB claim

When a family in crisis needs help, a Service Officer (Prison Liaison
Officer (PLO)) can advocate on behalf of a customer to expedite the
processing of a family assistance claim.

Non-Lodger

Partners of incarcerated customers can lodge an online non-lodger
application on behalf of the incarcerated customer.

Child Care Subsidy

To be eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)/ Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) the customer must have a FTB child in their care.

Concession cards

Customer whose payment stops when imprisoned are not entitled to the:

-   automatic Health Care Card (HCC)
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Income Management (IM)

If a customer's payment is subject to IM and they have an active basic
card, see:

-   Effect on Income Management when payment is suspended, on zero rate,
    cancelled or an Unemployment Non-Payment Period applied and
-   Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or
    leaving prison

Home Equity Access Scheme

If the customer is a recipient of the Home Equity Access Scheme,
escalate to a Complex Assessment Officer.

Medicare

For Medicare enrolments and reissues, see Australian citizens
eligibility for Medicare.

Child Support

A national telephone service offer enables customers who are in prison
with Child Support obligations to contact Services Australia.

ABSTUDY Lawful Custody Allowance

This is an ABSTUDY supplement to assist Indigenous students and
Indigenous Australian Apprentices with study costs while in custody by
reimbursing essential costs. This is paid directly to the accredited
institution.

Member of a couple separated due to imprisonment

Payment cancellation due to imprisonment or lawful custody may affect a
partner’s eligibility for an income support payment. See Assessment of
circumstances for customers with partner in prison.

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and NZ DRA

DRA is a payment made available under the Social Security Act 1991. It
gives short term income support to help eligible Australians who can
demonstrate they have suffered a loss of income as a direct result of a
declared major disaster. While NZ DRA is not made available under the
Social Security Act 1991, eligibility for the payment is very similar.
DRA/ NZ DRA is payable for a maximum of 13 weeks from the date a
customer has or will have a loss of income as a direct result of the
disaster.

If a customer was granted DRA/NZ DRA before going into prison, DRA/ NZ
DRA is payable during the period in imprisonment and psychiatric
confinement. See DRA and NZ DRA.

Prisoner Wallet Card

The wallet card provides customers with:

-   key information for Services Australia payments and services,
    including
-   actions customers should take to avoid getting a debt when they go
    to prison and
-   documents to bring to Centrelink after a customer is released from
    prison

Service officers can order Prisoner Wallet Cards (product number 12902)
through the Product Ordering Portal (POP) for corrective services staff
to give to customers during their incarceration and release from prison.
See Resources for a link to the POP.

Contents

Leave of absence from prison

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are
imprisoned or in psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

The Resources page contains:

-   table of situations to determine if a customer is in gaol
-   FTB scenarios
-   link to Child Support information for people in custody and
-   link to Services Australia Prison Servicing contacts
-   links to the Prisoner Wallet Card and the Product Ordering Portal
    (POP)
-   an example of date of effect for weekend suspension
-   contact details for the SRSS Helpdesk

Related links

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Manual rates of payment

Effect on Income Management when payment is suspended, on zero rate,
cancelled, or an Unemployment Non-Payment Period applied

Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers

Payment rates and thresholds

Personalised Services

Customer service delivered through a One Main Contact (OMC) as part of a
Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment enquiries

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
