
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process to take when recipients notify of a
change of address.

Notification of change of circumstances

When a recipient changes their address, either temporarily or
permanently, they need to notify Centrelink of this change in
circumstances within 14 days of moving. They will also be required to
advise of any other changes in circumstances as a result of their move,
for example if they owned their previous home, they will need to provide
details of what has happened to it.

Every recipient's address (including postal address) and telephone
contact details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at
every contact, and updated if required.

Note: if the recipient has authenticated themselves via Interactive
Voice Response (IVR), address details do not need to be confirmed.

Centrelink may ask recipients to provide specific information about
particular events or changes in circumstances. These requests can be
made in writing and recipients usually have 14 days to respond. Failure
to respond may lead to suspension or cancellation of payments.

If a recipient requests mail to be sent to a different address this is
recorded as a postal address.

Recipients experiencing homelessness

Recipients receiving income support payments are required to provide a
current address, if the recipient is homeless or unable to provide a
current residential address, the Service Officer should apply a
homelessness indicator to the recipient's record and assist them to
provide an alternative address at which Services Australia may contact
them. The Service Officer should also implement procedures to assist the
recipient in their needs, this may include referrals to Centrelink
professionals or external agencies.

Note: recipients who are receiving or applying for Rent Assistance (RA)
must have a current residential address.

Recipients with an outstanding debt

Recipients who have an outstanding debt have a legal obligation to
notify Services Australia of any change of address within 14 days while
a debt is still owing, even if they are no longer receiving a payment.

CP and/or CA carer or care receiver notifies of a change of address

When a carer or a care receiver notifies a change of address further
information is required to assess whether the carer is still providing
sufficient care to maintain qualification for payment. See Change of
address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) for more
information.

Note: a recipient may be on a Centrelink payment in their own right as
well as being a care receiver for someone else’s CP and/or CA payment.

Income managed recipients

When an income managed recipient notifies a change in circumstances,
including a change of address or change in rent, a review of their
priority needs and expense allocations is required. See Changes to
Income Management priority needs for more information.

Income managed recipient who move out of a declared Income Management
area

Recipients:

-   whose payments are currently income managed and who move
    indefinitely or permanently outside of a declared Income Management
    area will continue to be income managed
-   who have been identified for Income Management and move out of a
    declared Income Management area before Income Management commences,
    or provide a retrospective change of address, may still have their
    payments income managed

See Customer moves out of an Income Management area for more
information.

Recipients who move into a declared Income Management area

When a recipient moves into a declared Income Management area, they may
be profiled or referred for Income Management if they meet the criteria
for an Income Management measure available in that location.

The location criteria for Income Management eligibility is based on a
recipient's permanent residential address (that is, Home or Term
address), therefore it is important to confirm the recipient's move is
permanent and not temporary to avoid them being incorrectly identified
for Income Management.

ABSTUDY students or nominees

If a recipient is the applicant for an ABSTUDY student, (for example,
for Schooling A payments) or they act as a nominee for another person,
their details will need to be updated on that customer’s record as well.

Notification of changes to other programs

Recipients should be advised that Services Australia does not routinely
transfer information between services. The recipient may need to contact
other programs and agencies, for example, Centrelink, Child Support and
Medicare, to update relevant information.

Recipients with an outstanding Rent Assistance Profile Review

If a recipient has an outstanding Rent Assistance Profile Review, the
address update must be done inside the review, unless the update is for
a future date. If the recipient wishes to advise a future change of
address, they will need to complete their review before they can make
the update.

Contents

Updating address details

Adding, changing or removing an email address

Temporary vacation of principal home

Permanent vacation of principal home

Vacation of principal home due to illness

Vacation of principal home to provide care

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Change of address for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
applicants or students

Changing address for customers in care of a state guardianship authority

Youth Allowance (YA) customer leaving the parental home

ABSTUDY customer leaving parental home

Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the
away from home rate of Youth Allowance (YA)

Returning to the parental home when in receipt of the away from home
rate of ABSTUDY

Parents moving in with ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA) customer

Change of address to an aged care home

Change of address from an aged care home

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Job seeker change of address

Related links

Changing personal details of nominees

Commencement, cessation and coding of the away from home rate of Youth
Allowance (YA)

Rent Assistance (RA)

Rent Assistance (RA) verification

Recording accommodation details

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Remote Area Allowance (RAA)

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Homelessness

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Homelessness Indicators

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
