
Commencing or returning to work for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker) 102-07030080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the commencement or
return to part-time, casual or full-time employment for customers
receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker).

Notifying of return to work

When a customer is on 2 weekly reporting and starts work, whether
full-time, part-time, casual, on-call etc., they must advise any paid
employment income on their Entitlement Period End Day (EPED). They may
advise in advance they are starting work but have to report their paid
gross employment income on their reporting day.

When a customer is on variable reporting (that is, 4WE, 12WE) and starts
work, whether full-time, part-time, casual, on-call etc., they must tell
Centrelink on or before the EPED of the reporting period they commenced
work.

Income test and Working Credit

Employment income a customer is paid may affect their payment under the
appropriate income test. The income test and Working Credit provides
extra incentive to customers to obtain work. Employment income will only
affect the customer's payment when the Working Credit has been depleted
and the income free area has been exceeded.

Full-time Australian Apprentice

If a customer is returning to work as a full-time Australian Apprentice,
consider entitlement to ABSTUDY, Austudy or YA payments as an Australian
Apprentice. If their current income support payment will be cancelled,
consider if it is to their financial advantage to change income support
payment. Customers receiving these payments as an Australian Apprentice
are subject to the same income and assets tests that apply to students.

Employment income nil rate period

Where a customer would receive nil payment due to the income test and
some of that income is from their (or their partner's) employment, the
customer is entitled to remain current at a nil rate for a period of up
to 6 consecutive fortnights if they would otherwise have remained
eligible for their income support payment. This process does not apply
if the customer has commenced or returned to full-time ongoing
employment.

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 week suspension period

Customers under 25 and in receipt of YA (other) or JSP may be eligible
for the YBWS initiative when placed in employment by their Workforce
Australia provider. These customers are eligible for a 26 week
suspension period. This commences on either:

-   the completion of the employment income nil rate period, or
-   the date they cease to be eligible for YA (other) or
-   JSP for an employment related reason

For more information, see Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week
Suspension Period.

Reporting requirements

-   If the customer or their partner is on variable reporting and
    commences work, they will be placed on 2 weekly reporting
-   For customers and/or their partners who are working, employment
    income details will need to be reported every 2 weeks
-   If a customer contacts to advise they have commenced employment and
    it is not their reporting day, employment details must be recorded
    on a DOC. Advise the customer to report hours worked and employment
    income paid within their reporting period on their reporting day and
    explain how to do this. If the customer is a variable reporter,
    ensure the customer's reporting frequency is changed to 2 weekly and
    tell the customer their next reporting date
-   When advising commencement of (or returning to) work, the customer
    must provide information about their employment circumstances

Employment record keeping

Customers should keep their own record of the hours worked and
employment income paid so their payment is not delayed while waiting for
this information from the employer. Customers can use the Earnings
Worksheet (SU505) to keep track of any pay events and hours worked they
need to report on their next reporting due date.

Note: family assistance and income support reporting obligations are
different. Income support customers must report actual income paid, not
just an estimate. Service Officers must discuss income reporting
requirements at every opportunity and ensure actual income and income
estimates are both updated when required. If either member of a couple
is receiving family assistance, their estimate must include income
support payments received, Paid Parental Leave, employment income and
any other components of Adjusted Taxable Income (received or expected)
for the financial year for both members of the couple.

Commencing full-time work and sufficient work requirements

Most customers receiving JSP or YA (job seeker), will no longer qualify
for payment if they commence full-time ongoing work. These job seekers
will be able to deplete their Working Credits before their payment is
cancelled. The customer will not be entitled to an employment income nil
rate period.

However, certain job seekers in receipt of JSP or YA (job seeker) who
meet sufficient work requirements, where their income is not above the
allowance income test cut off limit for the relevant payment, may
continue on payment.

The most common examples of full-time workers who might still qualify
for JSP without further mutual obligation requirements are:

-   a JSP customer with a pensioner partner, because the income test for
    these couples results in a cut-out point for JSP which is
    considerably higher than applies to individuals in couples where
    both receive a social security benefit such as JSP
-   long-term single JSP customers aged 60 or more who receive Rent
    Assistance (RA) (the cut-out point for such cases can also exceed
    full-time minimum wages)
-   JSP single principal carers in full-time work, because the income
    test for these customers allows them to continue to be entitled to
    part rate of JSP after all Working Credits have been exhausted

Meeting mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers who are principal carers, or assessed as having a partial
capacity to work, or who are mature age 55+ are able to satisfy their
mutual obligation requirements by undertaking sufficient work of 15
hours per week.

Job seekers assessed as having a partial capacity to work will have
their work capacity reviewed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
if they work more than 60 hours per fortnight over a period of 3
consecutive fortnights.

Job seekers aged 55 to 59 who are within the first 12 months of receipt
of their current income support payment (including suspension periods of
up to 3 months), have a minimum requirement of 15 hours per fortnight of
paid work or self-employment, as part of their combination of approved
voluntary work and paid work.

After receiving their current income support payment for a 12 month
period or upon turning 60 years old, these job seekers may fully satisfy
their requirements by undertaking 30 hours or more per fortnight of any
combination of approved unpaid voluntary work and paid
work/self-employment, including solely through approved unpaid voluntary
work.

Note: job seekers aged 55 years or over must remain connected with a
Workforce Australia provider and must attend any notified appointments.

Job seekers aged 60 or over may choose to undertake voluntary work or a
combination of voluntary work and paid work or self-employment of at
least 30 hours per fortnight with employment income, or net business
income, at the national minimum wage or above.

Family assistance

If the customer or partner receives Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child
Care Subsidy (CCS), the Service Officer should check if the customer
needs to revise their estimate of annual income and advise the customer
of the payment choices available. This will help reduce the risk of
overpayment due to changes in their income during the financial year. If
either member of a couple is receiving family assistance, their estimate
must include income support payments received, or expecting to receive,
employment income and any other components of Adjusted Taxable Income
(received or expected) for the financial year for both members of the
couple.

Manually rejecting an income support payment

If a customer has been granted an income support payment or allowance
and is yet to receive a payment, then the customer advises they have
returned to work or employment income precludes their payment before
their start day, the claim will have to be manually rejected.

Recording employment income

Customers who are registered for self-service can report their
employment income via self-service on their reporting due date.

Service Officers are to record employment information via the Earnings
and reporting workflow tool.

See Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments and
Recording and correcting employment income details.

The Resources page contains a link to a matrix with information to
assist with determining the appropriate action in various situations.

Related links

Working Credit

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Employment income nil rate period

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Allowance income and assets tests

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Coding a cancellation

Cancellation of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) at customer's request

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker (JSP) or Youth Allowance (job seeker)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Earnings and reporting workflow tool

Workforce Australia/Community Development Program (CDP) registration
inactivated and cancellation of income support in error

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Recording and correcting employment income details

Nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
