
Effect of end of course on payments for students 102-07020030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when students advise and/or
confirm the course end date of their current study. Services Australia
(the agency) administered payments for students will usually cease once
the customer's course of study has ended.

Notifying change of study details

Youth Allowance (YA) (Student), Austudy, ABSTUDY and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) customers may [] update their details online to notify
of a change to their:

-   course end date
-   study discontinuation
-   study load, or
-   other study details

This notification option is not available to Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) customers (usually the parent/guardian is the applicant
for the student).

The record will either generate a DOC or create a Change of
Circumstances interaction if there is a change to the student's
participation status or student end date that is:

-   more than 28 days after the current recorded student end date, or
-   more than 28 days before the current recorded student end date, or
-   a date before the date of the actual online update

A Service Officer must complete the follow up action.

Where an update to a student end date is made within 28 days of the
current student end date, and that date is not a date prior to the date
of the actual online update, this will be automatically processed.

Course end date reached

The options for the customer when their student end date is reached are:

-   commence another course of study in the next available study period
    for which they may continue to receive a student payment, or
-   advise an intention to study in the next study period, or
-   apply for payment for another reason (for example, as a job seeker),
    or
-   cease receiving income support payments or ABSTUDY altogether

When a student advises that their current course has ended (or is about
to end), the Service Officer must follow the correct procedures to
ensure an appropriate outcome for the customer.

For ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) and Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), when the course and student end date for AIC
students and ABSTUDY secondary school students is the end of the study
year, they remain eligible (and payments are normally made) until 31
December. ABSTUDY PES or PES students undertaking a full year course
(ending after 15 September) will be eligible to be paid until 31
December.

For Austudy (AUS) and Youth Allowance (Student) (YAL-STU), if the
customer is 22 years of age or older on their student end date with no
Study Details Manual Follow-ups (MFUs) recorded, they are offered a
streamlined JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claim option 28 days prior to their
student end date. [] This is available in the 'Confirm course end date'
task presented on their Centrelink online account home screen. See
Student to job seeker transfers.

Continuing and intending students

When Service Officers are making study updates, consideration should be
given to whether the customer can be considered a continuing/intending
student. This determination may influence whether their student payment
can continue between study periods. The rules for continuing/intending
students vary between different student payments.

14 day notification rule

If a Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY student ceases full-time study,
they must notify the agency and register as a job seeker within 14 days
in order to receive backdating of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA (Job
seeker), if they are eligible. Failure to notify cessation of study
within 14 days will result in cancellation of ABSTUDY/YA from the
student end date + 1 day. Payment of YA (Job seeker)/JSP may only
commence from the date the claim was submitted.

A debt may be generated for students who fail to notify cessation of
studies.

If a tertiary or secondary non-school student receiving ABSTUDY
discontinues full-time study and does not intend to claim JSP or YA (Job
seeker), ABSTUDY is cancelled from the study end date + 1 day regardless
of when they advised the change, or when the agency became aware of the
change.

Effect on Student Income Bank (SIB) and Working Credits

If the customer has unused SIB credits, these credits can be transferred
to Working Credits, including where there is a gap in entitlement of up
to 12 months.

If the customer is already receiving Youth Allowance (YA) (Student) and
they commence an Australian Apprenticeship, up to 1000 unused SIB
credits can be transferred to their Australian Apprentice Income Bank,
where there has been no gap in entitlement.

For more information, see Personal Income Test and Income Bank for
ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
Apprentices.

The Resources page contains links to the Access Support Centre (ASC)
homepage, and Payment and Service Finder.

Related links

Student to job seeker transfers

Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study
load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES

Coding new study details

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institution
for ABSTUDY students

Student intending to undertake a course at Honours level

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Working Credit

Processing end of course and intention to study reviews for Austudy and
Youth Allowance (YA)

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
