
Increasing study load for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students 102-07020070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on determining which payment from
Services Australia (the agency) may be the most appropriate for a
customer when they increase their study load, particularly from
part-time to full-time.

On this Page:

Part-time students

For customers studying part-time and are intending to return to
full-time study, the date they will qualify for Austudy or YA as a
full-time student would be the last day of part-time study plus one day.

The last day of part-time study would be the later of:

-   the student's last examination date, or
-   the last day the student was required to submit coursework, or
-   the last day the student was required to attend a class, lecture or
    tutorial

For example, John was studying a second year of a Bachelor of Arts
course. In Semester 2 John studied on a part-time basis. The last
official examination date for the educational institution in Semester 2
is the 20th November. However, John has advised the last examination was
held on the 15th November. John is intending to return to full-time
study in Semester 1 of the third year. John would qualify for Austudy as
an intending full-time student from the 16th November, the day following
the last day required to complete the part-time course requirements for
the semester.

Intending students

Intending students are considered to be satisfying the Activity Test as
a full-time student, that is they are treated the same as a full-time
student.

For Austudy and YA payments, an intending student is one who:

-   is intending to continue in the same course that they are currently
    undertaking after a recognised holiday period, or
-   is progressing into a new course of approved study following
    completion of their current course or study period

To be an intending student the customer must show that they intend, and
have always intended, to enrol or re-enrol in the course for the next
available study period, when enrolments in the course are next accepted.

Non-intending students

Students who are not considered to be 'intending students' are those
who:

-   have previously been working or looking for work and who did not
    study in the last available semester or study period
-   have deferred their course for a period of time and are now planning
    to continue the course, or
-   transferred to a payment as a job seeker at the end of their
    previous study and now plan to return to study

These customers will not be considered to be full-time students until
they commence their course. Until they qualify for Austudy or YA
(student) they should test their eligibility for another payment, for
example, JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA (jobseeker).

Payment qualification

If a customer is increasing their study load and/or changing their
course of study or institution, a number of issues must be considered.
The customer may have a choice to stay on their existing payment or
claim a student payment. Service Officers should determine which payment
would be of most benefit to the customer before directing them to claim.
See Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices.

Related links

Coding new study details

Increasing study load for ABSTUDY students

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for the 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for the 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
