-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA)
customers who have started a course and then deferred or withdrawn from
full-time studies before the end of their course.

Notification of change of study circumstances

A change in study details is a change in circumstances that may affect a
customer's qualification for payment, and is therefore, a notifiable
event. Customers undertaking study or training must notify Services
Australia (the agency) within the notification period if any of the
following events occur, or are likely to occur:

-   starting or discontinuing a full-time or concessional study load
    course
-   not enrolling in a course as a continuing student by the end of the
    enrolment period
-   not starting the course by the end of the second week
-   changing the study load of a course from full-time to part-time, or
-   changing their enrolment status in the course (for example, leave of
    absence, deferral)

Updating study details online

[] Customers may notify the change by updating their details online. If
there is a change to the student's Participation Status or Student End
Date, follow up action will generate for a Service Officer.

Customers with a Centrelink online account can view their personal
information including study details through the My Profile menu option
in the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

All of a customer's addresses (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every phone
and personal contact, and updated if needed. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via Interactive Voice Response (IVR), address
details do not need to be confirmed.

Notification period rule

If a YA (student) or Austudy customer stops study they must notify the
agency within the notification period. The Process page has more
information on notification periods.

The job seeker payment starts from the date the customer makes initial
contact with the agency to claim for payment if they:

-   fail to notify stopped studying within the notification period, and
-   they want to claim payment as a job seeker

A debt may be generated for students who fail to notify cessation of
studies.

Customers with an intention to study who will not start their course

If a YA or Austudy customer had an intention to study and will not, or
did not start their course, see Customer will not commence full-time
study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES).

Part time studies

Generally, if a student stops full-time study they stop to qualify for
the student payment. However, if the customer has reduced their study
load, they may qualify for a study load concession. If a customer who is
receiving YA is under 22 years of age and is continuing to study
part-time, they may be able to continue to receive YA as a jobseeker if
they combine this activity with others such as looking for work or part
time work.

Reduction in study load due to temporary incapacity

If a YA full-time student becomes temporarily incapacitated, however
remains enrolled in a qualifying course or registered for the relevant
award, they may still be able to be paid YA as a student. See Youth
Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated.

If an Austudy customer reduces their study load due to a temporary
incapacity, they may be eligible to remain on Austudy as a concessional
student, or they may need to test their eligibility for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP). See Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated.

Away from home rate

If the customer was receiving the away from home rate due to studying,
review the customer's entitlement to the away from home rate.

Student becomes a Job Seeker or Australian Apprentice

YAcustomers under 22 years of age may continue to qualify for YA if they
change their activity from full-time study to job search. They do not
need to lodge an additional claim.

Customers currently receiving YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY who will continue
to be eligible to receive the same payment as an Australian Apprentice
do not need to lodge a claim. See Existing customer starts an Australian
Apprenticeship.

YA customers aged 22 and over will no longer qualify for YA if they
change their activity from a full-time student (or Australian
Apprentice) to a job seeker. They would need to transfer to another
payment such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

Effect on Working Credits

Customers transferring from a YA (Student) or Austudy to a payment
eligible for Working Credits may be able to transfer all or part of
their Student Income Bank to their Working Credit balance.

A carryover of Student Income Bank to Working Credit can occur when a
customer transfers between payments, and also if granted a social
security pension or benefit after a break of up to 12 months.

The Resources page has examples of what date a customer can be paid to,
based on when the Service Officer updates the record.

Related links

Payment of ABSTUDY when a student is deferring or discontinuing study
before the end of the course

Deferring or discontinuing study before end of course for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Changing study/training details for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES), ABSTUDY PES or AIC PES customers

Changing study/training details for Austudy customers

Commencing or returning to work for Austudy and Youth Allowance
(Students)

Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices

Austudy student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Changing or correcting course of study or educational institution for
Youth Allowance, Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement students

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pension Education Supplements (PES)

Registering customer as a job seeker

Coding new study details

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Working Credit

Existing recipient starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Student to job seeker transfers

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker) claims

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
