-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing the status and payment
rates for ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA) customers living together as
partners, where one customer has been assessed as independent and the
other as dependent.

On this Page:

Independent and dependent status

ABSTUDY and YA customers can be considered either independent or
dependent subject to their circumstances. Independence status determines
whether the customer is subject to the Parental Means Test. It can also
affect the rate of payment, and eligibility for payment of Rent
Assistance (RA).

Member of a YA couple

For the purposes of YA, a person is considered to be a member of a YA
couple where the person is currently:

-   legally married, or
-   in a registered relationship, or
-   in a de facto relationship for a continuous period of 12 months

Note: the partners to the relationship must be over the age of consent
(applicable to the relevant state or territory) and must not have been
living separately or apart on a permanent or indefinite basis.

The Resources page contains a link to the Australian Institute of Family
Studies, for age of consent laws in each State and Territory.

Member of an ABSTUDY couple

For the purposes of ABSTUDY, a person is considered to be a member of an
ABSTUDY couple where the person is currently:

-   legally married or married under Aboriginal/Torres Strait Islander
    law, or
-   in a registered relationship, or
-   in a de facto relationship of at least 6 months’ duration

Note: the partners to the relationship must be over the age of consent
applicable to the relevant state or territory and must not have been
living separately or apart on a permanent or indefinite basis.

Income test

When an independent and dependent customer live together as a member of
a couple, the income test that applies to each member of the couple and
the customer's status (that is, dependent or independent) can vary
depending on the nature and length of the relationship.

Living with parents

An independent YA or ABSTUDY couple living in the home of 1 of their
parents and paying rent, board and/or lodgings to them, may be eligible
to receive RA.

The Resources page contains examples of assessments of
independent/dependent customers living together as a member of a couple,
and a link to the Australian Institute of Family Studies, for age of
consent laws in each State and Territory.

Related links

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

ABSTUDY customer in de facto relationship

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
