
Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the away from home (AFH) rate of Youth Allowance (YA) 102-03010120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding Youth Allowance (YA)
customers who have returned to their parental home when in receipt of
the away from home rate or who are independent.

Permanent or temporary return

It is important to establish if the customer has returned to the
parental home on a temporary or permanent basis, and whether they
continue to maintain their accommodation away from the parental home.
These factors will determine if the customer's rate of payment will need
to change.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) impacts on the away from home rate

During the COVID-19 pandemic, some students were required to leave their
campus term accommodation. Many students also transitioned to online
study, as face-to-face teaching was unavailable.

Students who were receiving the away from home (AFH) rate, and
temporarily transitioned to online learning as a result of COVID-19
remain eligible for the AFH rate. To continue to be eligible for the AFH
rate tertiary students must return to face-to-face study as soon as it
becomes available.

Where a student had to move out of education provider accommodation
(such as on campus) and are, or were temporarily staying with their
parents, they will remain eligible for the AFH rate providing they:

-   remain enrolled in their course of study, and
-   intend to return to their campus accommodation as soon as the
    education provider allows them to return

In this case, the change in accommodation should be assessed as
temporary.

Reviewing independence

When a young independent person receiving YA lives in the parental home,
some independence provisions are not met. A young person's independent
status may need to be reviewed if the customer returns to live in the
parental home. Some independence reasons are reviewable, for example,
where they were previously independent due to unreasonable to live at
home or in state care.

An independent customer who lives at their parental home may be
considered an accommodated independent person. Accommodated independent
customers receive the lower (at home) rate, unless an exemption applies.

Reviewing the away from home rate

When a customer returns to the parental home an assessment is required
to determine if they are still entitled to the away from home rate. If a
customer returns home for the weekend or vacation period and they are
still enrolled in full time study and maintaining accommodation
elsewhere, no reassessment is required.

Entitlement to Rent Assistance

When a YA customer returns to the parental home the customer's
entitlement to Rent Assistance (RA) if qualified, is to be reviewed.
Their continuing entitlement to RA will depend on whether the return to
the parental home is temporary or permanent, and if they are still
paying rent.

The Resources pages contains a link to Office Locator.

Related links

Returning to the parental home when in receipt of the away from home
rate of ABSTUDY

Commencement, cessation and coding of the away from home rate for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Parents moving in with ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA) customer

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
