
Changing study load from full-time to part-time or concessional study load for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy or PES 102-07020020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process involved if a student changes their
study load from full-time to a part-time or concessional study load for
YA, Austudy or Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

Study requirements

YA, Austudy and PES students must be undertaking a full-time or
concessional study load in an approved course.

If a student reduces their study load from full-time to a part-time or
concessional study load, they may no longer be eligible for payment as a
student. PES students may still be eligible, but there may be a change
to their rate, depending on their study load and qualifying payment. An
exception to this rule may apply if the student is in a Partner
Bereavement Activity Test exemption period.

Study load assessment

If the student is unsure whether they are full-time or part-time after
their reduction in study load, the student must provide enrolment
details for their course so the study load can be assessed.

Reduction of study load to less than 75%

When a student reduces their study load to less than 75% of the normal
amount of full-time study, a Service Officer must assess whether the
student remains eligible for Austudy or PES, or for YA (student).
Recipients under 22 years of age no longer eligible for YA (student) who
still require assistance may remain on YA but will need to register as a
job seeker.

YA (student) ceases full-time study

If a YA (student) ceases full-time study and wants to receive payment as
a job seeker, they must register as a job seeker within 14 days of
ceasing study. Failure to notify cessation of study within 14 days will
result in cancellation of YA from Student End Date plus one day. If the
student does not notify cessation of study within 14 days, payment of YA
(job seeker) may only commence from the date the student makes contact
with Services Australia to claim for a payment. A debt may be generated
for students who fail to notify cessation of studies.

If a YA (student) ceases full-time study to become an Australian
Apprentice, refer to Existing customer starts an Australian
Apprenticeship.

Students impacted by Coronavirus (COVID-19) in the 2020/2021/2022 academic years

Due to COVID-19, some students were temporarily unable to study or
reduced their study load below full-time. Impacts for students include:

-   a sudden transition away from face-to-face learning to online
    learning
-   closure of student accommodation
-   cancellation of some units of study
-   delays in commencing practical placements

Some students will contact to advise a delay in their practical
placement. These students may not know when their placement will begin
or end. Service Officers:

-   can use estimated dates provided by the customer in these
    circumstances
-   do not have to request documentation from an education provider to
    confirm placement dates. See below for other evidence requirements
-   should tell customers to update their course details when they know
    more specific details

Activity Test and Study Requirements

Students unable to study, or with a reduced study load, meet their study
requirements or activity test if they:

had an approved reason, and

remained enrolled in their course (this includes taking an approved
leave of absence), and

returned, or intended to return to full-time studies or an approved
concessional study load in the:

-   next available study period, or
-   earliest possibility of full-time study

cannot return to full-time study as they are in the final study period
of their course

Approved reasons for reduction in study load

Approved reasons include:

-   the student moved from face-to-face to online study, and had a lack
    of available resources. For example internet access, PC/laptop or
    specialist equipment
-   the student dropped units of study because they failed or would have
    failed because of transitioning away from face-to-face learning
-   education provider cancelled subjects or units, or
-   rescheduling of compulsory practical placement

Do not update the Education Course Details (EDC) screen unless the
student needs to extend their course and study end dates.

For a student with study circumstances impacted by COVID-19, record
details in a DOC. Include:

why the customer is temporarily unable to study or reduced their study
load

if the student has the intention to return to full-time study or
approved concessional study load:

-   in the next available study period, or
-   the earliest possible instance full-time study becomes available to
    them again

if the student cannot return to full-time study, as they are in the
final study period of their course

A student does not have an approved reason if they decided to:

-   end their study, or
-   reduce their study load because their education provider waived a
    financial or academic penalty

Evidence requirements

Students with a reduced study load due to COVID-19, need to provide
evidence from their education provider. This evidence must state they
have a reduced study load as a direct result of COVID-19.

Do not request evidence from an education provider if practical
placement is delayed due to COVID-19 and the start or end date for
placement is unknown.

Update the EDC screen with estimated dates provided by the student.

YA (student) becomes incapacitated

If a YA (student) ceases full-time study or reduces their study load due
to:

-   A temporary incapacity they may remain on YA (student) for the
    period of their incapacity in some cases. See Youth Allowance (YA)
    Student or Australian Apprentice becomes incapacitated
-   The death of their partner. See Activity test exemptions for Youth
    Allowance (student) customers when their partner dies

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Related links

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing eligibility for 25% concessional study load for Austudy

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Assessing eligibility for the 66% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Assessing eligibility for the 25% concessional study load for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES)

Study requirements for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Employment assistance for full-time students

Existing customer starts an Australian Apprenticeship

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Activity test exemptions for Youth Allowance (student) customers when
their partner dies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
