-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when a customer advises they are no
longer an Australian Apprentice.

Payments may continue for some customers

A new claim may not be required for some customers to continue receiving
payments.

Customer under 22 years of age

If the customer is currently receiving Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY
and is under 22 years of age, they may continue to qualify for payment
if they change their activity from full-time Australian Apprentice to
job search (YA only) or full-time study (YA and ABSTUDY). No claim is
required. This is considered a change in circumstances only.

Customers aged 22 years and over

[A self service option is available for customers] Customers aged 22
years and over who are receiving YA, ABSTUDY or Austudy as a full-time
Australian Apprentice who are no longer an apprentice, may continue to
qualify if they change their activity from full-time Australian
Apprentice to full-time study. No claim is required; this is considered
a change in circumstances only.

Customers aged 22 years and over who are no longer an apprentice or
undertaking full-time study can make a claim for another suitable
payment, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP) using online services.

Apprentice customers claiming other income support payments during the coronavirus pandemic

Some customers may apply for a different income support payment (such as
Jobseeker payment) during the coronavirus pandemic. This may be because
they have stopped their apprenticeship either permanently or
temporarily, or the customer may be unsure about the future of their
apprenticeship. Service Officers must be aware that the customer may
still qualify for YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY as an Australian Apprentice
providing their Commonwealth Registration Number remains current.

If the customer confirms they have permanently stopped or completed
their Australian Apprenticeship, the Apprentice Details (NAPD) screen in
Process Direct or Apprenticeship Details (NAPD) screen in Customer First
will need to be updated to end date the apprenticeship before another
payment can be granted.

Working Credits

Unused working credits or an Australian Apprentice Income Bank balance
can be transferred to the customer's Student Income Bank or working
credit balance, up to a maximum of 1,000 credits.

Related links

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Working Credit

Student to job seeker transfers

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Claiming ABSTUDY

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
