
Excess repayment of Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) 102-15010040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines what to do when the customer has paid more than
the outstanding amount of their Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) during
the contract period.

On this Page:

Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)

FSL was a voluntary loan paid under the Student Financial Supplement
Scheme (SFSS) that gave eligible tertiary students the option of
borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they studied.

FSL was payable only to tertiary students who were in receipt of an
appropriate benefit.

Entitlement to FSL

FSL was payable only to tertiary students who were in receipt of one of
the following payments:

-   ABSTUDY (Living Allowance)
-   Austudy
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), or
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Excess repayment

In some cases a young person may have repaid an amount that exceeded
their outstanding loan balance. In these cases, the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA) or ATO who received the payment must repay the excess
amount back to the loan recipient.

Incorrect loan information

If a customer provides proof that the information held by Services
Australia regarding their loan is incorrect, the customer should provide
this evidence to the agency for investigation. Service Officers who
receive this information should forward the details to the Student
Payments Helpdesk. See Resources for contact details.

End of loan contract period

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Services Australia until the end of the contract period.

During the contract period, a young person was not required to make any
compulsory repayments. However, they could choose to make voluntary
repayments. These payments could only be made directly to the CBA or
Australia Post.

Transfer of the loan to the ATO

At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan was transferred
to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then became a debt to
the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation system.

All outstanding FSL loans have been transferred to the ATO, so the
customer should be referred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
website for their latest FSL details.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
Services Australia's system. This does not mean that the loan has been
zeroed off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO
for recovery through the taxation system.

The Resources page contains contact details for ATO and the Student
Payments Helpdesk.

Related links

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
