
Service Components and Service Actions 102-01010010

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Service Strategy which assists in providing a
more targeted approach to customer contacts.

On this Page:

Service Strategy

The Service Strategy comprises of:

-   Service Components
-   Service Actions
-   Service Detail

Each Service Component has one or more Service Actions which
collectively describe the steps, tasks or actions that are involved in
completing the Service Component.

Service Components and Service Actions have a status which provide the
following capability:

-   Tracking - the ability to determine which Service Components and
    Service Actions are yet to be actioned, are in progress, or are
    completed
-   Searching - the ability to identify customers that have Service
    Components and Service Actions that require action

The maintenance of Service Component status is an automated function.
The status of the Service Component cannot be directly updated.

The status of the Service Actions associated with the Service Component
may be updated, resulting in the Service Component status being updated.

Note:

-   'STA'rted Service Components cannot be deferred
-   Not Started Service Components cannot be cancelled
-   When the Service Component is completed it cannot be restarted

Service Profile screens

In preparing for any contact with a customer, see the Service Profile
screens to identify the level of service a customer requires, and view
the recommended Service Strategies for interacting with the customer.

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen displays information about the
relevant contacts for the customer's Profile.

Search for Service Update work using the Service Component Search (PQCS)
and Service Component National Search (PQNS) screens. The status of a
Service Action is updated on the customer's Service Strategy (PQSS)
screen.

When a Service Update is to be deferred or cancelled, the Service
Officer is navigated to the Deferment/Cancellation Details (PQDC) screen
to record the reason for deferral or cancellation.

Service Component and Service Action status codes and descriptions are
contained in the Process page.

Related links

Service Components by number

Service Profiling

Service Profiling Capability

The Profile Summary (PQS), Profile History (PQH) and Profile Details
(PQD) screens

The Predictor Details (PQPD) screen

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

The Profile Search (PQSE) screen

Accessing and using the Service Profiling screens

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to Integrated Review System (IRS)
Service Updates

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

The Service Component History (PQSH) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
