
The Living Arrangements question set 102-05030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a family and domestic violence interaction point. If the
customer is with another person, or on speaker phone, or already
identified with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the
current business conversation. Otherwise, go to the family and domestic
violence procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral
process.

This document explains the Living Arrangements (LA) question set which
streamlines processes for assessing a customer's living arrangement.

Purpose of LA question set

The LA question set identifies if there is a payment correctness risk of
a customer being paid the single rate of payment when they may be in a
member of a couple relationship (partnered) which they haven’t advised
Services Australia about.

A customer’s responses to the LA question set will determine if they
need to give more details about their living arrangements via the
relevant Relationship Details form (SS284 or SS293) to have a formal
member of a couple assessment done.

The LA question set applies to customers who have a non-partnered
relationship status and are sharing accommodation with another person
who is not an immediate family member and who is 16 years or older, when
they:

-   claim an income support payment, or
-   advise of a change of accommodation details (in person, via phone or
    online), or
-   living arrangements need review

Generally, both the customer and their sharer will need to each complete
and return the required form.

Family and domestic violence

There are specific procedures for a customer who is experiencing family
and domestic violence. Under no circumstances should contact be made
with the alleged user of violence (generally the other person who is the
sharer/ex-partner). The matter must be referred to a social worker to
assess appropriate supports and help that may be needed. See Family and
domestic violence for more information.

A safety concern question is included in the LA question set which
identifies if a customer is concerned about their safety, if forms are
issued to the person with whom they are sharing accommodation (for
example, may be experiencing family and domestic violence). If the
customer identifies safety concerns, the system will only issue the
Relationship Details (SS284 or SS293) form to the customer and not to
the sharer.

Sharer Details

Sharer Details page

The Sharer Details page is presented before the LA question set if a
non-partnered customer advises of a change of accommodation
circumstances and does not have a Sharer Status that is considered
exempt.

The Sharer Details page allows staff to differentiate between newly
added, provisionally added and confirmed sharer details:

-   New (NEW) displays next to added sharer details when the Service
    Officer has not yet selected Continue
-   Provisional (PVL) displays next to added sharer details when the
    Service Officer has selected Continue and then gone back to the
    Sharer Details page to make updates
-   Confirmed (CNF) displays next to sharer details that are currently
    stored on the customer's record

Note: change of address details for dates in the future cannot be coded
for sharers. Tell these customers to re-contact once they have
physically moved address.

Sharer details not provided

When completing the sharer details within the LA question set, the
customer may be unable to or refuse to provide details of the people
they are sharing with.

When the customer is unable or refuses to provide sharer details during
the LA sharer questions workflow, tell the customer they must provide
these details within 14 days.

Sharer details are needed to allow the agency to assess the customer's
circumstances and deliver the correct rate of payment. The customer must
respond within 14 days or their payment may be suspended.

Content of LA question set

The LA questions are related to 4 of the 5 factors that must be
considered when making a decision as to whether a customer is a member
of a couple:

-   financial aspects of the relationship
-   social aspects of the relationship
-   nature of the household
-   nature of the commitment

When undertaking a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment, information
relating to all 5 factors is considered, although not all factors need
to be present for a decision to be made that a person is a member of a
couple.

The fifth factor that the LA question set does not ask is the presence
or absence of a sexual relationship. The related Relationship Details
form covers this additional factor when responses to the LA question set
triggers the need for the completion of the form.

The agency does not make a determination as to whether the customer is
in a relationship based on the responses of the LA questions alone. The
responses will only establish whether further information (that is,
issue of Relationship Details forms (SS284 or SS293) is needed from the
customer and the sharer.

Once the Relationship Details forms (SS284 or SS293) are returned,
Service Officers must conduct a series of checks to ensure there have
been no change in circumstances and confirm whether a Member of a Couple
(MoC) assessment is required.

Safety concern question

A safety concern question is included to identify if the customer may be
at risk (of family and domestic violence) if the Relationship Details
(SS284 or SS293) forms are issued to the sharer(s). The customer is
asked the following question for each relevant person they advise they
share accommodation with:

-   'Are you concerned about your safety if forms are issued to any of
    these people?'

If a 'Yes' response is recorded against this question, any Relationship
Details forms triggered will only be issued to the customer and will not
be issued to the sharer(s) for whom safety concerns are identified
against.

When LA question set is used

The question set is included as part of the:

-   Change in Contact Details and Address workflows
-   Online Claims
-   Online Account updates
-   Express Plus Centrelink Mobile app
-   some paper claim forms, and
-   the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) process

When customers are updating their details online or completing an online
claim, they will be presented with the LA question set if applicable.

Customers whose relationship status is single and they are in receipt or
claiming the following payments (except those customers under 16 years
of age) are presented with the LA question set during any workflow,
which includes an update to accommodation details:

-   ABSTUDY (Living Allowance) if independent (ABY)
-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (student, apprentice, job seeker)

There are limited circumstances where the system will not automatically
navigate to the Living Arrangements question set following an update to
the customer’s accommodation details, however a MoC/SUOR assessment will
be required. For example this might happen where customers only get:

-   Family Tax Benefit and/or Child Care Subsidy - need a manual issue
    of the SS293 form/s
-   Carer Allowance (CDA) - need a manual issue of the SS293 or SS284
    form/s

Issuing forms

Based on the customer's responses to the LA questions, the system may
generate an automated recommendation to send to the customer and their
sharer(s) either a:

-    Relationship Details (SS284) form, or
-   Relationship Details - Separated under One Roof (SS293) form

A recommendation to issue the SS284 will occur if the customer provides
a 'Yes' response to the following questions:

-   Do you share the parenting/guardianship of any children with any of
    these people?
-   Has the customer ever had joint financial commitments (for example
    joint bank accounts, mortgage or other loans) with this person/any
    of these people?
-   When the customer participates in activities jointly with this
    person/any of these people, are they considered to be a couple?

A recommendation to issue the SS293 will occur if the customer provides
a 'Yes' response to the question:

-   Have you previously lived together as a couple (for example married,
    partnered, de facto or in a registered relationship) with any of
    these people?

The issue of an SS293 form overrides the issue of any SS284 form in the
event a customer responds with 'Yes' to more than one question, that is,
only one type of form is issued, not both.

The system will not issue an SS284 or SS293 to the sharer(s) if safety
concerns have been identified by the customer. Under no circumstances
should an SS284 or SS293 be issued manually to the other person(s) or
any contact be made with the other person(s) in this situation.

If the LA question set recommends the SS284 or SS293 be sent, this can
be accepted or overridden based on additional information provided by
the customer to a Service Officer. If it is clear from further
discussions with the customer that there is no risk of an undisclosed
relationship existing, the Service Officer must stop the forms being
issued by overriding the system recommendation. For more information on
when it may be appropriate to override the issue of the forms, see
Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment.

If a Service Officer overrides the system recommendation to issue forms,
they will need to enter notes to explain why.

The system will retain all responses to the LA questions.

Online Claims/Online Services

[] When a customer lodges an online claim or updates their accommodation
details online or via the Express Plus Centrelink Mobile app, they will
be presented with the LA question set when appropriate and the safety
concern question.

If a Relationship Details (SS284 or SS293) form has been triggered
during the online claim process, the Next Steps screen will display 2
links to the relevant Relationship Details form, one for the customer to
download and complete and one for the sharer to complete. If safety
concerns have been identified, the customer will be presented with only
one link to the Relationship Details form and a link to the form
relating to the sharer will not be presented. At no stage during the
claim process should the sharer be contacted when safety concerns have
been identified.

To confirm if safety concerns have or have not been identified, Service
Officers can review a customer's responses to the LA question set by
selecting the Review Claim function before processing the claim.

As part of the claim assessment process, Service Officers can mark the
forms as not required if appropriate.

If a MoC assessment is needed, to enable the correct rate of payment to
be determined (single or partnered), the claim cannot be finalised:

-   until a completed SS284 or SS293 form has been provided generally
    from both the customer and the sharer, and,
-   the MoC assessment has been finalised

If a customer is updating their details online or via the Express Plus
Centrelink Mobile app and it is identified an SS284 or SS293 may be
needed, a task requesting the forms will be presented to the customer.

If the customer has answered 'Yes' to the safety concern question, the
task will present requesting the form from the customer only.

The Resources page has links to forms and a table on living arrangement
questions.

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Requesting information (CLK)

Updating address details

Assessment of relationship status - processes, roles and
responsibilities

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

https://ourblueprint.internal.dept.local/content/ongoing-contact/102-05030000.gif

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
