
Deleting or undeleting a Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN) 102-13030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the deletion of a Centrelink
CRN and the process for undeleting a record.

Deleted Centrelink records

A Centrelink record is deleted if it meets certain business rules. This
is normally:

-   a period of inactivity
-   no active links to other records, or
-   information that is out of date

Deleted records are only found if the exact CRN is entered into the
database. It allows Service Officers to view the customer’s information
and simultaneously protects the record from any updates.

Deleted records will display ‘M9851 Deleted record – screen fields
protected’ message.

Note: these record types are not classified as multiple CRNs and should
not be referred to the Data Quality Unit (DQU).

Online claims submitted on deleted records

In some circumstances, the system has enabled online claims to be
submitted onto deleted CRNs, which then generates a work item.

Service Officers must:

-    Complete a thorough search to locate an existing customer record
-   Ensure the correct record has been found for the customer
-   Cancel the new claim (NCL) activity on the deleted CRN and re-index
    on the primary customer record. See Cancelling claim activities and
    re-indexing claims

If an exhaustive search has not identified an existing customer record,
contact the Data Quality Unit (DQU) to undelete the record.

Manual deletion

The manual deletion function is restricted to staff within the Data
Quality Unit (DQU) and controlled by Resource Assignment.

Only person (PER) and unauthenticated online entity (UOE) records can be
manually deleted once specific business rules are met.

When DQU deletes a customer’s multiple record a Display on Access (DOA)
DOC containing the deleted CRN will be added to the customer’s primary
record.

Automatic deletion

Automatic deletion occurs on inactive records by a periodic 'shell
clean-up' of the database. In this process ‘shell’ records that meet
specific business rules are deleted.

Undeleting a record

A CRN that has been deleted either manually or automatically can be
undeleted, this function is restricted to staff within the Data Quality
Unit (DQU).

DQU will only undelete a customer record if there is a critical business
need.

Scenarios that do qualify as critical business needs:

-   A claim is accidentally started, submitted or finalised on a deleted
    CRN
-   Data, where a ripple needs to occur for correct payments and raising
    debts

Scenarios that are not critical business needs:

-   A customer wants to claim a new payment such as the COVID-19
    Disaster Payment
-   A customer wants to register for Centrelink online services through
    myGov

If there is a critical business need to undelete the customer record,
contact the DQU to undelete the record.

If there is no critical business need to undelete the customer record,
commence a thorough search for an existing CRN.

If the record has migrated to Environment Y, see information under the
Environment Y heading.

Environment Y

Environment Y stores deleted and deceased records where there is no
ongoing business requirement. A record can only be retrieved or
undeleted if there is a critical business need. See Centrelink
Environment Y for deleted and inactive deceased customer records.

Access to move CRNs with the status of deceased from Environment Y is
restricted to Data Quality Unit (DQU) staff.

Related links

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Centrelink Multiple Match List (MML) screen

Centrelink Environment Y for deleted and inactive deceased customer
records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
