
Codes for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme cancellation, suspension and rejection reasons 102-10010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the appropriate codes when cancelling, suspending
or rejection AIC.

Use of codes

The Centrelink computer system requires a specific code when a decision
to cancel or suspend a payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded. A
description of the code is used in correspondence with customers. This
procedure contains a list of the cancellation and rejection codes for
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme. The list of codes is not
available to the public.

The Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Smart Centre staff may need
to take the following actions:

-   Rejection of AIC claim/payment
-   Suspension of AIC claim/payment
-   Cancellation of AIC claim/payment

Before suspending an applicant's payment, care should be taken to
establish that the applicant or the student is temporarily not eligible
for payment, that there is a policy basis to suspend the payment, and
that all appropriate action has been taken to contact the applicant.

Generally, payments should only be suspended if:

-   a determination has been made that the applicant is not qualified,
    or the payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period
    as a result of changes in their circumstances, or
-   the applicant has not complied with a request that was reasonable.
    The request may be to provide information held by the applicant.

If a decision to suspend payment is made, swift action should be taken
to advise the applicant of the suspension reason and their rights of
review and appeal, to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

The Process page contains a table which describes the rejection,
suspension and cancellation codes to be used in actioning AIC records.

Related links

Suspension of payments of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Restoration of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
