
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for conducting service update
briefing interviews or notification for Parenting Payment (PP) customers
when their youngest child is 5 years and 9 months (single customers).
These interviews are conducted as Service Profiling appointments to
discuss changes to mutual obligation requirements.

Notifications

Service Profiling appointments were replaced by notifications for PPS
customers who will be subject to mutual obligation requirements due to
the age of their youngest child.

These notifications are sent via the customers preferred channel and
outline upcoming mutual obligation requirements and the Compulsory
Participation Appointment.

These changes do not affect Remote Customers who will continue to be
serviced as per current arrangements.

PP child age requirements

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
customers lose entitlement to PP when their youngest child turns 6 (PPP)
or 8 (PPS) years of age.

PP customers who are about to lose qualification due to the age of their
youngest child must complete the 'Your payment is ending' task in their
Centrelink online account. This task will present the required
information to the customer and provide an option, if eligible, to claim
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) via a streamlined claim service. See Transfer to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment.

PPS customers start compulsory mutual obligation requirements when their
youngest child turns 6.

Briefing interviews for remote customers

Remote PPS customers must attend a briefing interview when their
youngest child turns 5 years and 9 months (SC199 (SC243 remote)) to tell
them of the impending compulsory mutual obligation requirements when the
youngest child turns 6.

An activity is generated and sent to an appropriate service centre to
book the briefing interview. Remote customers do not need a face to face
appointment for these interviews.

PPS should be suspended if a customer does not attend the appointment
and no exceptional circumstances exist. For example:

-   recent experience of family and domestic violence
-   bereavement, or
-   significant mental health issues

The process and actions involved are outlined in the relevant Service
Profiling Update workflow. Finalising the workflow will complete the
Service Component on the customer's Service Strategy (PQSS) screen.

Related links

Conducting a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) Compulsory Participation
Interview

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Principal carer of dependent children Service Updates

Service Component and Service Actions

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Eligibility and Registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO)/No
RJCP Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
