
Separating safely - protecting personal details 102-22060707

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, see the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document provides the details staff should give to customers to
keep their personal details safe when unlinking their record from
another person. This includes separating from their partner or ending a
carer relationship.

Protecting personal details

When a customer separates from a relationship, they must advise of the
change to their circumstances. Action needs to be taken to keep the
customer's personal information safe from the other person by completing
the unlinking tasks applicable to the customer's circumstances:

-   before updating any personal details
-   to prevent their details being available to another person

There are key steps a customer should consider to separate safely. These
will protect their personal details from a potential privacy breach.

-   The customer may need to contact Centrelink, Medicare and Child
    Support separately
-   The customer can complete some steps online. Where this is possible
    and safe to do, staff should encourage the use of self-service
-   Staff must give the customer as much information as possible. This
    will help the customer decide what steps they need to take to keep
    their personal details safe
-   If family and domestic violence concerns are identified, follow the
    processes outlined in Family and Domestic Violence

The Resources page contains contact details, links to the Service
Australia website and external websites and examples.

Related links

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Changing payment destination

Copy or transfer a person or child to another Medicare card

Family registration and confirmation for Medicare Safety Net

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Store, confirm and end date bank account details for Medicare EFT
payments

Updating Child Support customer and assessment information

Update customer details in Pluto

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
