-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before processing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

The Department of Social Services (DSS) have paused all Moving to an
Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) assessments. Do not undertake
any MALEP assessments.

This document outlines the procedure for customers who update their
address details. For some payments, a change of address can affect a
customer's rate and qualification for payment.

Change of address due to separation, including where the customer is at risk of family and domestic violence

There are different processes to follow, depending on whether the
customer is at risk of family and domestic violence, when updating an
address where the customer is advising of a change of address due to
separation from their partner.

In all cases, care must be taken when updating the customer's address to
ensure updates do not flow onto their former partner's record. All
address types and contact details should be reviewed when making updates
to make sure current details are up to date.

If a customer indicates they and/or their children are at risk of family
and domestic violence and are concerned for their safety, their
relationship status can be updated immediately and the Separation
details (MOD S) form and/or verification supplied within 14 days.

For more information and updating instructions, see Change in
relationship status from partnered to single.

Mail cannot be sent to a future address

For correspondence to be sent, Services Australia must be given an
address where a customer can receive mail.

If a customer is advising of a future change of address, make sure they
are aware that mail will not be sent to that address until after the
future start date.

To help keep customer’s information secure, tell the customer that they
may need to give us a postal address to send mail to until that future
date. For further information on postal address options available, see
Where customers are unable to provide a residential address.

Change of details

Customers should be advised that information used for their Centrelink,
Child Support and Medicare payments and services is transferred within
the agency. However, additional contact with one of the agency's
programs separately may be required to update relevant information,
depending on individual circumstances.

A customer's address (including postal address) and telephone details
(including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every contact, and
updated if required.

If a customer has been selected for a Rent Assistance (RA) Profile
Review, address updates must be done as part of the review. While a RA
Profile Review is outstanding, customers and staff will be blocked from
updating the address outside the review.

Where the customer has verified their identity via Interactive Voice
Response (IVR), address details do not need to be confirmed.

[] The customer can view/update address, accommodation or contact
details online.

Note: the home address on the system will not be changed just to issue a
Health Care Card (HCC) or Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) with a
different address (for example, term address for students). Customers
can nominate a preference as to which address should be displayed on the
HCC or LIC. See Preferences for concession cards for more information.

Change of postal address only

If the address change is a change of postal address only, entitlement
will not be affected. All mail will go to the postal address. End dating
a postal address using yesterday's date makes sure any future outgoing
correspondence is sent to the correct address.

Sharing accommodation

If a person is sharing accommodation with another person who is not a
family member:

-   The Living Arrangements question set needs to be asked, and
-   Request sharer details through a Rent Certificate (SU523) form using
    Request Documents. See Requesting information (CLK). Note: change of
    address details for dates in the future are unable to be coded for
    sharers. Advise these customers to re-contact once they have
    physically moved address

Change of address for customers assessed as separated under one roof

Two people who were previously partnered may be living separately and
apart on a permanent or indefinite basis but continue to live under the
same roof. This may be a temporary or permanent arrangement.

If a customer currently assessed as separated under one roof advises
they have now moved out of the shared residence, the customer's record
must be updated and the 'SUR' Relationship Qualifier Code must be ended
on the Marital Status (MS) screen. For more information on how to end
the 'SUR' qualifier code, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated
under one roof (SUOR) assessments.

Circumstances that may affect entitlement to all payments

-   Entitlement to Rent Assistance (RA) may change. For example, now
    sharing accommodation, purchased a home, under 25 and now living
    with parents or moved temporarily
-   If the customer is in receipt of Disability Support Pension (DSP)
    (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) they must disclose details of their
    income and assets to be paid RA
-   Entitlement to Remote Area Allowance (RAA) may change
-   Relationship status changes. For example, separation, becoming
    partnered, illness separated
-   Dependent child changes due to separation or becoming partnered
-   A change in income and/or assets from real estate. For example, a
    homeowner becoming a non-homeowner and their previous home becoming
    an asset
-   Customer receiving Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) are
    required to reclaim for the new address

Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

When the person receiving EMEP (or the equipment user they care for)
changes address, the system will auto cancel their EMEP payment. This is
due to EMEP being paid in respect of medical equipment and/or medically
required heating/cooling being run at a specific address. When a person
moves and continues to use that medical equipment at the new address,
they must lodge a new claim for the EMEP.

The cancellation of EMEP must be documented with the change of address.

No home address or temporary/unstable accommodation

If the customer has indicated they no longer have a home address or that
their new accommodation is temporary or unstable, consider recording a
homelessness indicator.

For correspondence to be sent, Services Australia must be provided with
an address where a customer can receive mail. Before updating a
customer's residential address to no fixed address, staff must ensure an
alternate postal address has been provided. See Where customers are
unable to provide a residential address.

Non-current customers

As the customer is not current, accommodation information and telephone
subscriber information is not required.

Note: in the situation where the non-current customer is a care receiver
and they have had a change of address, eligibility for Carer Payment
(CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for the carer needs to be reviewed. See
Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) for
more information.

Current customers who cannot access Rent Assistance (RA)

Customer's receiving a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC), a Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (CSHC) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) are deemed
current customers. If the customer, and partner if applicable, are only
in receipt of a LIC, CSHC or CCS, the customer's rent details (the
Accommodation Details (AC) screen) do not need to be coded, as the
customer cannot access RA.

Job seekers

Circumstances that may affect customer's entitlements include:

-   Moving to an area of lower employment prospects. Services Australia
    must determine if the job seeker has reduced their employment
    prospects by moving to a new location. If this is the case, the
    Service Officer should investigate a possible Moving to an Area of
    Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment related exclusion
    period
-   Single customers under 25 years old, without dependent children, who
    return to live with a parent, do not qualify for Rent Assistance
    (RA)

Job seekers are able to give their Employment Services Provider their
new address details. The Employment Services Provider will advise the
job seeker they will need to contact Services Australia to provide their
updated home address. When the job seeker contacts Services Australia,
the Service Officer will need to confirm their home address details and
determine if there are any potential impacts on eligibility and/or
ongoing entitlement.

Note: when a temporary address is recorded, job seekers will remain
connected to the same Employment Services Provider and will be required
to comply with their mutual obligation requirements.

For more information, see Job seeker change of address.

ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

If a customer is the applicant for an ABSTUDY student (for example, for
Schooling A payments), or they act as a nominee for another person,
their details will need to be updated on that customer's record as well.

Circumstances that may affect customer's entitlements include:

-   At home or accommodated independent person if living with parents
-   Away from home rate if required to live away from home for the
    purposes of engaging in study, training, employment, etc. for
    secondary and tertiary students
-   Independence on the grounds of state care. Independent customers
    that return to live in the parental home will be required to have
    their independent status reviewed. For more information, see
    Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the
    away from home rate of Youth Allowance (YA) or Returning to the
    parental home when in receipt of the away from home rate of ABSTUDY
-   Independence because it is unreasonable for the customer to live at
    the home of either parent; rate changes associated with leaving or
    returning to the parental home. Claims for the unreasonable to live
    at home (UTLAH) rate must be investigated by a social worker
-   Fares Allowance entitlement, if required to live away from home to
    study
-   Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) - this can
    result in the application of a payment preclusion period

Self service

[] Customers contacting to provide a change of address are required to
complete the transaction through their online account or Express Plus
App if capable of self-management.

Refer to Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking
and resetting and Update address, accommodation or contact details
online for more information.

If customers receiving payments for Austudy, Trainees, Australian
Apprentice, Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP), Child Care Subsidy(CCS), JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
Parenting Payment (PP) as a single or partnered customer, Youth
Allowance (YA) (full-time students) and YA (job seeker), are not
excluded from using self service in relation to change of address
transactions, they must be referred to self service to complete the
update, unless:

-   self service channels are currently unavailable (confirmed by NNU,
    Newsflash and Bulletins), or
-   the Service Officer determines the customer is not capable of
    self-management in this instance

Note: if a customer has been selected for a Rent Assistance (RA) Profile
review, address updates must be done as part of the review. While a RA
Profile review is outstanding, customers and staff will be blocked from
updating an address outside the review.

Carer

There are specific qualification criteria in relation to where the carer
and care receiver are living. When a carer or care receiver notifies a
change of address, continued eligibility for payment needs to be
confirmed. See Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer
Allowance (CA) for more information.

Note: accommodation details (for example, rent paid or ownership) are
not required if the carer is receiving CA only.

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

-   If the customer moves in with their carer, their principal home may
    remain an exempt asset for up to 2 years
-   They are exempt from the sharers' rate of Rent Assistance (RA)
-   If they are under 21 (receiving Youth Disability Support Pension
    (DSP)), the rate of payment will vary depending on whether they are
    living with their parents or independently
-   If the customer lives in disability accommodation this must be
    correctly recorded on their record
-   If the customer is in receipt of DSP (Blind) they must disclose
    details of their income and assets to be paid RA

Customers with outstanding debts

Customers who have an outstanding debt, have a legal obligation to
notify Services Australia of any change of address within 14 days while
a debt is still owing, even if they are no longer receiving a payment.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with debts stopped for manual intervention

Customers who have no current address or myGov inbox subscription will
have the following stopped for manual intervention:

-   FTB reconciliation
-   lump sum claim
-   non-lodger activities
-   Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) debt activities

See Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation.

Income managed customers

When an income managed customer notifies a change in circumstances,
including a change of address or change in rent, a review of their
priority needs and expense allocations is required. For more
information, see Changes to Income Management priority needs.

Income managed customers who move out of a declared Income Management (IM) area

Customers:

-   whose payments are currently income managed and who move
    indefinitely or permanently outside of a declared IM area will
    continue to be income managed
-   who have been identified for IM and move out of a declared IM area
    before IM commences, or provide a retrospective change of address,
    may still have their payments income managed

For more information, see Customer moves out of an Income Management
area.

Customers who move into a declared Income Management (IM) area

When a customer moves into a declared IM area, they may be profiled or
referred for IM if they meet the criteria for an IM measure available in
that location.

The location criteria for IM eligibility is based on a customer's
permanent residential address (that is, Home or Term address). Therefore
it is important to confirm the customer's move is permanent and not
temporary to avoid them being incorrectly identified for IM. The
Resources page contains a link to more information about declared IM
areas.

Enhanced Income Management customers

Customers may be placed on enhanced IM if their home or term address is
in an enhanced IM location and they meet other eligibility criteria. If
customers are only in the area temporarily (for example, they are
travelling, attending a funeral or medical appointment), their address
must be coded as Temporary to avoid being placed on enhanced IM in
error.

If a customer wishes to change and/or backdate their address details,
evidence supporting the change may be required from the customer before
ending participation on enhanced IM is considered. This is to prevent
customers from changing or backdating their address details to avoid
participation.

Customers who permanently move out of an enhanced IM location will end
participation in the program after 13 weeks. Updating or deleting home
or term address details purely for the purposes of avoiding enhanced IM
will not automatically end a customer's participation. Address updates
done incorrectly in an effort to avoid enhanced IM may result in placing
the customer at risk of overpayment for additional payments such as Rent
Assistance or Remote Area Allowance.

Address updates for customers paid outside of Australia

Some countries have specific address format requirements in order for a
customer to be paid correctly to an overseas bank account. Refer to
Overseas Bank Account Details (OBAD) for country task cards and coding
requirements. Updating a home address incorrectly for customers paid to
certain countries may cause their payment to reject. Care needs to be
taken before updating address details for these overseas customers.

Third party address updates

Generally, addresses must not be changed solely on information provided
by a third party. However, there are some circumstances where it may be
appropriate to action a change of address, if:

-   The partner of a Services Australia customer advises a change of
    address for both themselves and their partner, and they have
    permission to enquire, the address may be changed. The identity of
    the person providing the update and marital circumstances must be
    verified prior to the change. Extra care must to be exercised in
    these cases and if not convinced of the accuracy, the address must
    not be changed before checking with the affected person
-   A customer is admitted to a nursing home and their partner or an
    authorised third party has advised the change of address into
    residential aged care. Once the information is clarified with the
    nursing home, the address may be changed, see Change of address to
    an aged care home

In all cases, the Service Officer needs to be satisfied the third party
is identified correctly before updates are made.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
more information about Income Management (IM) areas and a link to Office
Locator for IM transfer numbers.

Related links

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Adding, changing or removing an email address

Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Job seeker change of address

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment
related exclusion period

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Remote Area Allowance (RAA) eligibility and payment

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Dependent child changes

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

ABSTUDY customer leaving parental home

Youth Allowance (YA) customer leaving the parental home

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

Permanent vacation of principal home

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Real estate

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Determining proof of rent for the Verification field on the
Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Change of address to an aged care home

Rates of payment for Special Benefit (SpB)

Updating telephone details and/or paying Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Inter-environment change of address (ICoA)

Confirming concession card entitlement and issuing interim vouchers

Non-homeowner purchasing a home

Changing personal details of nominees

Homelessness

Homelessness Indicators

Preferences for concession cards

Returning to the parental home when independent or qualified for the
away from home rate of Youth Allowance (YA)

Returning to the parental home when in receipt of the away from home
rate of ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY customer who has returned to live in an Indigenous Australian
community

Rapid Addressing

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
