-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for a Service Officer to decide if
Youth Allowance (YA) is payable to a customer, and for how long, while
they are overseas. It explains the actions the Service Officer and the
customer are to take before the customer's departure.

Initial contact

Note: do not refer Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) cases to Centrelink
International Services (CIS)

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding for the following:

-   students and Australian Apprentices who are going overseas to
    undertake approved study or work
-   customers who clearly do not satisfy an approved reason
-   customers leaving to live in another country

In all other cases, if a customer has indicated their overseas travel
meets the initial criteria for an approved reason, the case must be
referred to Centrelink International Services (CIS) to assess
entitlement and code the departure.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will guide service
centre and Smart Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to CIS.

Leaving to live in another country

If a customer is leaving Australia to live in another country, stop YA
payments from the earlier of the date of departure and:

-   for students and job seekers, the last day the customer satisfies
    the activity test or mutual obligation requirements
-   for Australian Apprentices, the date they cease to qualify as an
    apprentice

Temporary absence - approved reason for travel

If a YA customer (including principal carer of a dependent child) leaves
Australia temporarily, payment may continue:

for a temporary absence of any length, (but unlikely to be more than a
few weeks) to attend a training camp with Australian Defence Force
Reserves

for a specific negotiated period (expected to be only a few weeks, but
not more than 6 weeks):

-   to attend to an acute family crisis
-   for medical treatment not available in Australia
-   for humanitarian reasons such as custody or adoption proceedings
    (job seeker only)

Customers will be activity test exempt or exempt from their mutual
obligation requirements while absent for these reasons. The allowable
absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.

Note: YA may also continue outside Australia for the duration of
approved overseas study or work (students and Australian Apprentices
only). Further information is below.

Approved overseas study or work

Before making a decision as to if YA can be paid for overseas study or
work, it is essential to determine if:

-   immediately before leaving Australia, the customer is undertaking
    full-time or approved concessional load study in an approved course,
    or is a continuing/intending student
-   students continue to satisfy the YA student qualification criteria
-   Australian Apprentices continue to have a current Commonwealth
    Registration Number
-   the overseas study or work will contribute to, and be credited
    towards, a full-time course or apprenticeship in Australia

Note: a student required, or choosing, to travel overseas to undertake a
work placement may continue to receive payment regardless of whether a
credit weighting is given. See Assessing study load requirements for
details.

Note: do not refer these cases to CIS.

The customer must:

-   advise their date of departure from Australia, and return date (if
    known), and
-   provide written advice from their Australian educational institution
    or State Training Authority confirming proof of the reason for their
    absence

Generally, a customer who is studying externally (for example, by
correspondence or online) will not have to attend a campus overseas to
complete units of their approved course. However, external students can
access extended portability under overseas study provisions if they can
demonstrate their primary reason for going overseas is to undertake
studies that form part of the course. This could be a residential
component at an overseas institution or an overseas work placement if it
is part of the Australian course.

YA may only be paid for student exchange programs if the customer stays
enrolled and undertakes an approved course at an approved Australian
institution. This is rarely the case for secondary students.

A student or Australian Apprentice granted portability for overseas
study or work can continue to receive YA for the duration of the
approved absence. The approved study period may include additional
travel time to allow them to prepare for the study and/or to finalise
their affairs and return to Australia.

Relocation Scholarship (RS) for YA students undertaking approved overseas study

YA students may be eligible for RS when they undertake approved overseas
study provided they meet all other eligibility criteria for the
scholarship. See Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility and Relocation
Scholarship (RS) payment and coding.

New claims and new students (and customer leaving Australia)

Immediately before leaving Australia, the customer must be:

-   receiving YA and undertaking full-time or approved concessional load
    study in an approved course, or
-   a continuing/intending student

Continuing students who lodge a claim for YA before leaving Australia
may start receiving payment after they have left Australia if they are
undertaking approved overseas study.

When running the Portability Script - Departures and Returns, it is
important to note choosing to assess YA for portability is on the basis
the customer meets one of these criteria. If not, do not use the script.

If a non-continuing student (for example, returning to study following a
gap year) has recently claimed and will not become qualified and payable
until after they leave Australia (for example, due to waiting periods),
YA cannot be paid until the customer returns to Australia. Reject claims
and advise affected customers as soon as possible so they can change
their travel plans if necessary.

Note: a new student whose Australian course starts before they leave
Australia, and who has claimed YA before they depart, can access
overseas study provisions. See the Resources page for examples.

Supporting documentation

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence, preferably prior
to their departure.

If payment has been made for an approved reason before receipt of
evidence, the customer will be required to provide supporting
documentation on their return. If the documentation is not acceptable or
not provided, a debt will be raised.

When a customer provides supporting documentation to a service centre
relating to a previous temporary absence that was not for an approved
reason at the time, there is no need to run a request for review as a
decision on their portability has not yet been made. Refer the case:

-   for overseas study for students and Australian Apprentices, to the
    Student Network or Apprentice Processing Team
-   for all other cases, to CIS

YA will be stopped from the date of departure if the reason for leaving
Australia is not acceptable or proof of the reason is not provided
either before or after the absence.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise, the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless if the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day, for example
airline crew, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Customer advises change of departure or return dates

If a customer travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and departs Australia more than 3 days
before or more than 3 days after the advised date, any specific
negotiated period of portability approved for the original date of
departure will cease to apply. The customer's approved reason for travel
outside Australia may no longer be valid, and payments will stop when
the Immigration Datalink verifies the customer's actual date of
departure.

Customers must advise of any change in their departure details prior to
travel if they wish to be paid during the absence. Service Officers can
assess if the approved reason still applies and record the new departure
date and reason again.

Return to Australia

The return rule for YA means where a customer has been granted an
approved overseas study absence, a brief return to Australia (up to 6
weeks) within the approved study period does not interrupt the
portability period for the course of study overseas. No new decision is
required in such cases.

However, if a student or Australian Apprentice studying or working
overseas decides to extend the length of their overseas course or work
(for example, wants to continue studying overseas for an extra semester)
the customer must apply to have their payment continue and provide new
supporting evidence.

For approved reasons other than overseas study, customers unable to
return to Australia by the end of the specific negotiated period should
contact CIS or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is
required, this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly
extended up to the maximum portability period. However, if they are
still unable to return to Australia for a reason other than an approved
reason (for example, they are hospitalised), there is discretion to
extend the period of portability under certain circumstances.

Refer any change to the length of an absence for an approved reason to
Centrelink International Services (CIS) for further assessment and
coding.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system assesses
portability of the payment, regardless whether the customer notified or
not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers must advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex, they
must contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Customer's dependent child leaving Australia

If the customer is the principal carer of a dependent child (or
children) and that child (or all dependent children) leaves Australia,
it can affect the customer's entitlement. It may also have an impact on
the mutual obligations requirements that apply to the customer.

If the child goes overseas to live in another country, the customer will
cease to be the principal carer for that child immediately on the
child's departure, as they are no longer a dependent child. Any payment
or concession paid to the customer for the care for the child will cease
on the departure date. The customer's Job Plan may need reviewing with
this change in carer status.

If a child leaves Australia temporarily or was born outside Australia,
the customer will generally still be regarded as the principal carer for
up to 6 weeks, even if the customer remains in Australia.

A person cannot be the principal carer of any child who has been outside
Australia for more than 6 weeks unless the customer is outside Australia
with that child and they are still entitled to the social security
payment they were receiving when they left Australia (that is, the
customer's maximum portability period has not ceased).

If a customer has ceased to be the principal carer of a child because
they have been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks and the child
returns to Australia for less than 6 weeks before going overseas again,
the customer will cease to be the principal carer of that child for the
entire period of the later absence.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping.

YA granted under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

If a customer has been granted YA under the New Zealand 10 year
residence exemption their payment cannot be restored on return to
Australia if there is any gap between the date of
suspension/cancellation and the date of restoration. If payment is
granted for a restricted portability reason for the whole period of
travel, payment can be restored. As this exemption can only be used
once, the customer will not be able to be re-granted YA again under this
exemption.

The Resources page contains contact details for CIS, examples of the
portability of YA, and links to the Services Australia website for
information about payments while outside Australia and travelling
overseas with medicine.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Coding for approved Overseas Full Time Study (OFS) payments

Portability of Add-ons

Undertaking full-time study requirements for Youth Allowance (YA)
students

Assessing a tertiary student studying overseas for Youth Allowance (YA)
at the away from home rate

Discretion to extend portability period

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Coding specialist portability assessments for Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff

Recording and correcting employment income details

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Relocation Scholarship (RS) eligibility

Relocation Scholarship (RS) payment and coding

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
