
Service Profiling 102-01010000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Service Profiling, a method of
selectively targeting Centrelink services and Service Officer assistance
to our customers. It is a way of identifying which customers need a more
focused/targeted level of service to assist them in meeting program
outcomes (for example - correctly declaring their earnings).

On this Page:

Overview

Profiling introduces a method of determining customer service
requirements, focusing more on need rather than the 'one size fits all'
approach. Some customers need much more assistance than others in order
to achieve the program outcomes. For example, some customers will find a
job within three months with little intervention necessary from
Centrelink while others will require significantly more help to achieve
this outcome.

Service Profiling is the key tool for managing ongoing relationships
with customers. All staff use Service Profiling to help with better
targeting their contacts with customers. In preparing for any contact
with a customer, a service officer should access the Service Profiling
screens to identify the level of service the customer requires, and view
the recommended strategies for interacting with their customer.

Profiling informs staff about the details that need to be discussed with
customers selected for contact. Staff will be able to focus their
attention on those customers who require a high level of support or
assistance. This will allow staff to better prepare for their customer
contacts.

Profile

To determine the Profile, the things that may actually contribute to the
likelihood of a customer not achieving the outcomes need to be known.
For example:

-   If a customer has been paid incorrectly in the past (that is -
    have/had a debt), there is the possibility they may receive an
    incorrect payment
-   If a customer has had several changes of address in a short period,
    there is the possibility they may have difficulty meeting their
    reporting obligations

These rules that are applied to a customer's record are called
Predictors. Depending on the priority given to these predictors a
customer could be considered to need either a low, medium or high level
of service and assistance.

A customer's Service Profile may be updated or refreshed as follows:

-   Whenever a record is updated and the update results in the customer
    meeting a new Predictor, or no longer meeting an existing Predictor,
    their Profile will be automatically refreshed
-   At regular intervals (for example - 60 days) all customers will have
    their Service Profile automatically refreshed
-   Service Officer may manually refresh individual customers or groups
    of customers

Briefly: Centrelink defines what program outcomes are being managed (the
Service Profile), the rules for assigning a customer to a Profile (the
Predictors), and how the risk will be managed (Service Strategy).

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen will recommend a range of actions
that will assist those customers to achieve the best outcome for
themselves and Centrelink.

Contents

Service Components and Service Actions

Service Components by number

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to Integrated Review System (IRS)
Review

Related links

Service Profiling Capability

The Predictor Details (PQPD) screen

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

The Profile Search (PQSE) screen

The Profiling Bulk Update Facility (PQBUF) screen

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

The Service Component History (PQSH) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
