
Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search (PQNS) screens 102-01020080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Service Profiling, which is a
tool used by Service Officers to manage their customer contacts and
conduct Service Updates. The Service Profile screens are key tools used
to manage customer contacts. These screens record and maintain a
customer's Service Strategy based on the Profile Bracket on a customer
record. A Service Strategy contains all of the current Service
Components (and associated Service Actions and Service Details) for the
customer.

On this Page:

Customer record search

A key part of this maintenance is to identify customers who require
Service Officer action due to outstanding Service Components or Actions.
The Service Component Search (PQCS) screen and Service Component
National Search (PQNS) screen provide this search facility.

Searches can be done nationally using the PQNS screen or by Service
Centre or Area code using either PQNS or PQCS. Other combinations can
include searching for particular Service Component or Service Action by
status, or a combination of both. The following types of searches may be
conducted:

-   Service Components - from one to three may be nominated in a search.
    This search may be further refined by searching by Service Reason or
    System Type
-   Service Actions - from one to three may be nominated in a search.
    Note: PQNS cannot search by Service Action alone
-   A combination of one Service Component and multiple Service Actions
-   A combination of multiple Service Components and one Service Action

Search results

The PQNS screen will present the national search results according to
the numbers in each environment. Upon selecting an area the results will
display for that area only as per PQCS.

The results of a PQCS search will provide a list of customers who may
need a Service Update, and who fit the search criteria. Search results
are presented according to the type of search requested. The results
contain the constant elements:

Customer Reference Number (CRN)

Service Centre

Valid Service Component statuses are:

-   NST - Not Started
-   STA - Started
-   DEF - Deferred
-   COM - Completed
-   HST - Historical
-   INF - Information only
-   WRP - Within Restoration Period
-   CAN - Cancelled

Valid Service Action statuses are:

-   NST - Not Started
-   STA - Started
-   DEF - Deferred
-   NAT - No Action Taken
-   NAP - No Action Possible
-   COM - Completed - Service Action has been successfully Completed
-   NUP - No Update Possible
-   INF - Information only

Days - the number of days the Service Component or Service Action
displayed has had the current status for

For any search involving Service Components only, these will be
displayed in the results under a heading 'Service Component'. For any
search involving Service Actions, the results will be displayed under
the heading 'Service Action'

Customer files can be selected from the result list by placing an 'S'
next to the appropriate file. When selected, the Service Strategy (PQSS)
screen in the customer's file will be displayed. All screens can be
accessed from this point. The next selected file can then be accessed by
keying 'NX' in the Nxt field (to go back a record, code 'PV') or
returning back to the list on the PQCS screen.

Related links

Service Profiling

Service Components and Service Actions

Service Profiling Capability

The Profile Summary (PQS), Profile History (PQH) and Profile Details
(PQD) screens

The Predictor Details (PQPD) screen

The Service Strategy (PQSS) screen

The Profile Search (PQSE) screen

Accessing and using the Service Profiling screens

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to the Integrated Review System
(IRS) Review

The Service Component History (PQSH) screen

Service Components by number

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
