
Service Profiling and Service Updates 102-01000000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Service Profiling, a method of
selectively targeting Centrelink services and Service Officer assistance
to our customers. It is a way of identifying which customers need a more
focused/targeted level of service to assist them in meeting program
outcomes (for example, correctly declaring their earnings).

Government intent

Service Profiling does not assist with determining qualification or
payability. It is a means of identifying which customers need a more
focused/targeted level of service to help them in meeting program
outcomes (for example, declaring their earnings).

Profiling works by checking existing information on a customer's record
for predefined Predictors or characteristics, then assigns the customer
to the appropriate Profile.

The Service Strategy, which is based on the Service Profile, will
provide information on how Service Officer action could be better
targeted to assist those customers who need more assistance or support
in meeting their obligations (for example, declaring earnings, gaining
employment, becoming involved in the community).

Profiling places customers in categories according to the likelihood of
them not meeting desired Program outcomes.

Profile

To assign a customer to a Profile, it is necessary to determine what
actually contributes to the customer not achieving the outcomes. For
example if:

-   a customer has been paid incorrectly in the past (for example,
    has/had a debt), there may be a greater likelihood of them again
    receiving an incorrect payment
-   a customer has had several changes of address in a short period
-   there is the possibility they may have difficulty meeting their
    reporting obligations

These rules that are applied to a customer's record are called
Predictors.

Centrelink's Service Profiling capability assigns customers to Profiles,
based on data on their records. It also defines the Profile bracket -
low, medium or high. It then determines the most appropriate Service
Strategies for the customer, recognising that not all customers require
the same level of service.

Centrelink defines what program outcomes are being managed (the Service
Profile), the rules for assigning a customer to a Profile (the
Predictors), and how best to service the customer's needs (Service
Strategy).

The Service Profiling capability was implemented from July 2002 for
recipients of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance, Parenting
Payment, Mature Age Allowance, Widow Allowance, Partner Allowance and
Age Pension. Service Profiling is the key tool for managing Centrelink's
ongoing relationship with customers and in many cases have replaced
review strategies for example, duration based reviews. These reviews
have been replaced by Service Updates.

The References page contains links to the Bilateral Management
Arrangements (BMA).

Contents

Service Profiling

Service Profiling Capability

Parenting Payment (PP) Service Updates

Principal carer of dependent children Service Updates

Youth Allowance (YA) Job Seeker Service Updates

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) Service Updates

Related links

Service Components by number

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
