
Confirming a partnered relationship 102-20012318

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a partner confirms that information provided
by the claimant about their relationship is true and correct for both
new claims and change of circumstances.

Partner confirmation

The Privacy Act 1988 regulates how Services Australia collects
information about a claimant (or their partner). When a customer advises
they are partnered, the relationship status must be confirmed with both
parties.

Failure to confirm details with the partner (where required) may have
impacts in family and domestic violence cases, including:

-   posing a risk to the safety of the person the claimant states
    they’re partnered to
-   affecting the other person’s eligibility to continued payment or
    rate of payment

When partner confirmation is not needed

Confirming information with the partner does not apply when a:

-   current customer has lodged a completed MOD P to advise a change to
    their relationship status and the form has been co-signed by both
    the customer and partner
-   partner has confirmed their details for a new claim through the
    Partner Confirmation Logon service on the Services Australia website
    using a Temporary Access Code (TAC). The TAC consists of a 7 digit
    Reference Number and a 10 letter upper and lower case Access Code.
-   Partner details (MOD P) form is a required task at Next steps in a
    new claim. Both the customer and the partner are required to co-sign
    the form as confirmation of the information provided
-   a customer has lodged a paper claim form that has been co-signed by
    their partner where required
    Nominees can only sign on behalf of the customer they are appointed
    for. Therefore, if a nominee has signed on behalf of a customer’s
    partner for whom they are not an appointed nominee, confirmation of
    the information and the relationship with the partner is required
-   customer is current on a payment and is claiming another payment
    (benefit transfer), and their partner is the same as recorded
-   customer lodges a claim and their partner is the same as recorded,
    and the claim is to be rejected for basic eligibility reasons. This
    includes streamlined or non-streamlined claims, no matter how long
    since that customer or partner were last on payment
-   customer and partner have both lodged claims at the same time, where
    both have confirmed their relationship with each other
-   non-current customer lodges a claim and their partner is a current
    Centrelink customer and linked to the new claimant
-   customer has lodged a combined partner online claim for Age Pension
    or Farm Household Allowance and their partner has confirmed the
    details provided in the claim
-   customer has lodged a new claim for a family payment only. For
    example, Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), Paid
    Parental Leave (PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP). See Family
    assistance customer becomes partnered
-   self-funded retiree who is not getting income support payments and
    is applying for an Aged Care Means Test assessment

When partner confirmation is needed

Information must be confirmed with the partner when:

a new customer is claiming, or a previous customer with a single
relationship status is reclaiming:

-   online or via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), and
-   advises they are partnered, but
-   has not confirmed their relationship using the Partner Confirmation
    Logon service, or by a Partner details (MOD P) form

a partnered customer is reclaiming, unless:

-   their claim will be rejected for basic eligibility reasons, and
-   the partner is the same as recorded

a current customer advises they have become partnered and the partner
details are obtained verbally from the customer. Confirmation of the
relationship can be obtained verbally from the partner if they are
available. If the partner is not available, a MOD P must be completed
and returned

a current customer has provided a MOD P but the form has not been
co-signed by their new partner. See Assessing the MOD P

a customer has lodged a paper claim form that has not been signed by
their partner where required
Nominees can only sign on behalf of the customer they are appointed for.
Therefore, if a nominee has signed on behalf of a customer’s partner for
whom they are not an appointed nominee, confirmation of the information
and the relationship with the partner is required

Note: if the customer or partner is getting or has claimed an income
support payment or concession at the same time as lodging a claim for a
family payment, partner details must be confirmed before finalising
either claim.

Partnered customers reclaiming

For some claims, partnered customers who reclaim within 52 weeks of last
receiving a payment are presented with a Reduced Question Set (RQS).
These customers will see known information from their record and will
have the option to edit/add extra details, including their relationship
status information. Note: if this feature is not applicable for the
payment the customer is claiming, they will see the full question set
(for example, Age Pension or Disability Support Pension online claim).

If a customer is reclaiming within 52 weeks, they will still be required
to confirm current information about their relationship. For example,
they will be need to navigate to the Relationship Status page. They will
be given the option at Next steps of:

-   a Temporary Access Code (TAC) for their partner to confirm the
    relationship through the Partner Confirmation Logon service, or
-   lodging a MOD P

Note: if the claim is to be rejected for basic eligibility reasons and
the partner is the same as recorded, confirmation of partner details is
not required for re-claims within 52 weeks.

Partner denies the relationship/family and domestic violence

When a customer advises they are partnered, through a new claim or a
change of circumstances, and the partner denies they are in a
relationship with the customer, a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment is
required. As the parties have provided conflicting information, an
assessment is needed to confirm if a member of a couple relationship
exists or not. This is to make sure the correct rate/entitlements are
paid.

Take care to check if there are family and domestic violence concerns
before issuing any Relationship Details (SS284 or SS293) forms. If the
partner denies the relationship and identifies family and domestic
violence concerns, alleging the customer is the perpetrator, SS284/SS293
forms must not be issued to the customer.

If a new customer is claiming payment or a current customer has lodged a
MOD P, and they have been identified as an alleged perpetrator of
violence, the claim/MOD P assessment may be delayed pending the outcome
of the MoC assessment. If a customer contacts to question any delay in
finalising their claim/MOD P assessment:

-   they must not be advised that a MoC assessment is required
-   tell them the claim/assessment is still in progress and they will be
    advised of the outcome as soon as possible (priority processing can
    be considered if not already done)

Temporary access code (TAC)

Customers, partners or third parties can use a TAC to complete a
once-off online process. Information provided when using a TAC may
support a customer’s new claim assessment or ongoing entitlement to a
current payment.

A TAC includes a 7-digit Reference Number and a 10 letter upper and
lower case Access Code. It can only be used once.

The TAC process for partner confirmation is currently only available for
customers claiming online or via the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

A TAC will be issued to customers who can provide accurate information
about their partner's circumstances when claiming the following
payments:

-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Youth Allowance

Online claim

Partner confirmation can be completed online using a TAC. Customers who
claim online will be asked: 'Can you provide accurate information
regarding your partner's circumstances to support your claim?'

If the customer:

can provide accurate information:

-   they record the partner’s details in the claim, or if Partner
    Permitted to Enquire exists they confirm known pre-filled details
-   at Next steps at the end of the claim, they are given a TAC and
    instruction on how to it. There will be no Partner details (MOD P)
    required task
-   the partner can then access the Partner Confirmation Logon service
    on the Services Australia website. Using the TAC and instructions on
    how to use it, the partner confirms the relationship online before
    the customer can submit their claim
    Note: the partner does not need an online account to use the service
-   about the partner. As the information about the partner was given by
    the customer, Service Officers must make sure the partner has
    confirmed the information about the relationship before making any
    updates and before finalising the claim

cannot provide accurate information or their partner cannot use the
online Partner Confirmation Logon service, the customer will need to:

-   download a Partner details (MOD P) form
-   submit the completed MOD P with their online claim. The MOD P will
    be a required task at the Next steps

If the partner completes the online confirmation, Service Officers do
not need to contact the partner or issue a MOD P to confirm the
relationship.

If using:

Centrelink online account, the customer can print the TAC advice and
give it to their partner

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app, the customer:

-   will receive a Confirmation of relationship details task containing
    a Reference Number and Access Code
-   can share the Reference Number and Access Code with the partner
-   can forward a link to the Partner Confirmation Logon service via SMS
    or email

The TAC will be a Required Task until the customer submits their claim.
The TAC can be reprinted. Once submitted, the TAC task will no longer be
available.

Using TAC to confirm the relationship on the website

The partner needs to go to servicesaustralia.gov.au and confirm the
relationship.

Alternatively, give the Partner Confirmation Logon page URL to the
customer for them to provide to their partner to access.

Claims when TAC not available

The TAC is not available for:

-   Special Benefit (SPB) claims, and
-   ABSTUDY (ABY) claims

For these claims, if the customer indicates they have a partner, they
must provide a MOD P. This is regardless of their response to the
question, ‘Can you provide accurate information regarding your partner’s
circumstances to support your claim?’.

Staff must not set the Partner Confirmation task to Not Required.

Locating partner response in Process Direct

The partner's response is in the Documents bar within the claim in
Process Direct:

-   Digital Partner Confirmation (DMOD P) contains the information the
    partner provided online (if the TAC has been used)
-   Partner details (MOD P) contains the completed Partner details
    (MOD P) form uploaded by the customer (if the TAC has not been used)

The partner's response (DMOD P) is not available to view in Customer
First.

For how to view the DMOD P for a Parenting Payment Benefit Transfer
activity, see Finalising the transfer to PPP table.

Partner unable to use TAC to confirm the relationship

If the partner is unable (or chooses not) to use the TAC, they can
confirm the relationship:

-   by completing a Partner details (MOD P) form. The customer must then
    upload the completed MOD P using Upload documents, or
-   verbally, if they are present at the time of contact. Verbal partner
    confirmation must be recorded on a DOC

Once the MOD P has been lodged or verbal partner confirmation received
for an online claim or ACC, the Service Officer must update the
Confirmation of relationship details task status to Provided. This will
allow the customer to submit their claim.

Exemptions

Customers are exempt from completing all required tasks (such as
providing evidence) before submitting their claim if they meet current
Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) claim submission exceptions or if
there are vulnerabilities such as family and domestic violence.

If there are any concerns or risk of family and domestic violence, see
Family and domestic violence.

Note: more documentation may be necessary when there is any doubt about
that customer's circumstances.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
forms.

Related links

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Family and domestic violence

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
