
Updating gender details on customer records 102-08020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers who want to update the
gender details on their record, or their child’s record.

Note: if Centrelink staff get a call before completing Gender X Training
(POR00546 and POR00547) they must warm transfer the customer to Change
of Gender Enquiry.

Updating gender details – customer

Customers can ask to update gender details on their record. A person may
identify with a gender other than the sex they were born with, or they
may be non-binary.

The sex or gender recorded on a customer's birth certificate does not
need to be changed to identify the person's gender for Services
Australia.

When helping customers update their gender details, be aware:

-   a person's sex and gender may not be the same
-   of the need to address the customer by their appropriate name and
    title. Staff must avoid misgendering (using incorrect personal
    pronouns) or 'deadnaming' (using previous names) as these actions
    can cause distress and offence to customers
-   customers may use a diverse range of pronouns. While pronouns cannot
    be recorded on the system Service Officers should be mindful to use
    appropriate pronouns where the customer makes it known

Staff can refer a customer to a social worker if the customer is
distressed or needs extra help.

Centrelink may require verification in circumstances where a customer
needs to supply verification under an international agreement or for a
foreign pension claim.

Note: if a Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer requests
to update their or their child’s gender, warm transfer them to
Multilingual Call, on 13 12 02 so an experienced SRSS Service Officer
can assist.

Updating gender details – child (Centrelink)

Note: staff must transfer all child gender enquiries to the appropriate
team. Refer to the Process page.

A principal carer of a child can ask to change the gender details of
children. A child may identify with a gender other than the sex they
were born with, or they may be non-binary.

Note: staff can use the terms carer, primary carer, principal carer,
foster carer or grandparent for the purposes of this Operational
Blueprint. This is in circumstances where the person advising has
parental responsibility for the child.

The sex or gender recorded on a child's birth certificate does not need
to be changed to update the child's gender with Services Australia.

When discussing child gender enquiries with a customer, be aware:

-   a child’s sex and gender may not be the same
-   to address the child’s appropriate name and title. Staff must avoid
    misgendering (using incorrect personal pronouns) or 'deadnaming'
    (using previous names) as these actions can cause distress and
    offence to customers
-   customers may use a diverse range of pronouns. While pronouns cannot
    be recorded on the system Service Officers should be mindful to use
    appropriate pronouns where the customer makes it known
-   a child’s gender details cannot be updated online

Staff can refer a customer to a social worker if the customer is
distressed or needs extra help.

Note: if a Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer requests
to update their or their child’s gender, warm transfer them to
Multilingual Call, on 13 12 02 so an experienced SRSS Service Officer
can assist.

Related links

Changing the Legal name of customers or their children

Change of sex or gender for Medicare enrolments

Amend a person's Medicare enrolment details

Updating Child Support customer and assessment information

Customer records Cuba Process Help

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
