-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for the Principal Carer Social
Worker Exemption Service Update. This is a Service Profiling review of
customers granted a mutual obligation requirement exemption due to
either being subjected to family and domestic violence or having
experienced a relationship breakdown. This is a process to assess if a
customer, to whom the exemption applied, is now able to meet their
mutual obligation requirements.

Purpose of Service Update

When a principal carer of a dependent child in receipt of Parenting
Payment, JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance or Special Benefit is
granted an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements due to
family and domestic violence or a relationship breakdown in the last 26
weeks, an appropriate period for the exemption to apply will be
determined.

The Principal Carer Social Worker Exemption Service Update will occur
prior to the exemption period ceasing and prompts the Service Officer to
consider if a social worker appointment is required to reassess the
customer's circumstances and if the customer is now able to participate,
or if the exemption needs to be reapplied.

This Service Update facilitates contact with the customer via a manual
letter, within 21 days of the exemption expiring. The Service Officer
may then be required to contact the customer and organise a face to face
or phone interview to discuss the customer's current circumstances.

The process and the actions involved are outlined in the relevant
Service Profiling Update Workflow. By selecting the Workflow via the
workspace page in Customer First, the Service Component on the
customer's Service Strategy (PQSS) screen will be completed when the
workflow is finalised.

Identifying Principal Carer Social Worker Exemption Service Update customers

Customers selected for a Principal Carer Social Worker Exemption Service
Update may be identified by searching for started (STA) Service
Components (ID No. 211) via the Component Search (PQCS) screen, or by
Service Update activities showing on the Worklist in WorkOptimiser.

Family and domestic violence or relationship breakdown exemption not renewed

If a family and domestic violence or relationship breakdown exemption is
not renewed as a part of the Service Update, the customer must be
referred for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) to determine their
barriers to employment and identify interventions that may assist them.

The Service Officer should always check to see if there is a current and
valid ESAt on the customer's record when considering whether to make a
new referral.

Related links

Family and domestic violence

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Approved activities for principal carers

Suitable/unsuitable work

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

Service Components by number

Shared care for social security payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
