
Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) after transfer to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) 102-15010060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Student Financial Supplement Scheme (SFSS) closed from 1 January
2004. Since December 2005 all outstanding Financial Supplement Loans
(FSL) have been transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for
recovery.

This document outlines the effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement
Loans (FSL) when the loan has been transferred to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

(FSL) was a voluntary loan paid under the Student Financial Supplement
Scheme (SFSS). It gave eligible tertiary students the option of
borrowing money to help cover their expenses while they studied.

On this Page:

End of loan contract period and transfer to the ATO

The funds for the FSL were provided by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia (CBA). When the student applied for FSL, the student entered
into a loan contract with the CBA for a contract period. All loans were
administered by Centrelink (now Services Australia) until the end of the
contract period. At the end of the contract period, the outstanding loan
was transferred to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). The loan then
became a debt to the Commonwealth and is repayable through the taxation
system.

Bankruptcy

Bankruptcy has no effect on the repayment of the FSL amount as FSL is
not a provable debt (as it is not immediately repayable).

A customer who declares bankruptcy after the debt was transferred to the
ATO may have a portion of the debt discharged but it is only the portion
that is immediately payable.

Note: any part of the loan that has been assessed as payable to the ATO
as part of the customer's Tax Assessment is considered to be due
immediately, and therefore can be included as a liability in terms of a
person's bankruptcy assessment.

If further information is required the customers should be referred to
ATO.

Note: the final balance on all outstanding loans will show as zero on
Services Australia's system. This does not mean that the loan has been
zeroed off, just that the balance has now been transferred to the ATO
for recovery through the taxation system.

Related links

Effect of bankruptcy on Financial Supplement loan (FSL) prior to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Repayment of Financial Supplement loan (FSL) after transfer to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
