
Inter-environment change of address (ICoA) transfer of a customer record 102-03020020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on transferring a customer's record
from one environment to another when updating a change of address.

Inter-environment change of address

The Centrelink computer system divides Australia into a series of
geographically based environments. When a customer changes their address
from one environment to another, their computer file record must also be
transferred. The Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility is
used to transfer records between environments. This procedure explains
how ICoA works for the transfer of a record of a customer.

Before starting the ICoA process

Before starting the ICoA activity:

-   Check and clarify customer circumstances (such as income, assets,
    children, partner, Centrepay) by locating the customer record in the
    current environment. Note any details that require changes. Also,
    check if the customer has an existing record in the gaining
    environment by coding the Customer Reference Number (CRN) in the
    gaining environment, to ensure that the transfer has not already
    been actioned
-   Check if the customer is a job seeker and moving interstate or
    changing environments within their state
-   Check if the customer is receiving Carer Payment and/or Carer
    Allowance

Customer details

Every customer's address (including postal address) and phone contact
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required.

Note: if the customer has authenticated themselves via Interactive Voice
Response (IVR), address details do not need to be confirmed.

If a customer or their partner, who are in receipt of a payment (current
or suspended), is transferring into or out of Environment I, Centrelink
International Services (CIS) staff must cancel the record prior to the
ICoA action. See Return to Australia procedures for Service Centre and
Smart Centre staff. If they are not in receipt of any payments then the
transfer can be completed by any Service Officer.

If the customer record is in Environment Y, see Environment Y for
inactive deleted and deceased customer records.

Failure to transfer

It should be noted that an Inter-environment transfer fails, with error
code 'EO761T, Appeals Incomplete ODM Reconsideration exists', where the
review officer reconsideration is bypassed at the customer's request.
Instructions to transfer the customer record to the gaining environment
in this instance are contained in Step 8 in Table 1.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) inter-environment change
of address

Inter-environment change of address (ICOA) transfer of a child record
using Customer First or Customer Record

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
completed transfers

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
scheduled transfers

Monitoring the Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility for
started transfers

Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility hints

Inter-environment Change of Address (ICoA) facility edits

Moving to Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment related
exclusion period

Return to Australia procedures for service centre and Smart Centre staff
for pension payments

Environment Y for inactive deleted and deceased customer records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
