
Suspension of payments (CLK) 102-10030000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document outlines information about suspending Centrelink payments.

Suspension of payments

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment as a result of:

-   changes in their circumstances
-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment, or
-   information is required to ensure that payments are directed
    correctly (such as a valid address or bank account details)

A decision to suspend a payment potentially has a great impact on a
customer and must be made in accordance with legislation and the
relevant process. Suspensions placed on customers' records that do not
follow the correct process may cause financial hardship and distress to
customers.

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of qualification, and
full arrears are issued if payment is subsequently restored.

A payment cannot be suspended pending investigation.

Reasons for suspension

Reasons for suspension of payment include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the customer failed to reply to correspondence
-   the customer failed to attend an interview
-   a customer has separated from their partner
-   a customer or their partner is in gaol or psychiatric confinement
-   the customer's mail has been returned to Centrelink - 'whereabouts
    unknown'
-   employment income or an increase in assets
-   qualification provisions specific to certain payments
-   the death of an adult or child cannot be confirmed

Income from employment

Before suspending a payment due to employment income, consideration must
be given to whether the customer can retain certain benefits for a
period of time:

-   If under Age Pension age - Working Credits may enable the customer
    to keep some of their income support payment while they are working
-   If over Age Pension age - and in receipt of a pension (excluding
    Parenting Payment Single) they may be entitled to the Work Bonus.
    Note: the Work Bonus is not used in the customer's transitional
    rules calculation, however partners may still benefit by the
    reduction in total income
-   If the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil and
    some of that income is employment income, the payment may remain
    current at nil rate for up to six fortnights and they may retain
    certain benefits

Customer contact

Before a payment is suspended, information must be requested from the
customer under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The
decision maker must be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence that
the customer is either temporarily not qualified for the payment or the
payment is not payable.

For information on requesting information, see Requesting information.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system a manual Q134 or Q999
letter must be sent and include:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the customer's review and appeal rights

When the payment is suspended additional appropriate actions are also
required, e.g. issue letter, code manual review, DOC the decision, etc.

Note: a separate Q134 or Q999 will need to be issued to the nominee
where the customer has a Correspondence Nominee.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Customer contacts after suspension

When a customer contacts about a suspended payment, explain the reason
for suspension. The Service Officer should also provide information
about the required documentation or advise the customer what is required
so the payment can be restored.

Partnered customers

If the customer and their partner are both receiving a payment and
information is needed that will impact both customers entitlements,
individual requests for information must be issued. The requests for
information must be sent at the same time. This is to ensure where an
adverse decision needs to be made for not responding to the request,
that is, suspension, this decision can be applied to both records at the
same time.

Note: The same time allowed to respond must be applied to both the
customer and their partner's request.

An adverse decision for not responding to the request for information
can only be made regarding the customer that was issued the request. It
cannot be applied to their partner, unless they were also issued a
request for information and failed to respond.

Date of effect

The date of effect of a decision to suspend a customer's payment depends
on the specific circumstances relating to the suspension. If the
customer or their partner informs the agency of a change in
circumstances, generally the date of effect is the date on which the
event or change in circumstances occurred. An exception exists with
respect to events and changes in circumstances concerning employment or
non-employment income, where a working credit balance applies.

If the customer fails to provide requested information when responding
to a section 63 or section 68 notice, the date of effect of this adverse
determination is generally the day following the expiration of the time
allowed to respond.

Where the customer has already been paid for this date, the date of
effect for the suspension will be Date Paid To (DPT) plus 1.

See Resources for examples.

Reviewing suspension - cancellation or restoration of payment

Suspended payments are reviewed within 13 weeks of the suspension. If a
customer does not contact or provide requested information, the
suspended payment may be cancelled as a result of the review and
notification of the cancellation will be issued.

A payment may be restored when the customer re-establishes their
qualification for the payment or provides the required information.

For information on restoring payments, see Restoration of payments (CLK)

For information on cancelling payments, see Cancellation of payments
(CLK)

Vulnerable or at risk customer

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative.

Correspondence returned from customer's address

As a part of the customer's notification obligations, they must advise
the agency of a change of address within 14 days of moving. If mail is
returned from the address currently shown on the customer's record, the
customer will be considered to be 'whereabouts unknown' (WUK). This mail
is forwarded to the agency's scanning provider. Once scanned the record
will be automatically suspended whereabouts unknown.

Automatic 'CAN'cellation or 'SUS'pension can occur if customers are not
identified as vulnerable customers or as requiring exception processing.
Customers in these categories are particularly vulnerable and additional
intervention may be required prior to updating the customer record. See,
Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement.

Payments can be restored when the customer contacts and confirms the
correct address. See the relevant procedure for restoring payments.

The Resources page contains date of effect suspension examples and more
information about the legislative basis for suspending payments.

Contents

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Suspension of ABSTUDY payments

Suspension of Age Pension

Suspension of payments of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Suspension of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Suspension of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Suspension of Parenting Payment (PP)

Suspension of Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES and
Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) PES payments

Suspension of Widow Allowance (WA) and Partner Allowance (PA)

Youth Allowance (YA) (job seekers, students and trainees) cancellations,
suspensions and restorations

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes (CLK)

Requesting information (CLK)

Creating a Q134 letter

Making an unfavourable decision (CLK)

How to code and action a manual review

Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension and Cancellation of
vulnerable and at risk customers

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Cancellation of payments

Restoration of payments

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Working Credit

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
