
Attributing Service Profiling Debts to Integrated Review System (IRS) Service Updates 102-01010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Service Update activities and
related debts to ensure correct recording in the Integrated Review
System (IRS).

On this Page:

Integrated Review System

The IRS records results related to Compliance Reviews, Program Reviews,
Service Updates, and other Centrelink reviews. The data recorded in the
IRS provides statistical information to support analysis of the number
of reviews undertaken and the effectiveness of those reviews.
Statistical information from the IRS is used by Centrelink Service
Centre, Area Support Office (ASO) and Services Australia Canberra staff
as a basis for management decisions about review activity, including the
allocation of resources. Data recorded in the IRS is used as part of the
basis of reports provided to Policy Departments, the Department of
Finance and Administration, and Parliament.

Actions performed over the life of a Service Update or Review are
displayed on the Review Action History (IRRA) screen. This screen
displays details such as:

-   where the Service Update or Review commenced
-   what action took place within the Service Update or Review
-   changes to work groups and positions
-   reassessments, as well as some finalisation details and any
    applicable restoration period that may apply

Service Profiling and IRS

Service Updates are processed in the Income Security Integrated System
(ISIS), with the information automatically transferring and updating the
corresponding IRS Review. It is vital that Service Update
activities/actions are correctly processed and 'COM'pleted using the
Service Strategy (PQSS) screen, to ensure correct activities are passed
to the IRS for an accurate Service Update result to be calculated.

Processing Service Updates

As soon as a Service Component is 'STA'rted, the Service Update details
are recorded in the IRS as a 'STA'rted IRS Review. Service Update
details cannot be manually updated in the IRS, but are attributed as a
result of the 'COM'pletion of relevant Service Actions. This makes it
very important that all activities related to a Service Update are
'COM'pleted through the appropriate Service Actions via PQSS screen.

Only activities created as a direct result of the Service Update and
after the Service Update is 'STA'rted will be attributed to the IRS
Review. Always update the status of the Service Actions, at each contact
and any reassessment that is part of a Service Action must be coded
within the Service Update activity. For example, coding changes to rent,
relationship status, income or manual debt shells should be done on the
relevant screens after selecting the appropriate Service
Action/Activity. Before a Service Update is finalised, ensure any
associated activities, including any debts, have been completed. Once
the Service Update is 'COM'pleted, the finalisation request will be sent
to IRS and the IRS Review will automatically finalise and calculate a
Review Result.

Service Updates and Debts

Debt activities are often created as a result of a Service Update. The
debt activity will be automatically attributed to the Service Update in
IRS, in the same way as other assessment activities, if the debt is
created as a result of an activity which is part of the Service Update
processing. A debt can be created automatically by using the activity
created by a negative adjustment on a reassessment, or manually, by
navigating to the Add Debt (OPAD) screen and coding the details. Any
debt that has been created manually will need to be manually attributed
to the relevant IRS Review. Manual attribution of debts can only be done
within 56 days of the finalisation of the related IRS Review. The manual
debt attribution option should only be used where a debt cannot be
created via a reassessment.

The References page contains a link to Accountable Authority
instructions (AAIs).

Related links

Service Profiling

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
