
Changing the Legal name of customers or their children 102-08010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before making updates, verify the correct record is selected using Proof
of Record Ownership. This will reduce the risk of fraud and creating
multiple and intertwined records.

This document outlines how to change the legal name of a customer or a
child under 18 in the customer's care.

Note: alternate arrangements are available for customers affected by
COVID-19 restrictions who request to change their legal name.

Circumstances when a legal name change may be requested

A customer can request a name change:

-   If their relationship status has changed. For example, they have
    partnered or separated
-   Gender expression - to align with their affirmed gender
-   Where a child (under 18) is assuming a parent's family name
    Note: written consent from the other parent or a court order is
    required
-   To protect themselves from a third party by changing all reference
    to their current name
-   Where a unnamed newborn child has now been named
    Note: the child's name will have been recorded as 'Newborn'
-   To correct spelling errors

If the customer asks to change their Preferred Name, Also Known As
(AKA), Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Traditional Name, see
Aliases and other names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.).

Sex and gender diverse customers

The term 'preferred name' can cause distress for some people.

For example, when a customer is undertaking a gender transition, or
identity affirmation process, they may find the term 'preferred name'
offensive. As part of their gender identity affirmation, a person may
use their affirmed name due to costs associated with changing a legal
name. Customers may use their affirmed name before progressing to
updating it legally.

A customer can provide their affirmed name and title. Staff can update
the affirmed name and title without a supporting document using the
preferred name field.

A customer can request that we do not use a courtesy title such as Miss,
Mr or Mrs.

Services Australia is committed to applying the Australian Government
Guidelines on the Recognition of Sex and Gender. See the Resources page
for a link. Consult with your team leader if you need further guidance
in supporting sex and gender diverse customers.

Legal name

A customer’s legal name appears in all written and online communication.

If the customer asks to change their legal name, they must provide in
person, one of the following original and unaltered supporting documents
issued by Births, Deaths and Marriages (BDM):

-   Australian Marriage certificate - Australian ceremonial certificates
    are not acceptable
-   Certificate of Name Change
-   Birth certificate - to support a child's legal (LGL) name
-   Reissued birth certificate in the new name

Legal name prior to marriage

-   If the customer requests to change their married legal name back to
    their birth or maiden name, and this name was coded as a historical
    legal name on the Customer Person Details Summary (CPDS) screen, no
    supporting evidence is required
-   Original, unaltered supporting evidence must be supplied if the
    customer’s birth or maiden name has never been coded as their legal
    name

Change of name overseas

Staff must refer these change of name requests that occur overseas to
the Customer Details Helpdesk. Documents should be uploaded or scanned
to the customer’s record if possible.

-   Australian Visa holders who are not Australian citizens, who
    ‘return’ to Australia and ask to change their legal name must
    provide a foreign passport with a current Australian Visa (verified)
-   Australian citizens who are born overseas and live overseas and
    become married or partnered overseas, may request to have their
    Australian Passport re-issued when they are overseas in their
    married name. When these customers ‘return’ to Australia and ask to
    change their legal name they must provide an Australian Passport
    (verified) and foreign marriage certificate when an Australian
    equivalent certificate is not available

Note: supporting documents must be presented in person, and be original
and unaltered.

Single names

When a customer uses only one name, ask for evidence of its use in the
community. For example, documents issued by other institutions and
agencies that use the single name.

Record the single name in the Family name: field on the CPDS screen.
Leave other name fields blank.

Note: for Identity Confirmation purposes, only record the name displayed
in the Family Name: field in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard.

When a customer's child is legally known by only one name, a system
workaround is currently in place for the coding the single name. Record
the single name in both the Family name: and First name: fields the on
the Change Child (CCH) screen. This will ensure the child's name
displays correctly on written correspondence.

Accurate recording of names

Recording accurate name variations and aliases on a customer's record
helps:

-   Reduce fraud - a customer can change names an unlimited number of
    time
    Note: numerous name changes may indicate an intention to defraud.
    Report Suspected Fraud, where suspected
-   Improve data match results - for example, obtain correct visa and
    travel details between the Department of Home Affairs and the agency
-   Effective operation of the Department of Home Affairs datalink. The
    datalink locates travel records for children travelling on a
    parent's passport. It is only effective if agency records contain
    exact spelling of customer and child names
-   Reduce the risk of multiple and intertwined records

Names that contain hyphens or apostrophes must not contain spaces. For
example, coding 'Anne-Maree' as ‘Anne – Maree' means it will not be
found when searching for a record.

Straightforward corrections

Straightforward corrections to names can be actioned at the first point
of contact. These updates include spelling corrections or name recorded
in incorrect order. See Customer's name incorrectly recorded.

myGov Profiles

A legal name update to one myGov member service will not flow to another
member service. The customer is required to change or update their legal
name directly with each member service. See Using myGov accounts.

Alternate service arrangements for customers affected by Emergency Events or COVID-19 restrictions

Alternate arrangements are in place for customers who are unable to
attend a service centre in person:

-   with their legal name change documents due to a COVID-19 lockdown or
    where customers are required to isolate or quarantine due to
    COVID-19
-   as they are affected by a current natural disaster emergency
    management event

Contents

Customer's name incorrectly recorded

Aliases and other name issues (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse
customers, cultural considerations etc.)

Indigenous naming conventions

Related links

Changing sex and/or gender details on customer records

Centrelink Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Administration of Restricted Access

myGov Profile

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Intertwined Centrelink records

Centrelink customer has multiple Customer Reference Numbers (CRN)

Searching for a customer on the system

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
