[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of a State or Territory Child Protection
Authority in Child Protection Income Management (CPIM).

On this Page:

Role of the Child Protection Authority

The State or Territory Child Protection Authority will:

-   make a request for Disclosure of Information (DOI) with Services
    Australia. This request for disclosure allows Child Protection
    Authorities to gather information to assist them to determine if a
    referral for Income Management is appropriate
-   advise the customer/s that they are going to be referred to Services
    Australia for Child Protection Income Management and explain what
    this means, including expected duration
-   provide Services Australia with a Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management for the customer. The
    notice will include contact details and duration of Income
    Management
-   provide Services Australia with a Revocation of Income Management or
    enhanced Income Management notice if it is to cease before the end
    of the original period stated in the Notice to Commence Income
    Management or enhanced Income Management
-   case manage the family as they would normally do
-   advise Services Australia of any changes in the family's
    circumstances that may impact upon Income Management

Income Management referrals

The Child Protection Authority case worker is responsible for providing
Services Australia with details of customers who the relevant State or
Territory Child Protection Authority has determined would benefit from
Income Management.

Once a customer has been referred by the relevant State or Territory
Child Protection Authority, Services Australia will determine if they
meet all other criteria required under Child Protection Income
Management. If the customer is eligible, their payments will be income
managed.

Revocation of Income Management

Income Management of a customer's payments can only occur whilst a
customer has an open case file with the Child Protection Authority. If
the customer no longer has an open case, the Child Protection Authority
should send Services Australia a Revocation of Income Management or
enhanced Income Management notice. If Services Australia is advised that
case management of the customer has ceased, contact should be made with
the State/Territory Child Protection Authority, to discuss the future of
Income Management for the customer in question. This contact with the
State/Territory Child Protection Authority will be made only by Services
Australia Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO).

Right to Appeal

A customer can appeal the Child Protection Authority's decision to refer
them to Services Australia for Income Management. In this case, Services
Australia will refer the customer to the Child Protection Authority
where usual internal appeals processing should occur. The Child
Protection Authority will provide customers with information on their
appeal rights.

Related links

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Services Australia role in Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Reviews of Income Management decisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
