
Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a customer who has commenced Income Management 103-01130010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assist staff with assessing current Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS) payments for customers who are commencing Income
Management, or actioning a request from a customer to amend a rent
payment deduction when their rent amount from the State Housing
Authority (SHA) changes.

Customer commencing Income Management

State and Territory Housing Authorities accept voluntary deductions for
housing related expenses using the Rent Deduction Scheme. When a
customer commences Income Management and they have a current RDS payment
in place, the amount is deducted from the customer's discretionary funds
by default per the existing RDS arrangement, not their income managed
funds. Customers should be given the option to transition any RDS
deductions over to Income Management to ensure their housing related
expenses are deducted from their Income Management money. This ensures
priority needs are being met through the use of Income Management funds
and maximises the discretionary money available to the customer.

Services Australia needs to confirm whether the customer wants to pay
their housing expenses from their discretionary funds using RDS, their
available income managed funds or a portion from both if they cannot
afford the full allocation from their Income Management funds. This
needs to be completed as part of the Initial assessment interview that
is held with the customer at the time they are placed onto Income
Management.

All staff can vary or cease RDS deductions and add new Income Management
deductions.

New RDS deductions can only be added by the State or Territory Housing
Authority.

Customer advises State Housing Authority (SHA) rent amount has changed

If the customer contacts Services Australia to advise that the rent they
pay to their SHA has changed, and that they have a current rent
deduction in place via their Income Management funds, this rent amount
will need to be updated to reflect the new rent amount the customer is
required to pay.

If the customer's rent has been paid from their discretionary funds, and
they wish to convert the payment to their Income Management funds, and
the customer is in hardship as a result of having no, or little
discretionary funds, then the customer may be offered an Unrestricted
Cash Payment.

Related links

Initial assessment of Income Management

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)

Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
