
Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment Summary 103-07050000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the taxable and non-taxable
payments reported to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) as they are
displayed on customers Centrelink payment summaries and sent to the ATO.

The document only contains payments reported to the ATO that appear on
the Centrelink payment summary and are taxable or non-taxable.

Centrelink payment summary taxable and non-taxable payments

Payments that appear on a customer's payment summary are those that are
reportable to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). These include some
taxable and non-taxable payments.

A payment will be a combination of a:

-   main payment - benefit/pension/allowance/payment, plus any
    reportable
-   component - component/allowance/supplement, if eligible

Reporting payments for customers aged under 16

Any payments made to customers aged under 16 years are non-taxable.
Where the customer is under 16 years for the entire financial year the
payment is non-reportable to the ATO. Where the customer turns 16 during
a financial year, the payments will be:

-   non-taxable prior to turning 16 years
-   taxable from 16th birthday
-   both amounts will be displayed on a payment summary

Payment summary information is reported automatically to the ATO. See
Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

How payments display on the Centrelink payment summary

Each payment received will display as a separate line for each
entitlement period on the payment summary. An entitlement period is
defined where there is a break of 14 days or more between entitlements
even if the payment type has not changed. Payment details will be
separated across the following sections of the payment summary:

-   Periods paid
-   Taxable
-   Tax withheld
-   Remote Area Allowance
-   Tax exempt

In some cases, a component will not be combined with the main payment,
it will be shown as a separate line to the rest of the payment. This is
done at the request of the ATO who require some component information
displayed and reported separately. See Electronic transfer of Payment
Summary details to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

For example, when a customer receives JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and the
Education Entry Payment (EDEP), they will appear as 2 different lines on
the payment summary. Other payments may be regular or one-time payments
such as Dad and Partner Pay (DAP), which is a lump sum payment and
comprises of a single component only.

To view which components are displayed separately see the Taxable and
Non-Taxable Payments table in Resources.

All reportable payment information on a customer's payment summary is
also displayed on the Tax Payment Summary Details (TXGD) screen. All
payments received by the customer (not just those that are included on
the payment summary) are displayed on the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD)
screen. See Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen.

Reportable payment information

Government Policy determines what Centrelink payment information
Services Australia (the agency) must report on a payment summary to the
ATO.

A reportable payment falls into either of the following categories:

-   Taxable payments - which are reportable to the ATO
-   Non-taxable payments - these are required to be reported to the ATO
    for compliance and/or offset purposes. This also includes Remote
    Area Allowance (RAA)

See the Taxable and Non-Taxable Payments table in Resources.

Tax withholding payment information

Tax withholdings must be displayed on the payment summary separately
against the relevant payment for each entitlement period. At the end of
a financial year, the tax withholding amount is displayed on the Tax
Payment Summary (TXGS) screen and the breakdown of tax withheld reported
per payment and entitlement period is displayed on the Tax Payment
Summary Details (TXGD) screen. Tax withholding is also referred to in
the agency as Tax Deduction. See Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax
deductions.

Emergency Payments and Disaster events

The below payments are paid under the Financial Framework (Supplementary
Powers) Act 1997) and although they are taxable they are not reported on
the Centrelink Payment Summary. Customers who received these payments
must include them in their tax returns. These payments include:

-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (PLDP)
-   New Zealand Disaster Recovery Allowance
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance Top-up and the Consumer Travel Support
    Program (CTSP), please note a business will not be issued a
    Centrelink Payment Summary however the payment may need to be
    included in an individual’s tax return (for example, they may be a
    sole trader) or the business’s tax return.

A customer can determine the total amount of any payments received by:

-   View payment history (online account)
-   View letters (online account or post)
-   Contacting us

Disaster Recovery Allowance is a taxable payment. Customers will see
this payment on their Centrelink Payment Summary and will need to
include it in their tax return.

The Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) was a taxable payment included on the
Centrelink payment summary. The amounts are not reported separately but
are included in the total value of the eligible income support payment
received by customers. For a list of eligible income support payments,
see Coronavirus Supplement.

The Cost of Living Payment Economic Support Payments and COVID-19
Disaster Payments are tax free and are not reported on the Centrelink
payment summary.

Related links

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payment

Coronavirus Supplement

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
