
Changing payment destination 103-04030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on what happens when a customer
contacts Services Australia to change their payment destination. There
is no legislation or policy which covers how often a customer can change
their payment destination.

Issues to consider when changing payment destination

Consider the following issues when a customer wishes to change their
payment destination:

-   Privacy issues
-   Payment destination details can only be changed by the customer
    themselves or a person with payment authority for that customer.
    This can also include a faxed request from a bank, on their
    letterhead and signed by the customer
-   The customer must have legal access to the account - it must be in
    their own name, or their name must appear in the title of the joint
    account
-   Customers who bank with credit unions must provide their account
    number, not their member number, or their payments will reject. This
    applies even where the customer has historically provided their
    member number (to Centrelink or any other third party)
-   Account numbers with leading zeros must be recorded exactly as
    described – any zeroes missed from the start of an account number
    can inadvertently redirect funds to an incorrect recipient
-   Payments can only be made to a child's account if the account is
    held in trust for the child by the customer or if withdrawals can
    only be made by the customer. In these cases, it is deemed that the
    customer has legal access to the account
-   It is vital that the correct information is coded. Once the payment
    destination has been updated confirm the change with the customer
-   If the customer receives more than one type of payment, confirm with
    the customer the account details for each payment
-   If a customer has a direct credit exemption coded and on the Payment
    Summary (PS) screen the payment destination is cheque, this payment
    has not been issued to the customer and will not be issued until
    bank account details are coded
-   Review any Payment Nominee arrangement that may be current. Where
    applicable, this arrangement needs to be cancelled before any
    payment destination changes are completed
-   Is this payment destination used for the receipt of NDIS payments?
    NDIS payments should be in a separate account as NDIS amounts
    received for funded support are income, asset and deeming exempt for
    income support purposes.

Work Items

The following work items relate to changing payment destination:

-   ZCOC_PMT_DEST Change of Circumstances - Payment Destination is
    created when an online payment destination update has failed. The
    ‘UPD DOC’ on the Document List (DL) screen will confirm the cause
-   ZDMS_Q286 - Provide account details for direct credit Q286 is
    created when a ‘Q286 - Letter to client requesting account details
    for payment destination’ has been completed and returned by the
    customer
-   ZDMS_Q092 Requested payment destination details Q092 is created when
    a customer uploads a ‘Q092 to customer requesting payment
    destination details’ form
-   ZDMS_SS270 - SS270 Group Payment Request is created when a ‘SS270
    Group Payment Request’ form is scanned to a customer’s record. See
    Group payment schedules and payments to organisations for more
    information
-   ZDMS_SS290 - SS290 Change of payment account details is created when
    a customer uploads a ‘SS290 Change of payment account details’

For ZDMS_Q286, ZDMS_Q092, ZDMS_SS270 and ZDMS_SS290 work items:

Check the Activity List (AL) screen to identify the form code on the
left hand side of the activity

Check the Document List (DL) screen to identify if there was a
triggering event that created this activity

Action the scan and update to the bank payment destination. When
actioned and completed:

-   Select the Transaction ID from the AL screen
-   Select Edit
-   Change Status from Document Added to Completed

Separated customers

When a customer separates from their partner, ensure the customer's bank
account details are correct and confirm whether they wish to have
payments made to the same account.

If a customer has payments made to a joint account, advise the customer
that if money is paid into the joint account, the former partner will
have access to their payment. The customer should be asked if they have
an account in their own name only, as payment should not continue to be
made to the joint account.

YA or ABSTUDY customer turns 18 years

Under 18 year olds who are dependent on their parents will have their
payments sent directly to the parent.

Once the Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer has turned 18, the
payment must either be paid to an account held by the customer (or
parents if the customer has a joint bank account with them) or a Payment
Nominee arrangement must be made. A parent who has been receiving their
under 18 YA child's payments may have authority to provide new bank
account details in the child's own name when the child turns 18.

There are certain 'payees' for customers in receipt of ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, refer to Living Allowance for ABSTUDY for further
information.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

Only AIC Smart Centre staff can change the payment destination of AIC
records. AIC payment information is NOT coded on the PAS screen, and if
coded here will cause payment errors/issues. Staff receiving a request
to have the payment destination of an AIC applicant changed should send
an ACTDOC to LPT with keywords of ACTAIC and URGENT. The ACTDOC will
need to contain the Account name, Account number, BSB and the date from
which the details changed.

YA and ABSTUDY customers under 18 years of age

In some cases, payments can be made to the customer or a third party.
See Under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer wants to
stop payment going to their parents.

There is no restriction on making changes to payment destination for
customers who are under 18 and independent.

Note: if any payment destination change is requested by a third party,
extra care must be taken to confirm identity, circumstances and
financial arrangements before a change is made.

The Resources page contains links to self service information on the
Services Australia website and to forms used by a customer to request
the appointment of a nominee, to authorise payment to be sent to an
institution and to request their payment destination be changed.

Related links

Payment destination

Under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer wants to stop
payment going to parents

Accepting and disclosing information

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Changing personal details of nominees

Centrelink payments to third parties

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

Protection of customer payments

Authenticating a customer

Nominee organisations

Payments to parents of ABSTUDY students aged 16-17 years

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Accepting information from parents of Youth Allowance (YA) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
