
Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 103-05040040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
as fortnightly instalments can ask to be paid lump sum advance payments
of part of their future FTB Part A entitlement. Ongoing FTB Part A
payments will be reduced to repay the advance payment.

FTB advance payment

An FTB advance payment is a lump sum payment repaid by deductions from
the customer's future FTB Part A instalment payments, generally over a
period of 26 weeks. Eligible customers can request an FTB advance
payment at any time. Eligibility criteria need to be met. Customers may
have one regular advance as well as one or more one-off advances in
place as long as the total amount of the advance payments does not
exceed their maximum FTB advance payment amount.

The maximum FTB advance payment amount is subject to the FTB advance
payment ceiling. This is a set amount that is the same for all
customers. The current rate is available on the Services Australia
website.

A customer's maximum FTB advance payment amount is based on their
circumstances, so not all customers will qualify for the FTB advance
payment ceiling amount.

Advance payment options

Customers must be advised how often they can be paid an advance so they
have a chance to change the amount before any advance is finalised.

Customers may choose to:

-   receive an FTB advance as a one-off payment or as a regular payment
    (previously known as continuous advance payments)
-   have a one-off advance at the same time as a regular advance, each
    with their own repayment schedule

Note: a customer may be granted a one-off and a regular FTB advance on
the same day, but only a single one-off advance can be granted per day.

Eligibility for an FTB advance payment

To be eligible for an FTB advance payment, a customer must:

-   receive FTB Part A for at least one FTB A child via instalments.
    This includes FTB instalment customers who elect to defer part or
    all of their FTB Part A entitlement
-   be legislatively entitled to at least the base rate of FTB Part A
    for a child under 18. For the base rate of FTB Part A, see Family
    Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A - rates (pf). For information on how
    education requirements and the age of FTB children can affect the
    rate of an advance payment, see Rate of Advance Payment below
-   not have an outstanding debt to the Commonwealth
-   have fully repaid any advance payments of FTB that were granted more
    than 12 months ago (excluding where the balance is less than $0.05)
-   not suffer financial hardship due to the payment deduction amount
    required per fortnight to recover the advance
-   not have reduced or suspended recovery in place for a current
    advance of any type
-   have the minimum advance amount available to them

Note: for a regular advance payment to automatically pay each 182 days,
the preceding regular advance must be fully recovered within 182 days.

Approved Care Organisations are not eligible for an FTB advance payment.

FTB advance payments are not available to customers subject to
Prohibition of FTB Instalment Payments (PIP). If PIP is applied and a
customer is already repaying an advance payment, an advance debt will
not be raised as the customer retains their entitlement to FTB Part A.
An advance debt will be raised if the customer subsequently loses their
entitlement to FTB Part A during the advance recovery period.

Regular FTB advance payments

Regular FTB advance payments are automatically paid to the customer and
are set at the minimum FTB advance payment amount. Once the advance
payment period of 182 days has passed, another regular FTB advance is
automatically paid to the customer, pending ongoing eligibility. This
will continue until the customer requests cancellation of the
arrangement or the customer loses entitlement to the advance.

Customers can nominate a date up to 26 weeks (182 days) in the future as
their first regular advance assessment day. If the assessment day for a
regular advance falls on a weekend or a public holiday, the assessment
day will become the next available working day.

A regular advance payment arrangement will be automatically cancelled if
the customer fails to meet all eligibility conditions, this includes
where the customer has a current advance with either reduced or
suspended recovery arrangement in place when the regular advance
assessment is due. A check is undertaken to determine payment of an
ongoing regular advance. Once cancelled, a customer will need to reapply
to commence receiving a regular advance payment.

Customers can only have one regular FTB advance in place at any time.

One-off FTB advance payments

One-off FTB advance payments are paid to the customer as a single lump
sum.

The amount depends on the customer's entitlement to FTB Part A and is
negotiated with the customer according to affordability issues (the
customer must have the available funds to make the required repayment
and not be placed into financial hardship due to an advance repayment
amount).

Subject to eligibility criteria, customers can have multiple one-off FTB
advance payments in place at any time. After a one-off FTB advance
payment has been repaid, it does not have any continuing impact on the
payability of future FTB advances.

The customer can test eligibility for a new one-off advance as soon as
any previous one-off advance is fully repaid or if the customer has more
than the minimum amount available. The one advance every 182 day period
only applies to regular advances.

If a customer has repaid their regular advance and is subsequently
issued a one-off advance at the maximum amount, this will cancel any
future regular advances being granted. The customer will not be eligible
for a regular or one-off advance until this maximum rate advance has
been fully repaid.

Applying for an advance payment

[] To apply for an advance payment, or to access other advance payment
options, customers should be strongly encouraged to use the available
digital channels, unless they are ineligible. Digital services available
include Online Services, Express Plus mobile app or Interactive Voice
Recognition (IVR).

Customers ineligible to use digital services to apply for an advance
are:

-   Customers who have a nominee arrangement in place
-   FTB customers who are under 18 can claim via telephone or a service
    centre. They are required to have a discussion either over the phone
    or in person prior to applying to ensure consideration has been
    taken regarding the impacts/risks or an advance payment
-   Weekly payment customers can apply via telephone or at a service
    centre but cannot use self service channels
-   Independent customers under 18 years of age are considered 'at risk'
    customers and must have a face-to-face interview when applying for
    an advance (except if rural and/or remote). Rurally isolated
    customers are those who live in rural or remote areas who live more
    than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no access to a
    service centre
-   Customers who face physical or intellectual barriers to accessing
    digital options can apply over the telephone or in person
-   Customers applying for Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance, Farm
    Household Allowance Advance and/or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Note: if the customer states self-service options are unavailable, check
NNU, Newsflash and Bulletins to confirm this prior to processing the
Advance manually.

The 'next possible advance date' field in the Advance Payments workflow

The Advance Payments workflow will provide the following information
about entitlement to future advances on the overview page:

-   If an advance can be paid now, today's date will display
-   If a date in the future can be determined, the date will be
    displayed. The customer should be advised that the next possible
    advance date is only a guide. If there is any change to their rate,
    the date they may be able to have an advance may also change. The
    information is not a guarantee of the date they will be eligible.
    The customer should not rely on this information as a basis to enter
    into financial obligations or incur expenses

[] The 'next possible advance date' will also be available via online
and phone self service channels.

Note: the date is calculated from the information currently held on the
record, and it may change if the customer's circumstances change. The
only accurate assessment is on the day of application.

Rate of advance payment

Regular FTB advance payments are set at the minimum FTB advance payment
amount.

The amount of a one-off FTB advance payment must be between the minimum
FTB advance payment amount and the lesser of:

-   the amount requested by the customer
-   the maximum FTB advance payment amount
-   the maximum FTB advance payment amount available to the customer on
    the day the request is assessed

If the customer has any outstanding FTB advance payments, the maximum
FTB advance payment amount is reduced by the original amount of each
outstanding FTB advance. Note: if the outstanding balance is less than 5
cents, the full advance amount is disregarded when calculating the
maximum available advance amount. The remaining balance (of between 1
and 4 cents) will be recovered from the customer's next FTB Part A
payment.

Note: the maximum FTB advance payment amount is subject to the FTB
advance payment ceiling.

An FTB advance payment can only be granted if the customer can afford
the repayments without being placed in financial hardship. The customer
will only be offered an advance amount that they can afford, based on
their financial circumstances.

If the customer will lose entitlement to FTB Part A within 26 weeks from
when they apply for the advance, the advance payment period and the
amount of the advance will be reduced. An example of this may be where
the youngest child has turned 19 years of age and is studying Year 12
and the advance application is lodged on 1 November. As the FTB Part A
would cease at the end of the calendar year in which the child turned
19, the advance period would only be from 1 November to 31 December.

Advance payments for customer on a manual rate of FTB

If an FTB customer is paid via a manual rate, the system cannot
calculate an advance payment as the rate of payment has been determined
by a Service Officer not the system. If a manual rate customer applies
for an advance payment, refer these cases to the ICT Service Desk to
action via mySupport using the form for FTB payments.

Advance payments for income managed customers

Income Managed customers who apply for an advance payment will have 100%
of their advance (excluding SEA) income managed. This means the full
amount is credited to their Income Management account and not their
nominated bank account. Funds are available in the Income Management
account the following day and customers can access these funds in the
usual way, such as transferring money to their BasicsCard or arranging
payments to a Third Party Organisation.

Referral to financial counselling

A customer is to be offered a referral to Financial Management support
services, including Commonwealth Financial Counselling (CFC) where it is
considered that they may benefit from the referral. Referrals are also
offered via self service channels.

The service is voluntary, confidential and free. Repeated requests for
an FTB advance payment, rejections due to affordability or reduced or
suspended advance payment recovery may indicate that the customer would
benefit from a referral to financial counselling.

Other options if customer is not eligible for an advance payment

Centrepay

Centrepay is a free bill-paying service offered to customers receiving
payments. Through Centrepay they choose to pay bills by having a regular
amount deducted from their payments and transferred electronically to an
approved organisation.

Repayment options

The basic rate of repayment is the amount of the FTB advance payment
divided by the number of days in the advance payment period (generally
182 days). A shorter advance period may apply if the customer will lose
FTB Part A entitlement prior to this time.

If a customer is repaying two or more FTB advance payments at any time,
each one will have its own deduction amount and these will make up the
total amount deducted from the fortnightly FTB payment.

Customers can also request changes to the repayment rate of an advance
payment.

When an advance payment becomes a debt

A debt will be raised for any advance amount that has not been recovered
where a customer has received an FTB advance, and:

-   they subsequently lose their entitlement to FTB Part A, including
    when Part A is zero rate - income too high (CZR-ITH) or
-   their rate of FTB Part A is reduced to zero due to an FTB Part A
    rate reduction, Note: these debts will be raised after 21 days, or
-   their rate of FTB Part A reduces and it will take an unreasonable
    amount of time to repay the FTB advance. If the repayment period
    increases to between 1 to 2 years, a number of factors must be
    considered before manually raising an advance debt.

Customers with nominee arrangements

If a customer with a nominee applies for an advance payment, the Service
Officer must determine if there are any restrictions preventing the
advance payment being granted. If an involuntary nominee arrangement is
in place the Service Officer must contact the nominee before granting
the advance. If a voluntary nominee arrangement exists, the nominee
should be contacted if it is considered to be in the customer's best
interest.

Involuntary nominee arrangements

This is where a third party has been given legal right, as the result of
a court, tribunal, guardianship or administration order, to administer
the customer's affairs.

-   Under no circumstances is an advance payment to be granted at the
    request of the customer without the nominee's approval
-   If the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, contact
    must be made with the nominee and approval obtained before granting
    it
-   It will be extremely rare for an advance payment to be approved by
    the nominee, particularly where the nominee is a State/Territory
    trustee organisation
-   If the nominee does not provide approval for the advance payment, or
    cannot be contacted, the Service Officer must reject the
    application. The name of the officer and/or organisation with who
    contact was made or attempted, must be included in the DOC
-   If the nominee approves the granting of an advance payment, the
    names of the officer contacted who provided the approval, and the
    organisation must be annotated in the DOC
-   Under no circumstance is the nominee arrangement to be cancelled, or
    the payment destination changed without approval from the nominee

Voluntary nominee arrangements

A voluntary arrangement is where a third party has been appointed as a
nominee at the request of the customer. Only the customer, or their
correspondence nominee on the customer's behalf, can apply for an
advance payment.

If the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, but during the
interaction with customer the Service Officer has concerns about the
customer's understanding of:

-   what an advance payment is
-   their capacity to repay
-   the excess income per fortnight they are declaring (after expenses)
    seems to be unrealistic, or
-   the effect of the repayments on their regular fortnightly payments
    (they do not understand that their payment will be reduced by the
    fortnightly repayment amount)

The Service Officer is to contact the nominee (correspondence or
payment) if possible before approving the advance payment to ensure due
consideration is given as to the benefit to the customer of granting the
advance.

If the customer has different correspondence and payment nominees, the
Service Officer will contact the correspondence nominee

If the customer has a payment nominee only, or the correspondence
nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to discuss only very
basic information about the application with the payment nominee,
including:

-   that an application for an advance payment has been made, and
-   the fortnightly rate of repayments

If a reason for the advance application has been provided by the
customer it should not be discussed with the payment nominee.

If the nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to action the
advance payment request and annotate the DOC with the information. The
customer should not be disadvantaged if the nominee cannot be contacted
in a timely manner.

If the nominee does not think payment of the advance is in the
customer's best interests, the Service Officer must discuss this with
the customer. If after this discussion the Service Officer is satisfied
that granting the advance payment will be for the customer's benefit and
will not place them in hardship, the Service Officer is to action the
request based on the customer's request and annotate the DOC with this
information.

Note: if the advance payment is to be approved for the customer who has
a payment nominee, ensure the customer is aware the payment will go to
the nominated person's bank account as per their normal payments.

The Resources page contains scenarios of how FTB advance payments are
calculated, how they are treated during FTB reconciliation, frequently
asked questions, and links to Centrelink online accounts and the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Raising debts of advanced payments

Using Centrelink self service

Advance payment options online

Advances

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as lump
sum for a previous year

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Payment rates and thresholds

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
