
Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card with a residual balance 103-04040070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process when an Electronic Benefits Transfer
(EBT) card that has a residual balance needs replacing, or has been
returned or found and handed in.

On this Page:

System check of EBT cards

The system will automatically check the balance of EBT cards on the 21st
day following activation.

For cards with a balance of more than $20, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) will
be created.

For cards with a balance of less than $20, the card will cancel and for
customers who are:

-   CURrent, the balance will be automatically reissued to the
    customer's default payment destination
-   no longer CURrent, a MFU is created to prompt reissue of the card
    balance

Note: the system will regularly check for cards with a balance of less
than $20 from the time of issue, rather than wait until the 21st day
from the issue of the card.

Cards with a balance of $0 will be automatically cancelled.

Reducing residual balances

To reduce the occurrence of an EBT card being left with a residual
balance, the customer must be given a 'How to use your Electronic
Benefits Transfer card' brochure (13240) when they are issued the card,
and be advised of the following:

-   Make 1 withdrawal only for the full amount issued to the EBT card.
    The amount issued to the EBT card must be recorded on the 'How to
    use your Electronic Benefits Transfer card' brochure. ATMs only
    dispense $20 and $50 notes
-   Make the withdrawal immediately
-   Once the payment has been fully withdrawn, bend or cut the card in
    half and dispose of it
-   If the EBT card has been lost or stolen, or the customer has any
    problem using the card they are to contact Services Australia, not
    the organisation that owns the ATM that is being used

Other EBT issues

The customer may contact the agency to advise the EBT card has been
lost, stolen, damaged, deactivated by the Automatic Teller Machine (ATM)
network, the Personal Identification Number (PIN) does not match the EBT
card, or the PIN has been lost. They may also wish to dispute a
transaction that has taken place. In these cases, follow the procedure
in Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's
request.

Reissue of payment

Before reissuing the payment to the customer, the Service Officer must
check that the customer is entitled to the payment. Reissuing the
payment to the customer will automatically cancel the EBT card. If the
customer is not entitled to the payment, the reissue of the payment
should be permanently blocked by the Service Officer. The most common
instance where this would occur is in the case of cards issued under
pre-release procedures and the prisoner was not released as expected.

It is also possible to temporarily block and hold a payment from
immediate reissue. This may be appropriate if the customer is no longer
current and it is not possible to determine the correctness of the
default payment destination.

Returned EBT cards

When notification is received that an EBT card has been returned or
found and handed in, the EBT card must be checked for any outstanding
balance and then cancelled immediately. If an EBT card:

-   has been returned by the customer, the card should be destroyed by
    bending it in half and disposing of it
-   is found by a member of the public, they should be advised to hand
    the card into a service centre or destroy the card by bending it in
    half and disposing of it
-   has been found and handed in, the card should be recorded in the EBT
    daily issue register, bent in half and disposed of

The EBT card's balance must be manually checked, and if a balance
remains, it must be reissued to the customer via direct credit to the
customer's regular bank account.

The Resources page has links to online forms, publications, mySupport,
Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query Form and the Record of
Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card issue (SS292) form.

Related links

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's
request

New claim for Crisis Payment prior to the release of a customer in
prison or psychiatric confinement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
