
Under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer wants to stop payment going to parents 103-04010050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures, policy and legislation related to
under 18 years old Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customers who want to
stop payment going to their parent/s.

Payments directed to an under 18 customer

As part of the payability provisions of YA and ABSTUDY, dependent
customers receiving YA or ABSTUDY as secondary school students who are
under 18 years of age are to have their payments directed to their
parent(s). In some circumstances, the payments can be directed to the YA
or ABSTUDY customer.

Payment can be paid directly to the dependent 16 or 17 year old
customer, if:

the young person is not benefiting from the allowance because the
parent(s) are using it for other purposes, or

the parents choose to have payments paid to the young person and
authorises the change:

-   in writing for YA or ABSTUDY, or
-   verbally for ABSTUDY only, and
-   the parent does not have to explain their decision

Note: for YA, it is important that it is the parent that provides the
written evidence. If in any doubt about the veracity of the statement
contact should be made with the parent concerned. If the student is in
receipt of ABSTUDY, the authorisation can also be accepted verbally.
Where the parent has requested that payments be made to their under 18
year old child, they can also request that payments revert back to their
own account; no explanation or reason is needed.

Independent students must have payments directed to their own account
unless they appoint a Payment Nominee.

For YA customers only

Payment can be paid directly to the dependent 16 or 17 year old if:

-   the young person is an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander who has
    been ceremonially admitted as an adult member of their community, or
-   the parents leave Australia temporarily and the young person cannot
    access YA payments

For ABSTUDY customers only

Payments are paid directly to the dependent 16 or 17 year old if:

-   studying at a secondary non-school, tertiary or Masters and
    Doctorate level, or
-   undertaking an Australian Apprenticeship

Payments must be made to the ABSTUDY customer in these cases as they are
considered to be the 'payee'. They have the option of appointing a
Payment Nominee.

Note: payments must be made to the parent/guardian for any ABSTUDY
student who is of dependent status and under 16 years of age and a
secondary school student. School Term Allowance payments must be made to
the Applicant.

In general, an ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice who are in State
Care receiving Living Allowance receive their allowances direct.
However, the authority may request that payment be made direct to the
care giver or a person nominated by the student or Australian
Apprentice, if:

-   the relevant government authority or an organisation approved by
    that authority believes that payment of allowances direct to younger
    students or Australian Apprentices could jeopardise the
    student-carer or Australian Apprentice-carer relationship, or
-   it is determined that the student or Australian Apprentice is unable
    to manage his/her own finances, for example. a student in a special
    school

Note: some students who are boarding may have their payments directed to
a Boarding School or Hostel that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Hostel
Agreement. However, bank details still need to be recorded for the carer
or student on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS) screen so that
residue/supplementary payments are paid correctly.

When a YA or ABSTUDY customer turns 18 years

Customers under 18 year olds who are dependent on their parents will
have their payments sent directly to the parent. Once the YA or ABSTUDY
customer has turned 18 years of age, the payment must either be paid to
an account held by the customer (or parents if the customer has a joint
bank account with them) or a Payment Nominee arrangement must be made. A
parent who has been received their under 18 YA child's payments may have
authority to provide new bank account details in their child's own name
when the child turns 18.

There are certain 'payees' for customer in receipt of ABSTUDY Living
Allowance, refer to Living Allowance for ABSTUDY for further
information.

Unreasonable to Live at Home Assessments

Payment to the young person should also be considered if the young
person is claiming independence on the grounds of it being Unreasonable
to Live at Home (UTLAH).

While a claim for UTLAH is being considered, YA or ABSTUDY can continue
to be paid on the basis of the parental means test. If a young person is
claiming UTLAH this may be an indicator that the payment is not being
used for the customer's benefit, especially where the young person is
considered to be at risk.

The assessment or recommendation of whether the YA or ABSTUDY should be
directed to the young person is often made by the social worker but it
can be made by the Service Officer.

If in any doubt, a Service Officer should consult with a social worker.
However, the YA or ABSTUDY should not continue to be paid to the parent,
if the Service Officer is satisfied that the payment is not being used
for the customer's benefit. The Service Officer would not need to wait
for the determination of UTLAH to make this decision.

It is not acceptable to suspend or cancel a payment while making a
decision about UTLAH or payment determination. A payment should only be
suspended/ cancelled if the Service Officer is satisfied that the person
is not qualified for YA or ABSTUDY or the payment is not payable.

Related links

Changing payment destination

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Payments to parents for ABSTUDY students aged 16-17 years

Payments to parents for ABSTUDY students under 16 years of age

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
