-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Income Management (IM) funds and Centrepay
are to be directed to let customers participate in the School Meals
Programs available in various locations throughout Australia.

Aim of School Meals Programs

School Meals Programs are usually a breakfast and/or lunch service for
children attending school. Although primarily available in the Northern
Territory, this program is available in various locations throughout
Australia. The program aims to support improved school attendance,
learning and engagement. Many also provide job opportunities and
training for local community members.

SMP is available to all parents/carers, but the majority contribute
through Income Management (IM) or Centrepay.

There are a number of School Meals Programs in place that provide
children with food. These include school administered programs and the
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&C) funded School Nutrition
Projects (SNP).

All references to the School Meals Program refers to both PM&C and
non-PM&C funded programs.

Availability of School Meals Programs

School Meals Programs are not available at all schools. If the child is
enrolled at a school where a School Meals Program is available, Service
Officers should discuss participation in the program with the
parent/carer.

Cost of School Meals Program

The cost of a School Meals Program varies from school to school and is
kept to a minimum. When providers calculate the cost of delivering
School Meals Programs, allowances are made for a level of absences and
public holidays throughout the school year.

When paying for a School Meals Program from income managed funds, the
fortnightly cost is annualised over the school year including school
holidays. Payments are suspended from the customer's last Entitlement
Period End Date (EPED) prior to the end of Term 4, and recommenced from
the customer's first EPED after the commencement of Term 1 in the new
school year.

Customers can choose to pay a lower amount than the actual annualised
cost. However, the Service Officer must make the customer aware that
they may be contacted by the Third Party Organisation (TPO) if their
expense allocation is lower than the cost of the service.

Amounts owed for past periods

Customers may request to make payments from income managed funds to
repay amounts owed to Third Party Organisations (TPOs) for past periods.
TPOs cannot request action be taken to repay amounts.

Additional payments can be made to a School Meals Program by increasing
the customer's regular IM expense allocation, or making a one-off
payment. However, the regular expense allocation cannot be extended
beyond the Term 4 end date.

Flexible care arrangements

Payment for the School Meals Program would normally be made by the
parent or carer of the child who receives Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for
that child. However, if more flexible arrangements are in place around
the care of the child, others in or outside the community (for example,
grandparents and aunts) can also contribute to the cost of the School
Meals Program for a particular child.

Income Management - Determining priority needs

A customer's priority needs are reviewed throughout the period of IM. If
the review identifies any changes to a customer's priority needs, IM
expenses can then be updated. An assessment of priority needs must be
completed:

-   at the Initial Assessment interview
-   where there is a change in the customers' circumstances, for
    example, change of address
-   when a work item is raised indicating priority needs must be checked
-   when a customer requests a review of their priority needs

Where children are involved, it should always be considered that part of
the income managed funds should be used for food, including School Meals
Programs if such programs are available in a community.

School Meals Programs are not compulsory. However, if a parent does not
direct any income managed funds towards a School Meals Program, the
parent/carer needs to explain how they are meeting their child's daily
food needs. If the Service Officer is not satisfied a priority need is
being met, under legislation action must be taken to allocate the
customer's income managed funds to certain priority needs.

Income Management - Recalling Income Management funds

Parents/carers are responsible for ensuring their child/ren attend
school and collect their meals at the scheduled times, particularly
breakfast.

Customers contributing to a School Meals Program through IM must notify
Services Australia of any change in circumstances that affect a child's
ability to participate in the program. For example, the child has
transferred to another school or has been absent for an extended period.

Where a child is absent from school for periods of longer than five
consecutive school days, it is the responsibility of the customer
contributing to the program to notify the agency immediately of their
change in circumstances. Once notified, the agency can suspend the
payments for a period requested by the customer.

Customers must notify the agency if their child/ren transfers to another
school or community, so payments can be transferred to the new provider
or stopped if there is not a program in the new location.

Customers are not entitled to a refund of any contributions made to a
School Meals Program arising from a child's temporary absence from
school. Customers can also arrange for meals to be collected from the
school during short periods of absence.

The agency acknowledges extraordinary and unanticipated circumstances
may arise where a customer may have a reasonable claim to request
recovery of payments made to a School Meals Program. Due to
circumstances beyond their control, customers may have been unable to
notify the agency of an extended absence, or transfer to another school.

If a customer believes they have such a claim, the usual Income
Management recovery process will be applied.

Income Management – Reviews and Appeals

In addition to normal Services Australia’s review processes, customers
can request reviews of IM decisions, including the allocation and
management of their IM funds.

The Resources page contains:

-   action to take when an income managed customer requests to cease a
    regular expense allocation to the School Meals Program
-   descriptions of the override reasons used when an income managed
    customer requests to cease a regular expense allocation to the
    School Meals Program
-   relationship codes - a list of relationship codes and descriptions
    for the relationship between the customer and the child when adding
    a School Meals Program expense allocation
-   links in Office Locator for the National Business Gateway (NBG)
    Processing Team, PM&C and non-PM&C funded Third Party Organisations
    (TPOs)
-   a link to Northern Territory (NT) school term dates

Centrepay

Customers can make School Meals Program contributions via Centrepay.
Customers should confirm the fortnightly amount payable with their local
provider, as these payments are generally not annualised out over the
school year.

Payments made to a School Meals Program via Centrepay will only end at
the end of the school year if the customer requests an end date or
target amount to achieve this. It is the customer’s responsibility to
notify the agency when they want to suspend or end their deductions.
Customers may use any of the following tools to manage their deductions:

-   [] Express Plus mobile app
-   [] Online account through myGov
-   Contacting the agency by phone or in person
-   Contacting their SMP provider who will liaise with the agency

When a customer's payments are no longer income managed, they may choose
to transfer their IM expense allocation to Centrepay. Third Party
Organisations (TPOs) in the Northern Territory will not incur any
Centrepay fees to receive payments via this method.

Related links

Priority needs and expense allocation

Initial assessment of Income Management

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Recall of Income Management funds from a Third Party Organisation (TPO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
