
Identification and eligibility for Income Management 103-01020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines how eligible customers for Income Management are
identified.

On this Page:

System identification

Customers may be automatically identified for Income Management, or
referred to Services Australia for Income Management. Services Australia
is responsible for ensuring customers meet the basic eligibility
criteria for any of the measures to which they have been referred.

The system will identify customers who live in a declared Income
Management area who are:

eligible for Compulsory Income Management (CIM), Disengaged Youth (DEY)
and Long-Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measures

eligible under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure
because they are:

-   aged under 16 years and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   16 years of age or over and in receipt of an independent rate of
    Youth Allowance, Disability Support Pension or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance due to meeting the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    criteria
-   under the age of 25 and receive a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the
    last 13 weeks due to prison release
-   customers will not be identified for VWPR if they are full time
    students or apprentices, or currently on Voluntary Income Management
    (VIM). Note: if a customer's VIM ceases, they may be income managed
    under this category

potentially eligible for Nominee Income Management (NIM)

Income Management referring authorities

Customers may be referred to Income Management by a State or Territory
Child Protection Authority, a Supporting People at Risk approved
referring authority or the Family Responsibilities Commission (FRC).
Customers referred by one of these authorities will be income managed
under Child Protection, Supporting People at Risk or Cape York
Initiative measures respectively.

Vulnerable customers

Customers whose personal circumstances make them vulnerable or at risk,
will, upon being determined as suitable by a Services Australia social
worker, be placed on Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure.

Voluntary Income Management

Customers can volunteer for Income Management under the Voluntary Income
Management (VIM) measure. This measure should be promoted to customers
who would benefit from Income Management in areas where Voluntary Income
Management is available.

Approved referring authorities and external organisations can also refer
a customer to the agency for Voluntary Income Management (VIM), however
the customer is under no obligation to enter into a VIM Agreement or
attend any appointments.

The Resources page contains a link to further information about declared
Income Management areas.

Contents

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Auto Income Management and suspension of payments when a customer fails
to attend Initial Assessment interview

Related links

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Overview and hierarchy of Income Management measures

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Nominee Income Management

Cashless Debit Card under the Cape York Initiative

State/Territory Authority's role in Child Protection Income Management
(CPIM)

Approved Authority's role in Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income
Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
