
Payments to parents for ABSTUDY students under 16 years of age 103-04010020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines who receives the payments for ABSTUDY students
under 16 years of age and provides information about who is responsible
for debts incurred.

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance is payable for a dependent student under
16 years of age. The parent(s)/guardian(s) are referred to as the
applicant due to the student being under 16 years of age.

ABSTUDY Schooling B

Under 16 year old students are eligible for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award if
they are receiving the away from home rate, are independent or in state
care, as well as meeting other criteria. Independent students under 16
years of age, can receive their payments directly.

Payment destination

ABSTUDY School Term Allowance must be made directly to the
parent(s)/guardian(s).

Independent secondary students under 16 years of age can receive their
Living Allowance payments directly.

Dependent secondary school students under 16 years of age may have their
Living Allowance payments directed to their parent/guardian or where
requested by the parent/guardian, to a:

-   boarding school
-   private board provider
-   boarding hostel that is a signatory to the Standard Hostels
    Agreement

Only one payment destination can be nominated. Any disagreement between
two parent(s)/guardian(s) as to the payment destination must be
resolved. If the student is dependent on only one parent then Services
Australia will comply with that parent/guardian's request. While
payments must be made to a third party, School Term Allowance remains a
non-taxable amount.

Where there is a dispute or doubt about who is the parent/guardian,
investigations will be carried out to determine who is the most suitable
person to apply for ABSTUDY on behalf of the student.

Debts

Debts that may be incurred due to an overpayment are normally the
responsibility of the person who received the payment. This will
normally be the parent/guardian, however, it can also be an organisation
where it has been the recipient of the payment.

Related links

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Changing payment destination

Payments to parents for ABSTUDY customers aged 16-17 years

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
