-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines instances where a customer, financial institution
or third party may wish to return a payment due to it being received in
error or because the customer objects to receiving the payment. This
procedure details how to record these cash or cheque repayments.

Accepting returned payments and issuing receipts

Customers should be guided towards the following methods to make a cash
payment:

-   Internet - The customer can make payments via the Money You Owe
    option online within a Centrelink online account or via Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app. They can use a debit or credit card
-   BPAY® - The customer can make payments with BPAY® through their
    financial institution
-   Australia Post - The customer can make payments at any Australian
    post office or postal outlet
-   POSTbillpay - This is a phone or online payment made via Australia
    POSTbillpay
-   Mail - Mail a cheque to the Agency. Cheques are not a preferred
    payment option

Cash repayments should only be accepted where there is no other way for
the customer to make the lump sum repayment, for example:

they do not have a credit or debit card and there is no Australia Post
outlet nearby

the return is unsolicited and no payment reference exists to use
preferred methods. This happens where the customer:

-   objects to receiving a payment they are legally entitled to
-   returns a payment to maintain eligibility for another payment (i.e.
    returning a COVID-19 Disaster Payment to claim a higher state-based
    payment)

Normal cash repayment procedures must be followed including recording of
the receipt in ESSentials and updating the balance of the customer's
advance in Manage Advances in Process Direct when a cash payment is
received. The customer cannot repay more than the outstanding balance,
for example: if the balance is $67.67, the customer can only pay $67.65
if paying by cash and will need to wait for the outstanding $0.02 to be
repaid.

Receipts should be issued via ESSentials Production by staff with access
to the system. A manual receipt should only be issued if a printed
ESSentials Production receipt is not available.

-   If the repayment is for a debt, the repayment is receipted in
    ESSentials Production against that Debt ID. This will ripple back to
    the customer record and finalise the debt
-   In all other cases, the repayment is receipted in Essentials
    Production as an advance. A request must be sent to the Treasury
    Helpdesk to have the payment recorded as returned on the customer's
    record

The References page contains a link to the Corporate and Financial
Policy for receipting public money.

The Resources page contains links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk and
contact details for the Treasury Helpdesk.

Related links

Reissue a payment returned from a financial institution

Returned payments and their effect on family assistance reconciliation

Protection of customer payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
