
Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure 103-01180010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for Income Management
under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) measure.

VWPR Income Management

To be eligible for VWPR Income Management, customers must be in receipt
of a Category H welfare payment and:

-   reside in a VWPR Income Management area
-   not be income managed under a measure that is higher in the
    hierarchy of Income Management measures
-   not have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management purposes,
    and
-   have been assessed as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient by a
    social worker, or
-   be under 25 years and automatically identified for Income Management
    due to their circumstances

Social worker assessed VWPR Income Management

Services Australia social workers who are Income Management trained can
assess customers as Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients and place them
on Income Management.

If a social worker, who is not Income Management trained, receives a
referral for assessment they must:

-   contact a social worker at the customer's closest Income Management
    Service Centre, and
-   refer the customer for assessment

When determining whether Income Management is suitable for a customer
who has one of the following vulnerability indicators:

-   financial hardship
-   financial exploitation
-   failure to undertake reasonable self-care
-   homelessness or risk of homelessness

Social workers will consider:

-   whether the customer is meeting their and their family's priority
    needs, and
-   whether Income Management is an appropriate support tool for the
    customer to meet their responsibilities, build and maintain
    self-care and manage their finances

VWPR Youth Income Management

Customers will automatically be identified for VWPR Youth Income
Management if they are:

-   under 16 years and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   in receipt of the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH) rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance, or
-   under 25 years and received a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the last
    13 weeks due to release from prison or psychiatric confinement

Customers will not be identified for Income Management if they are:

full-time students or Australian apprentices

currently on Voluntary Income Management (VIM):

-   customers on VIM before being identified for VWPR Youth Income
    Management can remain on VIM
-   customers requesting to exit VIM who are eligible for VWPR Youth
    Income Management should be made aware that if they terminate their
    VIM agreement, they may be income managed under the VWPR measure
-   if the customer's payment is cancelled and is restored within 13
    weeks, VIM can be reinstated
-   if the customer's payment is cancelled and restored outside 13
    weeks, their circumstances will be reassessed and they may be
    eligible for VWPR Income Management

Exclusions from VWPR Youth Income Management

Customers are automatically granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income
Management if they have received less than 25% of their maximum basic
rate of payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights. This does
not include non-payment periods or reduced rates of payment due to
non-compliance. Customers can request to be assessed for this exclusion
if they believe they meet this criteria but have not automatically been
excluded.

A Services Australia social worker is only responsible for assessing an
exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management if:

-   Income Management would put the customer's mental, physical or
    emotional wellbeing at risk, or
-   it is not practicable due to Support and Demonstrated capacity, see
    Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable
    Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management by social
    workers

All other exclusion and exit categories for VWPR Youth Income Management
must be referred to the income Management Exemption and Assessment Team
(IMEAT).

Services Australia social workers who are Income Management trained can
assess customers for an exclusion from VPWR Youth Income Management.

If a social worker, who is not Income Management trained, receives a
referral for assessment, they must:

-   contact a social worker at the customer's nearest Income Management
    Service Centre , and
-   refer the customer for assessment

For information about eligibility for an exclusion and referrals for an
assessment, see Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service
Officers.

Duration of Income Management

Social worker assessed VWPR: A Vulnerable notice is generally for a
period of 12 months, however, a social worker can end the notice prior
to this date. After 12 months, a social worker will make a new
determination and may extend the notice provided the customer still
meets the criteria.

VWPR Youth - UTLAH and SpB-SUY customers: Income Management is for a
one-off period of 12 months. When a customer has completed 12 months,
they will be automatically exited from VWPR Youth Income Management.
Customers cannot be identified for Income Management under these
categories for a second time, however they may become eligible if they
receive a Crisis Payment upon release from prison or psychiatric
confinement.

VWPR Youth - CrP customers: Income Management will be for a period of 12
months. Eligibility for VWPR Youth Income Management under this category
can apply again after the initial 12 month period if the customer is
paid another CrP due to release from prison or psychiatric confinement.

Note: VWPR Youth customers' Income Management will end if they are
granted an exclusion or they no longer have the applicable trigger
reason and request to exit Income Management. However, Income Management
may be reinstated where the exclusion or ineligibility ends during the
12 month period. See the Resources page for examples.

Percentage of payments income managed

Under VWPR Income Management:

-   50% of a customer's regular fortnightly Category I welfare payment
    (which includes Category H welfare payments) are income managed, and
-   100% of lump sum payments are income managed

There are specific payments not income managed.

VWPR Income Management and DVA payments

The Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) administers payments which are
'Category H' payments and therefore eligible for VWPR Income Management.

The DVA Category H payments are:

-   Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement
-   Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Veteran Payment

DVA customers are subject to the same Income Management rules as
Services Australia customers.

It will be necessary to confirm that the customer receives one of the
DVA eligible payments and that they reside in an area where the relevant
measure is available. An Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) will
handle all DVA cases.

Customers who move from an Income Management area

If a customer moves out of a VWPR Income Management area after being
identified for or commencing Income Management under this measure, their
payments may still be income managed.

See Customer moves out of an Income Management area.

Reviews and Appeals

Customers who disagree with a decision relating to their Income
Management measure may appeal that decision. Normal review and appeal
processes apply.

Customers who have been assessed for VWPR Income Management by a social
worker can request a reconsideration of their VWPR Notice. This is
different from a request for a review of a decision as the customer is
seeking to have their circumstances reviewed by an Income Management
trained social worker to determine if they still meet the criteria as a
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient. Customers can request this review
every 90 days.

The Resources page contains examples of manual and automatic
identification for VWPR Income Management.

Related links

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management

Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
(VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management due to rate of payment

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments - social work

Overview and hierarchy of Income Management measures

Social Work Services

Initial Assessment interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients

Priority needs and expense allocation

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)
Income Management

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
