-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the manual assessment process for customers,
without dependent children, who apply for an exemption from Income
Management because they are studying or doing an apprenticeship, or they
have received less than 25% of the maximum basic rate of payment for 4
out of the last 6 fortnights.

On this Page:

Exemption from Income Management

Customers who are identified for Income Management, or are being income
managed, under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment
Recipient (LTWPR) measures can apply for an exemption from Income
Management.

For customers without dependent children an exemption recognises those
young people and long-term unemployed customers who have taken personal
initiative through participation in education or, training. Customers
are eligible for an exemption if they satisfy one of the following
criteria:

-   they are a full-time student or apprentice in receipt of Youth
    Allowance (YA), or
-   they have received less than 25% of the maximum basic rate of
    payment for 4 out of the last 6 fortnights

Exemption Assessments

Customers who have received less than 25% of the maximum basic rate of
payment for 4 out of the last 6 fortnights will automatically be granted
an exemption from Income Management.

Where an automatic exemption has not occurred for an eligible customer,
or the customer is requesting an exemption as they have commenced full
time study or an apprenticeship, the assessment and coding is completed
by the Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT).

Note: customers claiming an exemption under these categories do not need
to be transferred to IMEAT. The exemption will be assessed and recorded
by IMEAT based on information available on the customer’s record.

Period of exemption

The assessment of an application for an exemption is a point in time
decision, and is applied for a 12 month period, however exemptions may
be ended earlier where an individual's circumstances have significantly
changed. For example, a customer enrols as a full time student and
withdraws from the course.

Customers still eligible for Income Management may need to re-apply for
an exemption after the 12 month period if one is not automatically
granted.

Voluntary Income Management

Customers granted an exemption from Income Management under the DEY or
LTWPR measures can volunteer for Income Management.

Note: customers on Voluntary Income Management will revert to Income
Management under the DEY or LTWPR measure if their exemption ends and
they continue to meet the criteria for those measures.

The Resources page contains links to National transfer numbers, Access
Support Centre and customer 13 and 1800 numbers, and the Income
Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) in Office Locator.

Related links

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Identifying customers for Income Management under Disengaged Youth (DEY)
or Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measures

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

Voluntary Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
