
Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) 103-07060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of electronic transfer of Centrelink
payment summary details to the ATO.

Transfer of payment summary information

Services Australia has an ongoing agreement with the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) to provide them with Centrelink customer payment
information for reportable payments. This agreement is underpinned by
the Agencies legislative responsibility to report to the ATO under
section 16-153 of Schedule 1 of the Tax Administration Act 1953.

Transferring payment summary details to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

Payment summary information is only transferred to the ATO for the
financial year most recently ended:

-   Original payment summary information is sent in the first week of
    July each year
-   Amended payment summary information for the financial year most
    recently ended commences weekly from the second Wednesday in July
    each year

Note: customers are to advise the ATO of amendments for earlier years.
Amended payment summary information is sent to the customer using their
nominated correspondence channel.

Example: a payment summary amended on:

-   1 January for the previous financial year – amended details are
    automatically sent to the ATO and to the customer
-   1 January for a financial year/s other than the last financial year
    – the amended details are sent to the customer only.

Payment summary information is loaded into the ATO's online lodgement
services and used to prefill individual tax returns. This information is
available to registered tax agents. Customers who choose to lodge their
tax returns online can access their prefilled payment summary
information using the ATO’s online service myTax via myGov. For more
information on how to create a myGov account, see How customers create a
myGov account and link services.

What is Prefill?

The ATO pre-fills tax returns with financial details received from:

-   government agencies
-   health funds
-   banks and financial institutions
-   employers, and
-   other sources

Customers will find their Centrelink payment summary details pre-filled
by mid-July each year while pre-filling of other financial details may
take longer.

The ATO website has information about the availability of pre-fill
details, this is updated from 1 July each year. Customers can find this
by searching 'pre-fill availability'.

If a customer needs help or disagrees with the pre-filled information
they should call the ATO on 13 28 61.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Tax Office (ATO)
website

Payment summary information unavailable in myTax

If a customer’s Centrelink payment summary information is incomplete or
not available through myTax, it may be due to one of the following
reasons:

-   Centrelink has not transferred the payment summary information to
    the ATO yet (prior to the first week of July)
-   Customer is on a non-reportable payment
-   An error with the payment information has prevented Centrelink
    transferring the information
-   A system issue is preventing the matching between the Centrelink and
    ATO records
-   The information didn’t pass the ATO data quality checks

If a customer advises their Centrelink payment summary information is
not available through the ATO’s myTax service or it is incorrect, go to
the process tab to determine what advice you can provide.

What is a registered tax agent

A registered tax agent prepares and lodges tax returns on behalf of
their customer.

They must be registered with the Tax Practitioners Board. Customers can
check the Tax Practitioners Board website to see if their tax
practitioner is registered.

A registered tax agent could be a:

-   tax agent
-   Business Activity Statement (BAS) agent, or
-   tax (financial) adviser

For more information about registered tax agents, see Lodge with a
registered tax agent on the ATO website.

The Resources page contains links to information on the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) website for customers unsure if they are required
to lodge a tax return.

Related links

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

Centrelink Payment Summaries

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

How customers create a myGov account and link services

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
