-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the different measures of Income Management,
hierarchy of Income Management measures, and movement between Income
Management measures.

Income Management (IM) overview

IM works by setting aside a percentage of a customer's fortnightly
entitlement to certain payments. A percentage of a customer's welfare
payment is directed to meeting priority needs such as food, clothing and
accommodation. The remaining percentage of a customer's payments is paid
to them in the usual way to be used at their discretion.

Deductions such as child support and government debt repayments are
taken into account before payments are income managed. Income managed
funds are allocated on the customer's behalf to help pay for the
identified priority needs of the customer and their family.

For all measures, 100% of ABSTUDY (with Living Allowance or Pensioner
Education Supplement) payments and 100% of lump sum payments are income
managed. There are specific payments not income managed.

One IM measure to apply at a time

A customer’s payments can only be income managed under one measure of IM
at any one time, even though they may be eligible for multiple measures.
The hierarchy of IM measures outlines which measure should apply when a
customer is eligible for more than one measure at a time.

As a result of the hierarchy, a customer may cease to be eligible for
one particular measure of IM but may then continue to be income managed
under a lower measure.

Hierarchy of Income Management measures

A customer could be eligible for more than one Income Management measure
at the same point in time. In these cases, a hierarchy is used to
determine under which measure the customer will be income managed.

The hierarchy from highest to lowest measure is:

-   Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)
-   Supporting People at Risk (SPaR)
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
-   Compulsory Income Management (CIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long
    Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)
-   Nominee Income management (NIM)
-   Voluntary Income Management (VIM) Note: VIM is only higher than
    Nominee Income Management (NIM) if the customer has a current VIM
    Agreement. See Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Each measure can be applied only in the hierarchy order. For example, if
a customer is income managed under CIM but a Notice to Commence Income
Management is received from a State or Territory Child Protection
Authority, the customer will be transferred to CPIM.

If a customer's Income Management ends and they are eligible for a lower
measure, they will be income managed under that measure. For example, a
VWPR customer may have an underlying eligibility for Income Management
under the LTWPR measure. When the customer is no longer eligible for
VWPR, the customer will continue to be income managed under the LTWPR
measure.

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Customers in a declared Income Management area can be referred for
Income Management by a State or Territory Child Protection Authority.

Percentage of payment for IM

Under Child Protection Income Management, 70% of a customer's category I
welfare payment (which includes a category H welfare payment) is income
managed.

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR)

Customers can be referred for Income Management by an approved referring
authority. Currently this measure is only available in the Northern
Territory.

Percentage of payment for IM

Under Supporting People at Risk Income Management, 70% of a customer's
category I welfare payment (which includes a category H welfare payment)
is income managed.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)

There are two methods for identifying customers for Income Management
under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) measure:

VWPR Notice - a Services Australia social worker can determine a
customer is eligible for Income Management under this measure; and

Automatically identified VWPR - the following groups of customers will
automatically be identified for VWPR Income Management if they are not a
full time student or apprentice, or currently on Voluntary Income
Management, and are:

-   aged under 16 years and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   16 years of age or over and in receipt of an independent rate of
    Youth Allowance, Disability Support Pension or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance due to meeting the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    status, or
-   under the age of 25 and receive a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the
    last 13 weeks due to prison release

Percentage of payment for IM

Under Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management,
50% of a customer's category I welfare payment (which includes a
category H welfare payment) is income managed.

Compulsory Income Management (CIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

Customers in the Northern Territory will be identified as potentially
eligible for Compulsory Income Management (CIM) - Disengaged Youth (DEY)
and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR) based on their usual
place of residence, income support payment type, length of time in
receipt of an income support payment and age.

Percentage of payment for IM

Under the Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient
measures of Income Management, 50% of a customer's category E welfare
payment and category I welfare payment is income managed.

Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Customers in a declared income Management area can volunteer to have
their payments income managed because they need assistance with
financial management.

A State or Territory Child Protection Authority or approved referring
authority can also refer a customer to Services Australia for Voluntary
Income Management (VIM), however customers are under no obligation to
attend an appointment or enter into a VIM.

Note: VIM customers who later identify for an IM measure other than
VWPR, will transition to the later identified measure, in line with the
IM hierarchy. If VIM customers with underlying WVPR eligibility request
to exit VIM they should be made aware if they terminate their VIM
Agreement they may be income managed under the VWPR measure.

Percentage of payment for IM

Under Voluntary Income Management, 50% of a customer's category I
welfare payment (which includes a category H welfare payment) is income
managed.

Payment Nominee impact on Income Management

A principal for Income Management purposes will have their payments
income managed under the same compulsory measure as their payment
nominee, unless they qualify for a different Income Management measure
on their own.

For more information see Nominee Income Management.

Movement between IM measures

Customers may also move between IM measures when they:

-   transfer from the Disengaged Youth (DEY) measure to the Long Term
    Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR) measure. For example, customer
    turns 25 years old and satisfies all requirements including period
    of time on income support payments under the Long Term Welfare
    Payment Recipient (LTWPR) measure
-   are income managed under Compulsory Income Management (CIM), either
    the Disengaged Youth (DEY) or Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient
    (LTWPR) measures, and a referring authority refers them for Child
    Protection Income Management (CPIM) or the Supporting People at Risk
    (SPaR) measure
-   are no longer eligible for any of the compulsory measures of Income
    Management but choose to enter into a Voluntary Income Management
    Agreement
-   are no longer eligible for Income Management on their own, but they
    have a payment nominee who is subject to income management under a
    certain measure so are automatically transferred to Nominee Income
    Management
-   are on Voluntary Income Management and become eligible for one of
    the compulsory measures of Income Management (except customers
    automatically identified for the Welfare Payment Recipient measure)

Impact on IM funds when moving between measures

When a customer moves between IM measures without a break in the period
of IM, their expenses will continue to be paid, their BasicsCard will
remain valid and their IM balance will remain in their IM account.

Consideration needs to be given to any possible change in the IM
percentage that may result from moving between measures and the effect
this may have on the customer’s IM expenses. For this reason, when a
customer moves between measures Service Officers must check their
current IM expenses to ensure they are still meeting their priority
needs.

If a customer has been off IM for a period of time and a residual
balance has begun to be disbursed, when the customer is income managed
again, disbursement payments to the customer will stop. Any remaining
residual balance will be income managed again.

Interviews and letters

Where a customer is transferring from one measure to another, they
should have an interview to ensure:

-   they understand their requirements under the new measure
-   they are aware of any exemptions or exclusions from IM which may be
    available under the new measure
-   their priority needs are still being met, in particular where the IM
    percentage has changed, and
-   they are fully aware of their review and appeal rights

These interviews can be conducted face-to-face or by telephone.

The customer is also sent a letter to explain why they are transferring
from one IM measure to another.

The Resources page contains scenarios of a customer transferring between
measures and the impact of this on their expense allocations.

Customers move out of an Income Management area

Customers whose payments are currently income managed and who move
indefinitely or permanently outside of a declared Income Management area
will continue to have their payments income managed.

Customers who have been identified for Income Management, and move out
of a declared Income Management area before Income Management commences,
or provide a retrospective change of address, may still have their
payments income managed.

For more information see Customer moves out of an Income Management
area.

The Resources page contains a link to further information on declared
Income Management areas, and the Income Management intranet page.

Contents

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Initial assessment of Income Management

Related links

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Compulsory Income Management for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term
Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

Voluntary Income Management

Nominee Income Management

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
