
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Income Management (IM) and enhanced IM under the
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) measure.

The IM program closed to new entrants on 4 September 2023, customers
that are identified for welfare quarantining under this measure or move
between measures on the hierarchy and otherwise meet the eligibility
criteria to participate, must commence enhanced IM.

Customers on IM under the VWPR measure may choose to move to enhanced
IM.

VWPR IM and enhanced IM

To be eligible for VWPR IM or enhanced IM, customers must be in receipt
of an eligible welfare payment and:

-   reside within a VWPR Income Management area or enhanced IM location
-   not be income managed under a measure that is higher in the
    hierarchy of Income Management measures
-   not have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management and
    enhanced IM purposes, and
-   have been assessed as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient by a
    social worker, or
-   be under 25 years of age and automatically identified for Income
    Management due to their circumstances

Social worker assessed VWPR IM and enhanced IM

Services Australia social workers can assess customers as a Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient and place them on IM. Since 4 September 2023,
newly referred customers will be placed on enhanced IM.

When determining whether welfare quarantining is suitable for a customer
who has one of the following vulnerability indicators:

-   financial hardship
-   financial exploitation
-   failure to undertake reasonable self-care
-   homelessness
-   Social workers will consider:
-   whether the customer is meeting their and their family's essential
    priority needs, and
-   whether walfare quarantining is an appropriate support tool for the
    customer to meet their responsibilities, build and maintain
    self-care and manage their finances

Before referring a customer for welfare quarantining, social work
assessment Service Officers must ensure the customer resides in an IM
area or enhanced IM location or is currently subject to IM or enhanced
IM. For information on when social work referrals can be made for both
welfare quarantined and non-welfare quarantined customers, see the
Resources tab in Social work service referral

VWPR Youth Income Management and enhanced IM

Customers will automatically be identified for VWPR Youth IM and
enhanced IM if they are:

-   under 16 years of age and in receipt of a Special Benefit (SpB-USY)
-   aged 16 years or over and in receipt of the Unreasonable to Live at
    Home (UTLAH) rate of Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support
    Pension (DSP) or ABSTUDY Living Allowance or
-   under 25 years and received a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the last
    13 weeks due to release from prison or psychiatric confinement

Customers will not be identified for welfare quarantining if they are
full-time students or Australian apprentices, or currently on Voluntary
IM or enhanced IM.

Duration of VWPR IM and enhanced IM

-   Social worker assessed VWPR: A Vulnerable notice is generally for a
    period of 12 months, however a social worker can end the notice
    prior to this date. After 12 months, a social worker will make a new
    determination and may extend the notice provided the customer still
    meets the criteria
-   VWPR Youth - UTLAH and SpB-SUY customers: IM and enhanced IM is for
    a one-off period of 12 months. When a customer has completed 12
    months, they will end from VWPR Youth IM or enhanced IM. Customers
    cannot be identified for welfare quarantining under these categories
    for a second time, however they may become eligible if they receive
    a Crisis Payment upon release from prison or psychiatric
    confinement. IM and enhanced IM will continue for a customer outside
    an IM area or enhanced IM location area under the same rules as if
    they had remained in the declared IM area or enhanced IM location
    area, for the duration of the 12 month period. For more information
    see Customer moves out of an Income Management or enhanced IM area
-   VWPR Youth - CrP customers: IM and enhanced IM will be for a period
    of 12 months. Eligibility for VWPR Youth IM and enhanced IM under
    this category can apply again after the initial 12 month period

Note: VWPR Youth customers' IM and enhanced IM will end if they are
granted an exclusion.

VWPR Youth customers can request to end IM or enhanced IM if they no
longer have the applicable trigger reason VWPR Youth – UTLAH no longer
receiving UTLAH rate of payment or VWPR Youth-Crisis turns 25.

If a customer moves out of a VWPR IM area or enhanced IM location after
being identified for or commencing welfare quarantining under this
measure, their payments may still be income managed. See Customer moves
out of an IM or enhanced IM area.

Percentage of payments income managed

Under the VWPR measure:

-   50% of a customer's regular fortnightly eligible welfare payments
    are welfare quarantined, and
-   100% of lump sum payments are welfare quarantined

There are specific payments not quarantined.

Exclusions from VWPR Youth IM and enhanced IM

Customers will automatically be granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth IM
and enhanced IM if they have received less than 25% of their maximum
basic rate of payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights.
Non-payment periods or reduced rates of payment due to non-compliance
are not included when determining eligibility. However, customers may
request to be assessed for this exclusion if they believe they meet this
criteria.

The Income Management and Assessment Team (IMEAT) are responsible for
determining these exclusions for IM customers. Assessments for an
exclusion for enhanced IM customers will be assessed by enhanced IM
Service Officers who have additional access and undertaken training in
manual processes.

A Services Australia social worker is responsible for assessing all
other requests for an exclusion from VWPR Youth if:

-   Welfare quarantining would put the customer’s mental, physical or
    emotional wellbeing at risk, or
-   is not practicable due to Support and Demonstrated capacity

All other exclusion and exit categories for VWPR youth Income Management
must be referred to the Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team
(IMEAT).

All other exclusion categories for VWPR youth enhanced IM must be
referred to enhanced IM Service Officers who have additional access and
undertaken training in manual processes.

For more details about exclusions and referrals for an assessment, see
Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management and enhanced IM for Service
Officers.

Note: customers who have been assessed as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient by a social worker cannot apply for an exclusion. However,
these customers can request a reconsideration of their circumstances.
For more information see Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable
Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers.

Reviews and Appeals

Customers who disagree with a decision relating to their Income
Management measure may appeal that decision. Normal review and appeal
processes apply.

Customers who have been assessed for VWPR by a social worker can request
a reconsideration of their VWPR Notice. This is different from a request
for a review of a decision as the customer is seeking to have their
circumstances reviewed by a welfare quarantine trained social worker to
determine if they still meet the criteria as a Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient. Customers can request this review every 90 days.

The Resources page contains examples of manual and automatic
identification for VWPR Income Management and enhanced IM.

Contents

Determining and recording eligibility for Income Management and enhanced
Income Management as a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) by a
social worker

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management and enhanced Income Management
for Service Officers

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
Income Management

Reviewing, reconsidering and ending Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient
(VWPR) Notices assessed by social workers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management and enhanced Income
Management by social workers

Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare
Payment Recipient (VWPR) Income Management and enhanced Income
Management due to rate of payment

Related links

Hierarchy and movement between Income Management and enhanced Income
Management measures - Overview

Customer moves out of an Income Management and enhanced Income
Management area

Reviews of Income Management and enhanced Income Management decisions

Social work service referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
