-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purpose of Income Management and assists with
understanding its role in the Government's broader welfare reforms.

The Process page of this procedure is intended to act as an easy to use
directory of all Income Management pages.

Income Management

Income Management can be a tool in helping people stabilise their lives
by developing their financial management skills, so that they can care
for their children with the aim to join or return to the workforce.

Income Management involves setting aside a percentage of a customer's
entitlement to certain payments and 100 per cent of lump sum payments,
and allocating this money to help pay for identified priority needs of
the customer and their family.

Intent of this procedure

The Process page of this procedure is intended to act as an easy to use
directory of all Income Management pages.

The links are bundled into useful categories to assist navigation, like:

The top five most frequently accessed Income Management OB pages.

Useful links to general income management pages.

Listings of each Income Management Measure in a hierarchy of most
accessed/used by staff.

Each measure is subdivided into categories of;

-   Commencing IM
-   Exemptions from IM
-   Managing IM Funds
-   Priority Needs and expense allocations
-   Exiting Income Management

Income Management measures

The measures of Income Management are:

-   Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)
-   Supporting People at Risk (SPaR)
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)
-   Compulsory Income Management and enhanced Income Management for
    Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients
    (LTWPR)
-   Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Promoting responsibility and strengthening families

The Government's broader welfare reforms promote responsibility and
strengthen families. The Government is responsible for supporting
people, and in return, welfare recipients have a personal responsibility
to spend their payments appropriately. Income Management is a key tool
to address this strategy.

Income Management promotes responsibility by enabling disadvantaged
customers to better manage their finances. It ensures more money is
spent on essential items such as food, clothes, utilities and rent, and
less money is available for alcohol, tobacco, gambling and pornographic
material (excluded goods and services). It targets passive welfare and
provides a platform for customers to move up and out of welfare
dependency.

Income Management strengthens families because more money is spent on
the needs of children. Children are protected with less money available
for excluded goods and services. Income Management is a tool available
to the Family Responsibilities Commission, a State or Territory Child
Protection Authority, an approved referring authority, State Housing
Authorities and Services Australia social workers, where it is
determined the customer and/or their family will benefit from Income
Management.

The Resources page contains links to Income Management on the Department
of Social Services website and the Income Management home page.

Contents

Hierarchy and movement between Income Management (IM) measures -
Overview

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Priority needs and expense allocation

Managing Income Management funds

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Income Management and BasicsCard Work Items

Unified Government Gateway (UGG)

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Income Management debts

Cape York enhanced Income Management

Child Protection Income Management (CPIM)

Compulsory Income Management and enhanced Income Management for
Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Voluntary Income Management

Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) Income Management

Nominee Income Management

BasicsCard

Related links

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
