
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia delivers a variety of
payments on behalf of a range of government agencies.

Government intent

The agency delivers these payments to customers on either a weekly or
fortnightly basis (depending on the customer's circumstances). All
payments are passed to the Reserve Bank of Australia, who then transfers
the payments to the customer's financial institution (for example bank,
building society, credit union).

Payment delivery

Payment delivery refers to the mechanisms the agency used to deliver
payments to customers.

Customers are able to nominate the way in which their payment is
delivered. Payments are delivered by two methods; direct credit to a
bank account owned and operated by them, or to the bank account of an
appointed payment nominee. The majority of customers are paid on a
fortnightly basis but weekly payments are available to eligible
customers who need assistance with budgeting. See Weekly payments.

In some instances, payments may not be received by the customer or they
are returned by the bank and require a replacement payment to be issued.
See Reissue a payment returned from a financial institution.

There is also legislative protection for government payments that
restricts the amount of payments able to be used to repay an overdrawn
account or to repay a third party organisation.

Payment destination

It is a requirement that unless an exemption has been granted, all
payments must be paid to a bank, credit union or building society
account.  

-   Payment Destination
-   Changing Payment Destination

Payment system and arrears limit

When actioning work relating to the issuing of payments, staff should
always ensure they are processing the activity within the system that
applies to the payment (NSS for Jobseeker Payment, FAO for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB), PEN for Age Pension).

Each payment system has limits on the amount of arrears that can
automatically be issued in any one payment. If the amount is higher than
this, the payment will reject, and will need to be reissued.

-   System arrears limits
-   Reissuing a rejected payment

Pay strip process

For Direct Credit, a payment delivery stripping process applies each
week (working) day from 6 pm local time, which collects (strips) the
customer payment data, updates the customer record, and then sends the
information to the RBA.

To pay an eligible customer or nominee, all relevant processing must be
completed by the strip time.

Payments stripped and sent via the NSS system are delivered the next
working day, while all other systems (FAO, PEN, PGA) are delivered in 2
working days.

Holiday Processing allows for payments that are due to delivered on or
around a national public holiday to be stripped and paid to customers
earlier, to avoid financial hardship.

-   Payment delivery strip times

Entitlement Period End date (EPED)

All Customers have an EPED, which is the last day of the customer's
entitlement period.

The EPED is not the delivery date of the payment. NSS system payments
(Jobseeker Payment) are delivered to customer's 1 working day after
their EPED (EPED+1), while other system payments (PEN) will deliver 2
working days after the EPED (EPED+2).

What pay cycle a customer is on is identified via a code, corresponding
to each working day in a fortnight period (A, B, C, D, E, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6). These can be found in the Centrelink Payments Calendar to determine
the delivery day of a payment.

When a payment strips and delivers temporarily changes during Holiday
Processing arrangements.

-   Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Rejected payments

Payments may be marked rejected (REJ) where:

Delivery was via a priority direct credit method (NPP/RTGS) and it has
been rejected by the RBA or financial institution (because the service
is not available). Direct Credit payments may reject in rare cases. In
the case of a rejected NPP payment, the system will automatically
reissue the payment via RTGS or Direct Credit if RTGS is not available.
If a payment does not reissue automatically it will need to be manually
reissued via Direct Credit first, then reissued again via NPP, RTGS, or
EBT card.

Centrelink system rejected payments can occur where the payment has been
calculated but prevented from issue due to a system limitation or error.
For example, due to the amount reaching the arrears limit

-   Reissuing a rejected payment

Returned payments

A financial institution may return (RTN) a payment for a number of
reasons, but usually:

-   the BSB or account number are incorrect or the account is closed (an
    unsolicited refund), or
-   they have been requested to return the payment (see Request for
    Refund) by the agency, because it was sent to an incorrect account.

If a payment has been returned by the financial institution, and no
replacement payment was made, the return payment can be reissued once
the payment destination is updated.

-   Processing a returned payment

Request for Refund

A Request for Refund (RFR) can only be made to a financial institution
if the payment was sent to an incorrect account that the customer does
not have legal access to. This is sometimes referred to as a recall
request.

When an RFR is processed, a letter is issued to the financial
institution requesting they refund the full amount to Centrelink. If
they cannot refund the full amount, they should refund any portion that
remains in the account and also provide the name and address of the
account holder. This information is used to raise a debt on the
incorrect recipient of the funds. The RFR also initiates debt processes
to ensure the customer is not overpaid following replacement of the
payment, if the money is later returned.

A RFR may also apply after a customer has passed away.

-   Requesting the return of a direct credit payment, New Payments
    Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) made to an
    incorrect recipient
-   Requesting refunds from third parties
-   Requesting refunds and raising debts for payments made after death
    of customer

Replacement payments

If it has been determined that a payment was made to an incorrect
account or a payment was not received, the agency can 'replace' the
payment so that the customer is not put into hardship (while a Request
for Refund is being pursued). Where a payment was made to an incorrect
account, it should not be replaced until after the Request for Refund
has been made to the financial institution.

If a payment was replaced, but then some or all of the money is
subsequently returned from the financial institution, this is applied to
the debt to ensure the customer is not overpaid.

-   Replacement payments
-   Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
    Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments at a customer's request
-   Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
    Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from a financial
    institution
-   Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was
    returned from financial institution

Payment Adjustment screen (PYAJ)

The PYAJ screen is used to make payments where customers are owed
monies, but are unable to be generated due to system limitation or
system fault. Access and use of the screen is strictly monitored and
should only be used where other workarounds are not available.

-   Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Payment offsetting

Customers receiving an income support payment and also Carer Allowance,
Family Tax Benefit or Double Orphan Pension can choose to offset their
payments so they are received on alternating weeks.

-   Offsetting Family Tax Benefit, Double Orphan Pension and Carer
    Allowance

Immediate methods of payment

Payments can be issued 'immediately' in certain circumstances (such as
Urgent or Crisis payments) and will be delivered according to the
payment method chosen.

Note: if a payment is delivered 'immediately' via Direct Credit, then it
will still be subject to the 1 working day delivery time for NSS, or 2
working day delivery for other payments.

Of the priority direct credit options (NPP, RTGS), the system will
always default to NPP where the account is NPP-reachable. Priority
direct credit amounts are limited to $3000.

Payments should only be issued to an EBT Card where all other options
are unavailable or not appropriate.

-   Immediate methods of payment
-   Immediate payment by payment method direct credit
-   Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer
    (EBT) card
-   Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement
    (RTGS)
-   Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP)

Code of Operation: Recovery of debts

The Code of Operations is a non-legally binding agreement that prevents
financial institutions from taking more than 10% of a customer's income
support payment, even if their account is overdrawn.

-   Protection of customer payments.

Third party payments and deductions

Customers may also request that a payment be made to a third party. This
request must be made via a payment nominee arrangement and the request
must be in writing.

Third party payments can also be deductions that are to be taken out of
the customer's payment.

Customers are also able to request any deductions to be taken out of
their payments. Most requests need to be made in writing.

Payments to customers overseas

Customers who go overseas permanently have additional payment options
depending on the country in which the customer is living. These
customers are paid:

-   into an Australian bank account
-   into an overseas bank account (for some countries)
-   by cheque (from some countries where overseas bank account payments
    are not possible), or
-   by overseas payment voucher (OVP) (in exceptional circumstances
    only)

See Portability of payments and Delivery of payments to Centrelink
customers outside Australia.

Payment delivery to the customer's account

Payment delivery has been consolidated into two runs. These are:

-   overnight delivery for Newstart System (NSS) payments
-   36 hour delivery for Pension (PEN), Parenting Payment (PP), family
    assistance payments, ABSTUDY and Mobility (MOB) payments

The delivery of the payment is also dependent on the payment being
processed before the payment delivery strip times occur.

Payment reconciliation

Payment reconciliation is an automatic process performed daily to check
that the payments calculated for customers, match the actual payments
issued by the Payments System. If a discrepancy is identified between
calculated entitlement and actual payment delivered, a work item will be
created on the customer’s record to ensure the customer has not been
under or over paid.

Common reasons for a payment reconciliation discrepancy are:

-   Customers reporting late
-   Advance, Arrears or Urgent payments
-   Weekly payments
-   Holiday Processing

For information on actioning Payment Reconciliation DOCs see, Processing
Payment Reconciliation (PAYREC) DOCs.

Contents

Processing Payment Reconciliation (PAYREC) DOCs

Related links

Frequency of payments

Immediate payments

Payment deductions

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Income Management

Payment of arrears after reassessment and stopping a payment

Payment delivery strip times

Payment destination

Payments to third parties

Replacement payments

Protection of customer payments

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
