
Nominee arrangements under Income Management 103-01010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines nominee arrangements and the impact on Income
Management and the BasicsCard.

On this Page:

Payment nominee definition

For the purposes of Income Management, a payment nominee is a person or
organisation who has been nominated to receive payments on behalf of
another person (the 'principal'). A payment nominee includes:

-   an appointed nominee
-   the parent to whom payments for an under 18 year old Youth Allowance
    (YA) dependent customer are directed

A payment nominee is responsible for determining allocations from the
Income Management account of the principal. The BasicsCard can be issued
in the name of the principal or the payment nominee, however only the
payment nominee can request the card be issued in the principal's name.

Under 18 YA dependent customers

If the parent/guardian that is receiving payments for an under 18 year
old YA dependent customer is income managed, there is currently no
functionality for the YA customer (principal) to be income managed under
Nominee Income Management.

Service Officers should take the opportunity to remind YA customers that
once they turn 18, payments must be directed to an account in their own
name or a formal payment nominee arrangement must be made.

Note: the above restrictions relating to Nominee Income Management does
not affect a YA customer's eligibility for Income Management in their
own right.

Customer has a payment nominee

The appointment of a payment nominee can affect eligibility for Income
Management. All Income Management measures prohibit a customer being
placed on Income Management if they have an excluded payment nominee. An
excluded payment nominee is defined as a payment nominee, under a formal
payment nominee arrangement, who is:

-   a public trustee, or
-   an individual who is not income managed, or
-   an organisation

If the customer has an excluded payment nominee for Income Management
purposes and are currently on Income Management, they need to be
manually exited.

A customer may become eligible for Income Management again if their
payment nominee becomes income managed, they cease their payment nominee
arrangement or they appoint a payment nominee who is income managed.

Where a customer has a payment nominee who is on Income Management under
the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at Risk (SPaR) or
Compulsory Income Management (Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients) measures, they will be income managed under the same
measure as their payment nominee unless they are eligible under another
measure in their own right.

Reviewing payment nominee arrangements

In all circumstances, whether a customer is or becomes a payment
nominee, or has or appoints a payment nominee, and either the principal
or payment nominee is referred to or identified as eligible for Income
Management, a review of the payment nominee arrangement should occur to
ensure the arrangement is in the best interests of the principal.
Further, if at any time there is concern that a nominee arrangement is
not in the best interests of a customer, the appointment must be
reviewed. For information on Nominee reviews refer to Reviewing nominee
arrangements.

Customer's referred for Income Management under the Cape York, Child
Protection, Supporting People at Risk or Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient measures, who have a payment nominee arrangement, or request a
payment nominee arrangement, must have the appointment investigated to
determine if the arrangement should be suspended, revoked or rejected,
regardless of whether the nominee is an excluded payment nominee.

The removal of a payment nominee for Income Management will not be
suitable for all customers. As part of the decision making process, the
Service Officer will need to consider the customer's ability to manage
their discretionary funds and assess if other alternatives such as
Centrepay may be better able to assist the customer.

Care should be taken to ensure that the appointment of a payment nominee
is not as a direct result of the customer avoiding Income Management.

Payment nominees and the BasicsCard

A payment nominee can decide to have the principal issued with the
BasicsCard. The system identifies that a customer has a payment nominee,
and can choose to have the BasicsCard issued in the principal's name
rather than their own.

Should the payment nominee decide to have the card assigned to the
principal, the principal will need to sign the BasicsCard receipt.

Note: if an under 18 year old Youth Allowance customer is income managed
in their own right, and wishes to have the BasicsCard issued in their
parents name and the parent approves, the under 18 year old Youth
Allowance customer must appoint their parent as a formal payment
nominee.

Balance on Receipt (BOR)

If a payment nominee decides to have the BasicsCard issued in their name
they will be able to 'opt in' or 'opt out' of Balance on Receipt.

Should the payment nominee decide to have the BasicsCard issued in the
principal (customer) name then the principal should be asked if they
would like to 'opt in' or 'opt out' of Balance on Receipt.

Note: there are a group of national retailers that are BasicsCard
Balance on Receipt merchants. These merchants have the functionality to
print BasicsCard balances on EFTPOS receipts for customers.

Customer is a payment nominee

An income managed customer currently acting as a payment nominee may
result in the principal also being income managed.

When an income managed person is a payment nominee and is on Income
Management under the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at
Risk or Compulsory Income Management (Disengaged Youth and Long Term
Welfare Payment Recipients) measures, the principal's payments will also
be income managed through their payment nominee. The principal will be
income managed under the same measure as the payment nominee, unless
they are eligible under another measure in their own right.

Note: customers on Nominee Income Management under the Disengaged Youth
or Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient measures are not eligible to
apply for an exemption.

Customers who are payment nominees and become eligible for Income
Management under the Cape York, Child Protection, Supporting People at
Risk (SPaR) or Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient measures, must have
their appointment reconsidered to determine whether the arrangement is
appropriate. Payment nominee arrangements should be cancelled or revoked
if not in the best interests of the principal.

Role of correspondence nominee

Under all of the Income Management measures, correspondence nominees
can, where there is no payment nominee, generally act in place of, or on
behalf of, the customer in the application of Income Management.

If a correspondence nominee requests to enter or exit Voluntary Income
Management on behalf of the principal, Services Australia must confirm
the principal (customer) is in agreement with the instructions of the
correspondence nominee prior to commencing or ending an Income
Management Agreement.

A correspondence nominee can terminate the Voluntary Income Management
Agreement verbally at any time after completing the mandatory 13 week
period, by contacting the agency.

In some circumstances, a correspondence nominee can act in place of a
principal.

Appointment and removal of payment nominees

The appointment and removal of payment nominees should take into account
the following:

-   Payment nominee arrangements are not used as a way to avoid Income
    Management
-   How the customer came to be referred to Income Management
-   Whether the current nominee arrangements are in the best interests
    of the customer and their children
-   Any negative consequences of the direct payment of the customer's
    discretionary funds to the customer

The Resources page contains a table summarising which nominees can be
issued a BasicsCard and make allocations and sign forms and statements
on behalf of the customer.

Related links

Overview and hierarchy of Income Management measures

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

BasicsCard

Nominees

Nominee Income Management

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Nominee Income Management (NIM) processing for National Business Gateway
(NBG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
