
Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY 103-04010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information and coding procedures for payments to
third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY.

On this Page:

Payments to third parties

In some circumstances ABSTUDY payments are directed to third parties
such as educational institutions, secondary boarding schools or hostels.
All ABSTUDY payments that are directed to third parties are required to
be approved ABSTUDY payees based on the customer's circumstances.

Examples of payments to third parties include

-   Payments for a secondary school boarding student made direct to the
    boarding school or hostel
-   School Fees Allowance payments made direct to the school
-   Payment of course fees or Student Contribution (previously Higher
    Education Contribution Scheme (HECS)) for Masters and Doctorate
    students made direct to the University or to the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO)

Note: ABSTUDY allowances must not be paid to an unapproved payee. If the
ABSTUDY allowances have been incorrectly paid, the money will be
requested back from that third party.

Manual issue of ABSTUDY arrears

To generate arrears manually for boarding and tuition payment or if
staff are unable to generate an arrears payments to education
institutions or service providers, these payments should be made through
the Centrelink Education Payment System (CEPS). The Process page
contains more information.

ABSTUDY boarding instalment payments

ABSTUDY secondary school students boarding at a school, or at a hostel,
that is a signatory to the ABSTUDY Standard Hostels Agreement must have
their payments delivered to the school or hostel.

Payments are made to boarding institutions as ABSTUDY boarding
instalments:

-   The first instalment is delivered to the school or boarding
    institution on the designated default pay date. This is in the
    fourth week of the school term in each state or territory, providing
    the school or boarding institution has confirmed that the student
    has commenced
-   The second instalment is delivered near the end of the school term
    without the need for the school to advise about a student’s
    enrolment or attendance.

Payment on Advice is the name of the process for schools and boarding
institutions:

-   which advises Services Australia of term commencements dates for
    ABSTUDY away from home students in order to receive ABSTUDY boarding
    instalment payments, and
-   is a debt prevention process that ensures accuracy of payments to
    the schools and boarding institutions and dramatically reduces
    instances of overpayments

The Resources page contains a link to the CEPS - Third party payment
form, ABSTUDY request for private board provider details form, and to
the Accounting Operations Section intranet page.

Related links

Payment of Residential Costs Option (RCO) for ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Payment of tuition fees or Student Contribution for ABSTUDY Masters and
Doctorate study

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) at home rate (Group 1)

ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance (SFA) (Group 2)

Creating and updating Organisation records for ABSTUDY purposes

Payment on Advice for ABSTUDY away from home rate

Changing payment destination

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
