-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the situations when fines can be paid from income
managed funds.

Payment of fines

Fines are generally not priority needs. Fines (including court fines,
fines from local government authorities such as councils or police
departments (for example, parking fines)) can however be paid from a
customer's income managed funds if the Services Australia delegate is
satisfied that the person's priority needs have been met now and into
the reasonably foreseeable future, and there are income managed funds in
excess of priority needs expenses available.

Prospect of imprisonment for non-payment of fine

Where a person has an immediate prospect of being imprisoned for
non-payment of a fine and does not have any other funds from which the
fine can be paid, the test of whether priority needs have been met
should be made having regard only to the immediate unmet needs of the
person, their partner, their children or their other dependants (rather
than current and reasonably foreseeable).

The immediate unmet needs would normally relate to food, housing, School
Meals program, clothing and health needs. If these immediate priority
needs have been met, then the fine can be paid with the person's income
managed funds. Payments in these circumstances would generally be
one-off payments. Customers in these circumstances should be referred to
the relevant organisation to renegotiate their arrangements (with the
assistance of a Services Australia social worker where necessary).

CPIM and the Cape York Initiative

Under Child Protection Income Management (CPIM) and the Cape York
Initiative, the relevant authority submits a notification to Services
Australia via the Unified Government Gateway (UGG) and may recommend
where income managed funds should be directed, however Service Officers
are not required to comply with the recommendation.

Existing Centrepay arrangement

If a customer has an existing Centrepay arrangement in place to pay for
a fine, and it cannot be transferred to an Income Management expense as
the customer does not have sufficient funds after basic needs are met or
the relevant organisation does not accept Income Management funds, the
customer is strongly encouraged to keep the Centrepay arrangement in
place. There can be serious consequences for customers that do not
maintain an existing payment arrangement including loss of license or
even imprisonment.

If a customer requests that an existing payment arrangement cease, the
Service Officer should discuss with the customer how they are going to
meet their payments in future. The customer should be strongly
encouraged to contact the relevant organisation to come to an
alternative arrangement.

Duty of care

Agency delegates have a duty of care to ensure that these payments
continue where possible. Service Officers must clearly DOC and record
via the Priority Needs screen or Expense Notes (as applicable), their
reasons for making any adjustments to fine payments and whether these
are being made through Centrepay deductions or Income Management funds.

Related links

Priority needs and expense allocation

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Urgent payment requests from Income Management customers

Initial offer or replacement of BasicsCard

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
