
Payments to parents for ABSTUDY students aged 16-17 years 103-04010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about payments to parents for ABSTUDY
students aged 16-17 years.

On this Page:

General information

Living Allowance for a dependent 16 or 17 year old student must normally
be paid to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of that student. However, in
certain cases, payments may be made to an institution or directly to the
student.

Payments made to a third party

Students approved for away from home entitlements have strict rules
governing the payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY. This includes
boarding organisations receiving full student entitlements. While
payments may be made to a third party they remain the taxable income of
the student.

Payments made to parents

Only one payment destination can be nominated for payments to parent(s)
or guardian(s). Any disagreement between the two parent(s)/guardian(s)
as to the payment destination must be resolved. If the student is
dependent on only one parent, Services Australia will comply with that
parent's request. If it is not possible to choose between the
parents/guardians on the basis of custody, Services Australia will ask
the student to nominate which parent/guardian receives payment.

At the discretion of the parent/guardian (that is, a reason is not
required), the parent/guardian can change/direct the payments to the
dependent ABSTUDY recipient's bank account. The request from the
parent/guardian can be given verbally or in writing.

Payments made directly to student

Payments can be directed to a 16-17 year old student without parental
advice if either:

-   the young person is not benefiting from the allowances because the
    payee is using it for other purposes, or
-   the payee has left Australia temporarily and the young person cannot
    access payments.

The student will be required to provide written details of the grounds
for an exemption from having payments made to their parents.

Where a 16-17 year old student is studying a secondary non-school,
tertiary or Masters and Doctorate level course, payments must be made to
a bank account in the student's name. Note: a student can choose payment
via the Residential Costs Option and direct payment to the residential
college, with the student receiving a reduced fortnightly payment.

Overpayments

Debts that may be incurred due to an overpayment are the responsibility
of the person who received the payment.

Related links

Payments to third parties and institutions for ABSTUDY

Under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) customer wants to stop payment
going to parents

Payment of away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
