
Death of an income managed customer 103-01060010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes to be followed upon the death of an
income managed customer.

Legal Personal Representative

When notified of an income managed customer's death, Service Officers
are to ask the person notifying of the death if they know the customer's
Legal Personal Representative (LPR). Where known, documentary evidence
is to be provided to Services Australia.

Release of information

When a person advises they are acting on behalf of a deceased customer,
and they request details of the remaining Income Management account
balance, Service Officers are to verify the person is one of the
following before any information is given:

-   the deceased customer's Legal Personal Representative (LPR)
-   next of kin, or
-   the person who has paid for the deceased customer's funeral expenses

If verification is not possible, an application can still be made for
the residual funds, providing they cannot be paid directly to the
customer's last known payment destination, or that of their payment
nominee (if applicable).

Disbursing residual balances

When an income managed customer passes away, the full residual balance
will be disbursed to the last known payment destination on the
customer's record when the Notification of Death guided procedure is
completed.

If the customer had a current payment nominee, the full balance will be
disbursed to the payment nominee.

IMPACT investigation

Where there are returned payments from a financial institution, the
residual balance will remain in the deceased customer's Income
Management account, and the options available for disbursement will be
pursued by the Income Management Payment and Contact Team (IMPACT).

IMPACT will liaise with the relevant Zones to investigate how residual
funds can be disbursed.

Cultural considerations

Service Officers are to be aware of cultural considerations which need
to be considered as customers from different cultural or religious
backgrounds may react differently to the death of a loved one. For more
information, see Cultural considerations when someone dies.

Late notification of death

Where funds have been credited to a customer's Income Management account
after their date of death (payments continuing to be made due to late
notification), this portion of income managed funds can be used to
offset the debt incurred due to the late notification of death.

The Resources page contains links to the Income Management Policy
helpdesk webform, Income Management intranet page, and contact details
for the Income Management Payment and Contact Team (IMPACT).

Related links

Initial contact after someone has died

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ceases

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Bereavement and family assistance payments

Bereavement and Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)

Bereavement and Parenting Payment (PP)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

BasicsCard close an account

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
