
Varying the restricted percentage for Cashless Debit Card (CDC) 103-03150020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Local Community Panels can consult with
participants to review the percentage of funds restricted to their CDC,
and how the restricted percentage is updated by the CDC Processing Team.
This only applies to CDC participants in Ceduna and the surrounding
region, and the East Kimberley. There are no local Community Panels for
CDC participants in the Goldfields region, the Bundaberg and Hervey Bay
region, the whole of the Northern Territory or Cape York.

On this Page:

Default, minimum and maximum restricted percentages

Up to 80% of regular fortnightly and 100% of lump sums and arrears of
restrictable payments will be restricted and paid to the customer's CDC.
The remaining 20% will be paid to the customer's normal bank account.

The minimum amount which may be restricted by Local Community Panels is
50% and the maximum amount is 80%. This is only available to
participants in Ceduna and the surrounding region, and the East
Kimberley region, Western Australia.

Review process

In consultation with the participant, Local Community Panels will have
the ability to review an individual's impacts on the community and
adjust the restriction percentage paid to the customer's CDC.

All CDC participants in Ceduna and the surrounding region and the East
Kimberley region (including voluntary participants), can only have their
restricted percentage changed through the Local Community Panel in their
area. An application form to apply for a percentage change is available
from the Department of Social Services (DSS) website. See Resources for
a link to the DSS website.

The customer will receive a letter from Services Australia advising them
of any changes to their restricted percentage.

Local Community Panels are not available in the Goldfields region in WA,
the Bundaberg and Hervey Bay region in QLD, the whole of the Northern
Territory or Cape York, so CDC participants from these regions do not
have any options to vary their restricted percentage.

The Resources page contains a link to the CDC intranet page, and links
to the Services Australia, Department of Social Services and Indue
websites.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Participation in the Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

Income Management customers in Cashless Debit Card areas (CDC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
