-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Residential Costs Option (RCO) available to
ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) recipients.
This allows students living in a residential college or hostel to have
their fees paid directly to the accommodation provider.

Students living in residential college or hostel

ABSTUDY and ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) students may
choose to have their residential fees paid directly by Services
Australia to their accommodation provider, while receiving a reduced
rate of Living Allowance or nil rate of PES during the relevant period.

There is no set upper limit on the residential costs payable by ABSTUDY
for approved students who choose the RCO. Services Australia must ensure
residential charges are reasonable, particularly where a large
proportion of the students are in receipt of ABSTUDY support. The full
residential fees will be paid by Services Australia regardless of the
student's Living Allowance or ABSTUDY PES entitlement.

Residential costs include:

-   accommodation fees
-   meals provided
-   laundry charges, and
-   other compulsory fees

Residential costs do not include bonds or other refundable fees.
Non-refundable deposits may be requested by a Residential College or
Hostel to be paid prior to the student commencing or resuming studies to
secure their accommodation.

A residential college can charge a student up to an additional four
weeks if they exit early. Students must negotiate with the residential
college to have the additional costs reduced. Students may qualify for
Additional Assistance if they have been unable to reduce the costs.
Additional Assistance will only be approved if the:

-   student and/or family would experience significant hardship, and
-   student is at risk of withdrawing from education or training

For further information, see ABSTUDY Additional Assistance

Note: some residential institutions do not provide meals, therefore you
may see a charge on the residential fees account or invoice for 'Living
Allowance'. This component is payable under Meals Provided and is used
to support the student with their day to day living costs.

Eligibility for Residential Costs Option

To be eligible for the residential costs option students must be:

eligible for one of the following ABSTUDY Awards:

-   Schooling B Award
-   Tertiary Award, or
-   Masters & Doctorate Award, and

be either:

-   a tertiary student
-   a secondary non-school student undertaking approved studies of at
    least 30 weeks duration (full year course) at a university, or
-   a student undertaking a university preparation course as a pathway
    into further substantive tertiary study, and

be receiving either:

-   an amount of ABSTUDY Living Allowance, or
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), and

either:

-   a dependent student who has been approved for Away From Home
    entitlements
-   an independent student or a PES recipient who would, if they are not
    independent or a PES recipient, meet one of the criteria for
    approval of Away from Home entitlements, or
-   a student who has ceased being in State care only because of their
    age, and

be residing at a residential college attached to an Australian education
institution, or a hostel

Financial viability of Residential Costs Option

As well as being convenient, the RCO may be financially favourable to
some students but not to others. Students must compare the costs
carefully. In addition to having the residential costs covered, students
receiving Living Allowance are paid a maximum of $41.60 per fortnight.
ABSTUDY PES students are not eligible for the reduced rate of Living
Allowance. These students forfeit their PES payments during the period
residential fees are charged.

The Relocation Scholarship (RS) and Indigenous Student Success
Programmes (ISSP) for relocation and/or accommodation costs are normally
not payable for the same scholarship period the RCO is paid. Therefore a
student must carefully consider the amount of the Relocation Scholarship
or the ISSP for relocation and/or accommodation costs payable when
determining whether to take up RCO.

Living Allowance recipients who take up RCO, will have the appropriate
income tests applied to the full fortnightly rate of Living Allowance.
The income tests are:

-   student
-   partner
-   parental

This means Living Allowance recipients who take up RCO will receive the
lesser of:

-   $41.60 per fortnight, or
-   the student’s normal fortnightly Living Allowance entitlement,
    including any amounts of Rent Assistance, Pharmaceutical Allowance
    or Energy Supplement (the amount they would receive after the
    application of the student, partner and parental income tests)

Note: the residential fees component of the RCO is not subject to a
means test

Periods when residential fees are being charged

Residential fees will be paid for the whole period that is being
charged, where a contract has been negotiated and an invoice from the
residential college is provided.

The student's normal rate of ABSTUDY Living Allowance at the Away From
Home or Independent rates, or the normal rate of ABSTUDY PES, is payable
for periods during which residential fees are not being charged.

Taxable income

For students who take up the RCO, only the Living Allowance entitlement
is assessable as taxable income of the student.

Indigenous Student Success Programme (ISSP)

From 1 January 2017 the ISSP superseded the Indigenous Commonwealth
Accommodation Scholarship (CAS) and Commonwealth Education Costs
Scholarship (CECS). Universities can offer the Indigenous CAS or CECS
under the ISSP.

Receipt of an ISSP for relocation and/or accommodation costs precludes a
student from receiving RCO for the same scholarship period.

Students receiving the ISSP for educational costs only can receive RCO
for the same scholarship period.

Students are required to provide confirmation of the ISSP and whether
the ISSP is for education costs or relocation and/or accommodation
costs.

See Commonwealth Scholarships.

Indigenous Commonwealth Accommodation Scholarship (CAS)

From 1 January 2017, the ISSP superseded the Indigenous CAS. An
Indigenous CAS including the ISSP for relocation and/or accommodation
costs is payable to a qualified student directly from their higher
education provider (usually a university) to assist with the costs of
living away from home to study. Receipt of an Indigenous CAS including
the ISSP for relocation and/or accommodation costs precludes a student
from receiving RCO for the same scholarship period.

Indigenous Commonwealth Education Costs Scholarship (CECS)

From 1 January 2017, the ISSP superseded the Indigenous CESC. An
Indigenous CECS including the ISSP for education costs is payable to a
qualified student directly from their higher education provider (usually
a university) to assist with education costs. Receipt of an Indigenous
CECS including the ISSP for education costs does not preclude a student
from receiving RCO for the same scholarship period.

Indigenous Access Scholarship (IAS)

Some students are offered an Indigenous Access Scholarship (IAS) from
the university or higher education provider. IAS is a one-off payment to
assist Indigenous students to undertake an enabling course,
undergraduate course or graduate diploma. IAS alone does not preclude a
student from receiving RCO. However, students who receive IAS may also
receive an Indigenous CAS at the same time which would preclude them
from receiving RCO.

Payment of RCO during semester breaks

If a student opts to remain in their residential college or in a hostel
during semester breaks, RCO can continue to be paid. Living Allowance
and ABSTUDY PES will continue to be payable at the appropriate reduced
or nil rate.

Payment of RCO while overseas

If a student travels overseas, they may lose qualification for ABSTUDY
during the period they are overseas. This will not affect the
residential fees so long as the student meets all other eligibility
requirements. See Eligibility for RCO on the Process page for more
information.

Students Impacted by COVID-19

During the COVID-19 pandemic, which occurred in Australia from March
2020, some students living in a residential college or hostel and
receiving RCO were required to leave their accommodation.

Students can receive Away from home rate of Living Allowance for the
period coronavirus prevents them from returning to on-campus
accommodation, if they:

-   were receiving the RCO rate
-   were required to return home temporarily due to coronavirus
-   remain enrolled in the course of study and the education institution
    is not charging residential fees for the period

See Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY.

The Resources page contains examples of when RCO may or may not be
advantageous to the student. It contains a link to the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet scholarship page, and examples to determine
whether RCO is payable to a student who has already received a
Relocation Scholarship for the same period.

Related links

Commonwealth Scholarships

Coding away from home rate for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
