
Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions 103-08030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax
deductions can be created, changed and ceased from a customer's taxable
income support payment. It also explains the how customers can manage
deductions from Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Potential Tax liability from Disaster and Emergency payments

Some payments made in a Disaster/Emergency event (including Pandemic)
may be taxable, but not directly reported by the Agency to the ATO. This
means these payments will not appear on customers Payment Summaries.
It’s important that customers who received these payments are aware they
need to declare them if they are required to lodge a tax return in the
financial year in which they were received.

Receiving these taxable payments may also lead to some customers having
a taxable income that exceeds the relevant thresholds. If so, they may
have to lodge a tax return and pay income tax, the Medicare levy, or
both.

Customers who received these extra payments and are unsure if they will
have a tax liability. Are encouraged to set up a Tax Withholding. See
Process for more information.

Tax Deductions

A customer can request to have tax deducted from their taxable income
support payment voluntarily.

Customers who get a taxable income support payment may also have income
from employment or other sources. This means their total income for the
year may exceed the relevant tax free threshold and/or Medicare Levy
threshold. At tax time they may find they owe an amount to the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO). This can be reduced or avoided if they
have tax deducted from their Centrelink payment throughout the financial
year.

Setting up a tax deduction can be especially important for customers who
have earnings or are expecting to return to employment, to help them
avoid a potential debt with the ATO. Customers may qualify for some tax
offsets which reduce the amount of tax they must pay, but the offsets
don’t reduce the Medicare Levy.

To have tax deducted from their payment, customers receiving a taxable
income support payment need to nominate the amount they want to be
deducted.

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) payments have a
default tax rate of 15% applied when their claim is completed. Customers
can nominate another percentage during the claim process.

When tax deductions are taken out of a customer's payment, their
Centrelink Payment Summary displays the total amount of taxable
Centrelink payments and the amount of tax withheld.

Note: this does not include customers receiving PPL from their employer,
these customers will need to contact their employer to discuss their tax
deduction rate.

Tax, add-ons and other supplements

Tax deductions are taken from basic amount of the taxable income support
payment first and then other taxable components.

How to manage tax deductions from income support payments

How to create tax deductions:

Customers can request tax be deducted by completing the appropriate
question in their claim. It is essential to check this question when
recording information from a claim for payment. PPL and DAP claims will
automatically default to a tax rate of 15%.

Income support customers can also request tax deductions be taken out of
their taxable income support payment at any time by:

-   [] Self-service - Centrelink online account or Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app
-   Verbally - Face to face at a Service Centre or by calling their
    usual payment line and speaking with a Service Officer
-   Writing - Completing a Tax Deduction Authority form (SU066) or by
    letter

The customer will specify the date of commencement and the fortnightly
amount they want deducted. Customers can choose the fortnightly amount
as a dollar value (in whole dollars) or by nominating a percentage
(rounded down to the nearest dollar).

How to change tax deductions:

Customers can change a tax deduction at any time. The change will take
affect from the customers next pay period.

A customer can request to change an existing tax deduction by:

-   Writing - Completing a Tax Deduction Authority form (SU066) or by
    letter
-   [] Self-service - Centrelink online account or Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app
-   Verbally - Face to face at a Service Centre or by calling their
    usual payment line and speaking with a Service Officer

How to cease tax deductions:

Customers can cease a tax deduction at any time. The cessation will take
affect from the customers next pay period.

A customer can request to cease an existing tax deduction by:

-   Writing - Completing a Tax Deduction Authority form (SU066) or by
    letter
-   [] Self-service - Centrelink online account or Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app
-   Verbally - Face to face at a Service Centre or by calling their
    usual payment line and speaking with a Service Officer

How to manage tax deductions from PPL and DAP

Payments delivered by Services Australia

The default tax deduction rate for PPL and DAP delivered by Services
Australia is 15%. Customers can nominate a different tax deduction rate
between 0% and 50% for these payments, when they claim and by:

-   [] Self-service - Using the PPL or DAP Circumstance option in
    Centrelink online account
-   Verbally - Face to face at a Service Centre or by calling their
    usual payment line and speaking with a Service Officer
-   Writing - By letter

Changes to the nominated tax deduction rate for PPL and DAP only affects
payments that have not yet stripped.

Note: if a customer has multiple PPL claims (for example, if they have a
newborn or newly adopted child and have not finished receiving Flexible
PPL for an older child), the tax deduction rate is applied to payments
for both claims. Customers cannot nominate different deduction amounts
for the different claims.

Payments delivered by employers

In most cases, payments of the PPL period and connected Flexible PPL
days are delivered by the customer’s employer.

If the customer wants to change the tax deduction rate for these
payments they must contact their employer to discuss their tax deduction
rate.

Date of effect for tax deductions

The date of effect for a tax deduction cannot be earlier than today's
date and it must be within the next 28 days, if a date is not entered
the start date will default to the customer's Entitlement Period End
Date (EPED)

How much tax should be deducted

Customers must determine the amount of tax they want deducted. Customers
can visit the ATO website and use the 'tax withheld for individual's
calculator' to help them work out the amount. The Resources page
contains a link to the ATO website.

The amount requested to be deducted must be whole dollars with a maximum
of $99999, or for PPL and DAP, a percentage rate of up to 50%.

The Resources page contains links to the Tax Deduction Authority (SU066)
form (used for income support payments only) and to the Australian Tax
Office (ATO) website and a table which identifies how a customer
creates, changes and ceases tax deduction depending on the taxable
payment they receive.

Related links

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Refunding Australian Taxation Office (ATO) excess tax deductions

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Customer notifies a change in circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
