
Recording an end date or target amount on a Centrepay deduction 103-09030060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for adding, changing or removing an
end date for a Centrepay deduction, and the process to set up Centrepay
deductions with a target amount.

On this Page:

Adding or varying an end date on a Centrepay deduction

[] Customers can add end dates to their deductions via their Centrelink
online account and Express Plus Centrelink mobile app account. These are
the preferred methods for customers to use.

A customer may request for a Centrepay deduction to be ceased from a
specified date up to 12 months in the future. This requires an end date
to be added to the deduction. An end date may be coded when coding a new
deduction, or added to an existing deduction. This end date may be
changed or removed at the request of the customer. When the end date has
been reached, the deduction will automatically cease.

Target amounts on Centrepay deductions

[] Customers can add target amounts to their deductions via their
Centrelink online account and Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
account. These are the preferred methods for customers to use.

A customer may request a Centrepay deduction to be paid to a Centrepay
business until a specific amount has been paid. This is known as a
target amount, and allows the customer to have a deduction that will
automatically cease when the nominated amount has been reached, at which
time the customer will be advised in writing. Target amounts can be
added when a new deduction is set up or added to an existing deduction.
As with other deductions, the deduction or target amount can be changed
or cancelled at any time. If a deduction has a target amount and the
final deduction is set to pay less than $2, the last two scheduled
deductions will be combined into one final deduction amount.

Target amounts being added to a customer’s Centrepay deduction must be
greater than $10, however the customer may have to check with the
business in case they specify a higher minimum target amount. Customers
requesting to remove only the target amount and for their Centrepay
deduction to continue, must have their deduction cancelled and restarted
as a new deduction without a target amount. See Starting, changing and
cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request of a customer for more
details.

Involuntary Nominee arrangements

In all instances of an involuntary nominee arrangement, service officers
must contact the nominee or the customer's case manager from the public
trustee to obtain approval to process any requests from the customer to
start, change or cancel a Centrepay deduction. For further information
on this process see Starting, changing and cancelling a Centrepay
deduction at the request of a customer.

Related links

Starting, changing or cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request of
a business

Starting, changing and cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request
of a customer

Documents and Statements option online

Deduction Statement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
