-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the issue of a Centrelink
entitlement to a person located overseas who is not paid a regular
payment by direct deposit (to either a bank account in Australia or
overseas) or cheque. Historically, an Overseas Payment Voucher (OPV) was
issued but this ceased from 2021.

One-off special payment via the SF030 form

The Notice to prepare a Refund Account (SF030) form is to be used to
request the issue of a special one off payment to a Centrelink
beneficiary. The beneficiary may be a customer or former customer who is
living overseas and who does not have a current payment record or
Australian bank account (for example, a customer who is entitled to
arrears from a family assistance reconciliation but who has left
Australia prior to that reconciliation). The SF030 form must also be
completed if a bereavement payment and/or arrears is to be issued to the
executor of the estate or the non-pensioner partner of a deceased
customer.

The SF030 form must be used by Centrelink International Services (CIS)
to request to pay overseas medical bills or to make adjustments to
certain types of direct embargo.

Payment methods available

Beneficiaries residing outside Australia can only have the one-off
payments issued to:

-   a Worldlink Wire (WWR) payment to overseas bank, or
-   an Australian bank account

Cheque payments are no longer available.

Responsibility for requesting overseas bank account details

All staff can obtain information from the beneficiary, including contact
details and country where they have their bank account located (where
they would like the payment to be issued to them).

Due to the complexities with overseas bank account details, only staff
in Centrelink International Services (CIS) are to request overseas bank
details from the beneficiary and prepare the SF030 form.

Payment will be issued by the Zone Tas Finance team via their finance
system.

The Resources page contains a link to the International Program
homepage.

Related links

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

New Zealand embargoes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
