
Coding Income Management expenses 103-01040070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 17 March 2021, Income Management (IM) customers based in the
Northern Territory (NT) can permanently transition to the Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) program. Customers on an income support payment who are
living in the NT and are not currently on IM, will be able to volunteer
for the Cashless Debit Card (CDC) from this date.
For more information on this process or to initiate an IM to CDC
transition, see Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
Transition in the Northern Territory, which also contains staff
resources and links to the transition overview Intranet page for
additional information.

This document outlines the required action when an Income Management
customer requests to commence, cease or vary a regular expense, or a
one-off payment using income managed funds.

On this Page:

Income Management expenses

A customer may contact requesting a change to their Income Management
expenses such as:

-   adding, varying, or cancelling a regular expense to a contracted or
    un-contracted Third Party Organisation (TPO)
-   requesting a one-off payment to a contracted or un-contracted TPO
-   adding, varying, or cancelling a regular BasicsCard expense (for
    BasicsCard Partial Payment method only)
-   transferring a Rent Deduction Scheme or Centrepay deduction to an
    Income Management expense
-   requesting a lump sum payment towards a Services Australia debt
    using income managed funds
-   requesting payment of a personal debt using income managed funds
    (for example, where priority needs have been met by the use of a
    personal credit card)
-   paying for travel for themselves or family members by air, rail, bus
    or another approved method
-   requesting a one-off purchase for a motor vehicle

Requests, not covered in this procedure, include customers:

-   accessing funds while travelling
-   paying court fines using Income Management funds, or
-   adding or varying Schools Meals Program expenses

Ranking of priority needs

Under Child Protection Income Management (CPIM) and Supporting People at
Risk (SPaR) measures, the referring authority may recommend where income
managed funds should be directed. Social workers who assess a customer
as Vulnerable for the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Income
Management can also recommend how income managed funds could be
directed.

Service Officers are not required to comply with the recommendation, but
should document how these needs will be met when conducting an
assessment of reviewing a customer's priority needs.

Reviewing priority needs

When commencing, varying or ending a regular expense, Service Officers
should ensure the customer's priority needs continue to be met. For more
information, see Changes to Income Management priority needs.

Any review of priority needs should include a review of voluntary
deductions (Centrepay and Rent Deduction Scheme payments). This will
identify whether any deductions can be changed to an Income Management
expense, or a duplication of payments.

To conduct these reviews, an understanding of how to determine a
customer's priority needs is required.

Customer changes their EPED

Whenever a customer changes their Entitlement Period End Date (EPED),
regular expenses should be updated to align with the change as this does
not occur automatically.

Payments from Income Management for a Consumer Lease Agreement

Payments to consumer lease providers can be paid from the Income
Management funds. However, before commencing any deductions, inform the
customer about resources available to help them make a decision about
consumer leases and alternatives which include:

-   using the Rent vs buy calculator
-   layby
-   No Interest Loan (NILs)
-   applying for an advance payment (if eligible)
-   a StepUP Loan (low interest loan)

See the Resources page for links.

Income Management and nominees

A payment nominee is responsible for determining allocations from the
Income Management account of the person for whom they are a payment
nominee. A BasicsCard can be issued to the payment nominee, or the
payment nominee can decide to have the card issued to the customer.
Should the payment nominee consent to the card being assigned to the
customer, the customer is required to sign the BasicsCard receipt.

A correspondence nominee cannot be issued with a BasicsCard. A
correspondence nominee can, where there is no payment nominee, generally
act in place of, or on behalf of, the customer in the application of
Income Management.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Locator for relevant contact details for staff and customers
-   the Rent vs buy calculator
-   NILs and StepUP Loan web pages, and
-   a list of Income Management Deduction Service Reasons, examples of
    when customers have insufficient funds, contact details for external
    agencies that can help customers with consumer rights issues

Related links

Payment of Schools Meals Program (SMP) expenses from Income Management
funds or Centrepay

Income Management customers accessing funds while travelling

BasicsCard offer and issue of initial BasicsCard

Payment of fines from income managed funds

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Restricted Direct Payments (RDP)

Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCPs)

Work Items and messages for Income Management

Income Management Summary Screen

Expense Management Summary screen

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
