
Effect on Income Management when payment is suspended, on zero rate, cancelled, or an Unemployment Non-Payment Period applied 103-01050080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a customer, who is subject to Income
Management, has their income support payment suspended, put on zero rate
or cancelled, or a serious failure period or Unemployment Non-Payment
Period (UNPP) has been applied.

Payment ceases other than cancellation

When a customer whose payments are income managed, has their income
support payment suspended, a serious failure period, or UNPP applied, or
the customer has a current zero rate, and the customer cannot be
contacted, all Income Management allocations will continue to be paid
until income managed funds are exhausted or Income Management ends.

Payment of expenses cannot be backdated

Payment of expenses cannot be backdated. Expenses cannot be
retrospectively set up and paid for a period in the past. After the
payments are restored, if the customer wants to 'catch up' on missed
expenses they will need to make a one off payment or increase the amount
of their future regular expenses to pay off the 'debt' amount they were
unable to pay during the period of suspension, subject to income managed
funds being available.

Suspensions

A customer's payment may be suspended 28 days after Auto Income
Management commences as they did not attend their Initial Assessment
interview. In these cases, upon restoration of their payments, the
customer must complete the Initial Assessment interview and placed on
'Manual' Income Management.

When payment is cancelled

When the customer's income support payment is cancelled, Income
Management will automatically end, and the expense allocations will
continue to pay for 14 days. The expenses will then automatically
cancel.

If the customer has insufficient funds available in their Income
Management account, upon cancellation, regular expenses may cease
earlier than 14 days.

If cancellation of a customer's payment results in the customer no
longer being eligible for Income Management, Service Officers should
disburse the income management funds.

When cancelling an Income Management customer's payment, a clear
explanation of the reason for the cancellation must be documented.

Note: a Child Protection, Cape York, Supporting People at Risk or
Vulnerable Notice will remain 'Active' on a customer's record even where
Income Management ends until the notice is revoked by the relevant
authority (Child Protection, Supporting People at Risk and Cape York),
or ended by a social worker (Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients).

Automatic cancellations

For cancellations that occur automatically, the Auto Disbursement rules
will be used where the customer has funds in their Income Management
account and they do not attend a Disbursement interview within 60 days
of Income Management ending.

Customers' income managed under the Cape York Initiative, Child
Protection Income Management and Supporting People at Risk measures will
no longer have Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payments income managed when
their income support payment is cancelled and they do not have a partner
who receives relevant income support payment.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for the Income
Management Contact Officers (IMCO), Cape York Team (Remote Servicing)
and the Office Locator National transfer, and 13 and 1800 numbers.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Identifying income managed customers and hand off protocols

Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted

Auto Income Management and suspension of payments when a customer fails
to attend Initial Assessment interview

Death of an income managed customer

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

Disbursement interview for Child Protection Income Management

Disbursement interview for Voluntary Income Management

Identification and eligibility for Income Management

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Cancellation, Suspension and Restoration

Actioning Unified Government Gateway (UGG) requests

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
