
Lump sum repayment of advance payment 103-05040050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers process a
lump sum repayment of an advance payment. A customer is able to make
repayments via credit or debit card using their Centrelink online
account or via Post Billpay at any Australia Post outlet.

This document does not apply to Advance payments for Home Equity Access
Scheme loans.

Repayment of advance and outstanding amounts

Discuss the reason for making the lump sum advance repayment, as it may
cause an unexpected disadvantage to the customer if they have not fully
considered the impacts.

If the customer wants to repay the outstanding advance payment in order
to apply for a new advance payment, ensure that the amount is paid in
full. If there will be rounding amounts outstanding after the repayment,
these amounts will be recovered from the next payment and may continue
to impact on any new advance payment application. These amounts cannot
be waived and must be recovered, as the customer still has a legal
liability to repay the full advance amount. This applies even if the
amount outstanding is less than $0.05.

Making repayments using Centrelink Online Services or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

[] Customers are able to make repayments to their advance payments using
their Centrelink online account. Payments can be made using either a
debit or credit card.

These repayments will be accepted immediately as paid and on the
customer's record, allowing the customer to be granted, if otherwise
eligible, a new advance payment.

Customers should be strongly encouraged to use their Centrelink online
account to make a repayment in the first instance.

Customers are also able to print an Australia Post Billpay barcode from
their online account which they can take to an Australia Post outlet to
make a payment. If the customer is using the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app, the barcode can be saved to the vault.

Staff will be able to:

-   make repayments on a customer's behalf using the Advance Payment
    Online Account
-   print an Australia Post Billpay barcode using the Advance Payment
    Online Account

The customer does not need to have an online account for the service
officer to use the staff online view on their behalf.

FTB advance payments

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB) advance payments, an outstanding advance
balance of less than $0.05 is disregarded in the system calculation of
the maximum advance amount available to the customer, but is still
payable and will be deducted from the customer's next payment of FTB
Part A. Therefore, the customer will be able to access a further FTB
advance amount whilst they have an outstanding residual FTB advance
amount of less than $0.05.

Repaying outstanding advance to obtain a new advance

A customer may wish to repay an outstanding advance in order to obtain a
new advance that is only slightly higher. This is a form of credit
cycling that may indicate that the customer is experiencing financial
hardship. A referral to Financial Management Support Services may be
more appropriate in these circumstances.

Service Officers are not to accept a repayment that is greater than the
amount outstanding, even by a few cents, as the repayment will not
record correctly on the system.

Service Officers must ensure the customer is certain they wish to
proceed with the repayment. Once the outstanding balance of the advance
payment shows as fully recovered, it can take up to 7 days to reverse
the transaction and refund the money to the customer. This is because
Services Australia must receive the payment before it can be refunded to
the customer. See Refunds of lump sums paid.

Note: before accepting/making the lump sum repayment for any advance
payment type, it is important to check that there are no other barriers
that may prevent a new advance payment being granted. If the customer
will not be able to get an advance payment following the lump sum
repayment of an outstanding advance payment, then consider whether
accepting the repayment is appropriate.

Repaying an advance payment early will not allow a pension customer to
receive another one unless the advance payment has been outstanding for
a period over 13 fortnights from the date of grant.

Balance transfers

A customer may contact to advise that they made the repayment on the
wrong advance and would like to have the funds transferred to the
correct advance. Payments can be transferred if:

-   the customer requests the transfer within 24 hours of the payment
    having been made (take into consideration only working days when
    calculating this timeframe)
-   another advance payment (of the same type) has not been granted
-   transfers can only be completed between advance payments of the same
    benefit type

Refunds of lump sums paid

[] A customer may make a lump sum repayment using their Centrelink
online account under the belief that they will be able to immediately
access a new advance of a higher amount. Once the repayment has been
made, the customer will then discover they are not eligible for either
the advance or the amount they expected.

The funds cannot be refunded to the customer until the payment has been
received by Services Australia (that is, the funds have been credited to
the agency's bank account and are not just pending transfer). It can
take up to 7 days for the funds to be returned to the customer's
financial institution.

Payments made should only be refunded in exceptional circumstances, as
the customer must complete a check box that states 'I acknowledge that
paying off an advance today may mean I am not entitled to another
advance immediately'.

Payments can be refunded if:

-   the customer requests the transfer within 24 hours of the payment
    having been made (take into consideration only working days when
    calculating this timeframe)
-   another advance payment (of the same type) has not been granted
-   the customer will be in severe financial hardship if the payment is
    not refunded

The payment will be refunded into the customer's recorded payment
destination (where their regular payments are made) except for credit
card payments which are to be refunded back to the credit card, this
action will be done by the specialist team.

If a previous advance has been over-recovered, the excess funds are to
be repaid to the customer by the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen. See
Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment. A refund must not
be requested.

Cash repayment procedures

Cash repayments should only be accepted where there is no other way for
the customer to make the lump sum repayment, for example, they do not
have a credit or debit card and there is no Australia Post outlet
nearby.

Normal cash repayment procedures will need to be followed including
recording of the receipt in ESSentials and update the balance of the
customer's advance in Manage Advances in Process Direct when a cash
payment is received. The customer cannot repay more than the outstanding
balance, for example: if the balance is $67.67, the customer can only
pay $67.65 if paying by cash and will need to wait for the outstanding
$0.02 to be repaid.

Mobility Allowance advance payments

Exception: Mobility Allowance advance payments cannot be repaid early.
There is no provision to allow for or accept such repayment action.
Service Officers should not, under any circumstances, accept or process
cash, or any other forms of payment, from customers wanting to repay
Mobility Allowance advance payments. Mobility Allowance advances can
only be repaid if they were initially paid to the customer in error.

The Resources page contains the RBA Portal and scenarios that outline
issues and solutions to ensure the correct action is taken on a
customer's record when an advance payment is repaid.

Related links

Advance Payments for non-pension customers

Advance Payments for pension customers

Advances

Advance Payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Work items for advance payments

Request to vary repayment of advance payment

Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security advance payment

Helping customers to build their financial capability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
