
Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's request 103-04040060

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process if a customer makes contact to advise
the Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card has been lost, stolen,
damaged, or deactivated by the Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) network,
the Personal Identification Number (PIN) does not match the EBT card, or
the PIN has been lost.

On this Page:

Services Australia responsibility

A customer may dispute an ATM transaction took place or that the funds
were received in full. The agency has a responsibility to make sure the
customer's payment is replaced (if eligible) as soon as possible.

Residual balance

If the customer has a Manual Follow-up, stating an EBT card has a
residual balance follow the procedure in Electronic Benefits Transfer
(EBT) cards with a residual balance.

Nominee or third party

For customers who have payments made either via a nominee or a third
party, the replacement payment would be made to the nominee or third
party. Unless the nominee or a third party agree for the payment to be
made to the customer.

Before reissuing the payment

Before reissuing the payment to the customer, the Service Officer must
check:

-   the EBT card was activated and correct PIN was issued
-   the EBT card's balance via the EBT Card Summary (EBSM) screen
-   for any reported problems with the ATM network or Financial
    Institution branded machines via an internet search
-   the EBT cards transaction (EBTH) screen for discrepancies, and
-   if the customer is entitled to the payment

Preferred method of delivery is via Direct Credit, New Payments Platform
(NPP) or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS), which can be processed by
Smart Centre staff.

Note: if a customer has a Managed Service Plan (MSP) in place on their
record and is prohibited from attending a service centre, then
alternative methods of delivery of the replacement payment such as
direct credit, NPP, RTGS or payment nominee may be more appropriate.

Balance disputes

If the customer disputes the balance, an investigation into the EBT
card's transactions must be completed. Escalate cases to ICT by
following normal escalation procedures. ICT will advise if payment can
be reissued to the customer.

Note: no payments should be issued without the approval of ICT.

Reissuing or blocking the payment

Reissuing the payment to the customer will automatically cancel the EBT
card. If the customer is not entitled to the payment, the payment can be
permanently blocked. The most common reason for there being no
entitlement to the payment is in the case of a prisoner who was not
released as expected. It is also possible to temporarily block a payment
from reissue.

The Resources page has links to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online
Query Form, mySupport and the Record of Electronic Benefits Transfer
(EBT) card issue (SS292) form.

Related links

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card with a residual balance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
