-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Since 4 September 2023, no new customers are eligible for Voluntary
Income Management, only Voluntary enhanced Income Management. For more
information, see Changes to Income Management (IM) and enhanced Income
Management

This document outlines Income Management (IM) under the VIM measure.

The VIM measure should not be confused with the voluntary enhanced
Income Management (VeIM) measure under the enhanced Income Management
(enhanced IM) program. The IM program is a similar, but not the same
program as the enhanced IM program. For more information, see Enhanced
Income Management (enhanced IM).

The IM program closed to new entrants on 4 September 2023, which means
that customers who request to have their income support payments income
managed and who otherwise meet the eligibility criteria to participate
in the enhanced IM program must commence enhanced IM.

Since 4 September 2023, VIM customers can choose to move to enhanced IM.
It is important to note that, given the closure of the IM program, when
these customers move from IM to enhanced IM, they will not be able to
return to IM, regardless of reason. For more information, see Voluntary
enhanced Income Management (VeIM).

Requesting IM

A customer may request to have their payments income managed because
they need assistance to meet financial responsibilities for themselves,
their children and/or families.

If the customer was eligible at the time of their request (that is,
prior to 4 September 2023), they commenced IM under the VIM measure.

If they subsequently became eligible for any another IM measure, that
measure took precedence over VIM as VIM was ranked the lowest in the
hierarchy of IM measures.

Since 4 September 2023, if they become eligible for another measure,
they become eligible for that measure under enhanced IM, and therefore
move to the enhanced IM program.

Eligibility criteria

Customers needed to request to be income managed, and be eligible to
participate in IM under the VIM measure prior to 4 September 2023, to
have been eligible to enter into a VIM Agreement with the agency.

They also needed to:

-   be in receipt of a category H welfare payment
-   live in a declared IM area
-   not have an excluded payment nominee for IM purposes
-   not terminated a previous agreement in the last 21 days, and
-   not had more than 4 terminations of an agreement in the preceding 12
    months

Duration

A compulsory period of 13 weeks applies when a customer enters into a
VIM Agreement.

Customers may terminate the VIM Agreement at any time after completing
the mandatory 13 week period, by contacting the agency.

Services Australia can also terminate the VIM Agreement if certain
events occur.

Ending VIM

If the customer’s payment is suspended or cancelled whilst their VIM
agreement is active, they will be placed on VIM again if that payment is
restored or re-granted within 13 weeks of the suspension or cancellation
date.

However, if their payment is restored or re-granted 13 weeks after the
suspension or cancellation date, the customer will be given the option
to either cease their VIM Agreement, or enter into a voluntary enhanced
IM agreement (which will entail the customer’s move from IM to enhanced
IM as a new customer).

For more information, see enhanced Income Management.

Quarantined percentage

The following payments are income managed under this measure:

-   50% of a customer's regular fortnightly Category I welfare payments
    (which includes Category H welfare payments)
-   100% of ABSTUDY (with Living Allowance or Pensioner Education
    Supplement (PES)) payments, and
-   100% of lump sum payments are income managed

There are specific payments that are not income managed.

VIM and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payments

DVA administers payments, such as Category H payments, that serve as
trigger payments for the purpose of IM.

The DVA administers the following payments:

-   Service Pension
-   Income Support Supplement
-   Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)
-   Age Pension paid by DVA
-   Veteran Payment

DVA customers are subject to the same IM rules as Services Australia
customers. The provision of this service is controlled by the Memorandum
of Understanding between the DVA and Services Australia.

Before commencing VIM, the agency confirmed that the customer received
an eligible DVA payment, and that they resided in an area where VIM was
available. An Income Management Contact Officer (IMCO) handles all DVA
cases.

The Resources page contains further information about declared IM areas,
and contact information for customers who receive a DVA Category H
payment, and requested to be income managed.

Contents

Voluntary Income Management eligibility

Initial Assessment interview for Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Disbursement interview for Voluntary Income Management

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Voluntary enhanced Income Management (VeIM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
