-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine financial vulnerability as part
of an assessment for an exemption from Income Management for customers
with dependent children.

On this Page:

Initial assessment

There are two parts to the process for assessing an Income Management
exemption for customers with dependent children under the Disengaged
Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients categories (LTWPR).

This procedure is the first part of the process. A Service Officer in
the Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT) will conduct
an interview with the customer and make a determination as to whether a
customer has shown signs of financial vulnerability over the 12 month
period immediately preceding the exemption request.

The Service Officer will base their decision on such things as whether a
person has been meeting their and their family's priority needs, has a
pattern of expenditure to meet these needs, has control over their
money, is not open to financial exploitation, and did not regularly
require urgent funds to pay for foreseeable costs.

Assessment factors

Service Officers will make a holistic assessment of the customer's
circumstances and will not rely solely on one indicator of financial
vulnerability. Each factor should be considered, and those that are
relevant taken into account. Factors to consider in building an overall
picture of the customer's financial circumstances and to form the basis
of discussion with the customer prior to a determination being made
include:

-   financial exploitation
-   demonstrated budgeting and savings
-   Centrepay deductions
-   Income Management expense allocations
-   BasicsCard replacements
-   declined BasicsCard transactions
-   changes to Entitlement Period End Date (EPED)
-   urgent payment applications
-   courses to learn or update financial skills (including Money
    Management courses)

If it is determined that the customer is not financially vulnerable, the
customer is then required to provide evidence of responsible parenting.
This is the second part of the process for assessing an Income
Management exemption.

The Resources page contains examples of Financial Vulnerability
Indicators and determining rejection dates.

Related links

Customers requesting exemption from Income Management

Recording Exemption Service Offer for customers with dependent children

Requirements for an exemption from Income Management for customers with
dependent children

Providing evidence and finalising the assessment for an exemption from
Income Management for customers with dependent children

Determining a person's priority needs for Income Management

Compulsory Income Management and enhanced Income Management for
Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
