
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details about Centrepay, a voluntary bill-paying
service that is free for customers to pay their bills directly from
their Centrelink payments.

On this Page:

What is Centrepay

Centrepay is a voluntary bill-paying service that is free for Centrelink
customers. Centrepay was established in 1998.

The objective of Centrepay is to help customers in managing expenses
that are consistent with the purposes of their welfare payments, and
reducing financial risk, by providing a facility through which, a
customer can authorise Services Australia to deduct regular amounts from
their welfare payments to pay their bills to an approved business.

Deductions are made before any balance of the welfare payment is
deposited in the customer’s nominated bank account.

Centrepay can be used to pay for a range of expenses including:

-   accommodation
-   education
-   health
-   legal and professional services
-   utilities
-   travel and transport
-   household
-   social and recreational
-   financial products

See the Resources tab for a copy of the Centrepay Procedural Guide for
Businesses. This provides a list of Centrepay approved and excluded
goods and services.

The agency does not guarantee that any payments will be made to a
business through Centrepay. Any payment to a business is dependent on
there being available funds to make deductions. If there are
insufficient funds available to make a deduction in full, a partial
deduction will be made.

Managing Centrepay Deductions

A Centrepay deduction may be started, changed, or cancelled by:

-   [] using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   [] using the Centrelink online account
-   calling the smart centre
-   attending a service centre, or
-   a customer providing consent to a Centrepay Business to manage their
    Centrepay deduction via Centrelink Business Online Services (CBOS)

The preferred method for customers to manage their Centrepay deductions
is via Service Australia's self service options using their Centrelink
online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app account.

Centrepay uses letters and SMS messaging to keep customers informed and
to help them manage their deductions.

Resources contains a list of correspondence issued and in which
circumstances.

Centrepay for Businesses

Centrepay is free to use for Centrelink customers. However businesses
must pay a transaction fee to the agency of $0.99 for each deduction
paid to them. This fee is usually deducted by the agency from the
payment made to the business. Under the Centrepay Policy and Terms a
business must not pass this fee onto the customer.

For businesses wishing to apply for Centrepay, see Processing a
Centrepay Business Application.

Centrepay enquiries

The National Business Gateway - Centrepay helpdesk provides ongoing
support to approved Centrepay businesses.

The Resources page has links to National Business Gateway – Centrepay
helpdesk, Deduction and Confirmation Branch - Centrepay Intranet pages,
the Services Australia website for general information on Centrepay for
both customers and businesses.

Contents

Centrepay customer interactions

Centrepay Business interactions

Centrepay overpayments

Centrepay Program Assurance - Framework

Business and organisation search tools

Related links

Starting, changing and cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request
of a customer

Starting, changing and cancelling a Centrepay deduction at the request
of a business

Centrepay overpayment recovery

Billing at Source or Billing in Arrears for Centrepay

Customer requests Centrepay account statement

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
