-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can access their income managed
funds as cash, paid directly into their personal bank account to form
part of their discretionary funds, in approved circumstances. These
payments are known as Unrestricted Cash Payments (UCP).

Unrestricted Cash Payments

A UCP can be a one-off or regular payment and is available to customers
on any measure of Income Management subject to appropriate approval.
UCPs are paid directly to the customer's (or payment nominee's) bank
account. These funds form part of the customer's discretionary funds and
there are no restrictions on what can be purchased with these funds.

UCPs are assessed on an individual basis. Customers may be entitled to
access a UCP in the following situations:

-   to access a portion of a Social Security arrears payment where the
    customer has not had access to their usual amount of discretionary
    funds in the previous fortnight
-   to access up to 50% of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation
    payments
-   acceptance of a 20% UCP service offer for Child Protection and
    Supporting People at Risk Income managed customers, or
-   when receiving ABSTUDY (with a Living Allowance or PES component)
    that is 100% income managed

A UCP should not be confused with a Restricted Direct Payment (RDP). An
RDP is a payment for priority needs that cannot be paid using the
standard Income Management payment methods such as BasicsCard, BPay,
direct credit, Scheduled Transfer or one-off payments to a Third Party
Organisation. Usually, the only option for the customer is to pay for
the expense by cash. For more information see, Restricted Direct
Payments (RDP).

RDPs should only be granted in exceptional circumstances and are
assessed and approved by the National Business Gateway (NBG).

One-off UCP

One-off UCPs are assessed on an individual basis by authorised staff
with appropriate ISP access and delegation (for example, Income
Management Contact Officer (IMCO), Smart Centre Local Peer Support
(LPS). If the request is for a reason other than a portion of an income
support arrears payment or up to 50% of an FTB reconciliation payment,
approval can only be granted if:

-   the customer's and their dependents current and reasonably
    foreseeable priority needs are being met, and
-   income managed funds are available

Regular UCPs

Customers can request to have a regular UCP for a specified amount of
their fortnightly income managed payment where it has been satisfied
there is no other practical use for the customer's income managed funds,
including meeting priority needs. This provides a direct payment to the
customer's (or their payment nominee's) bank account. Customers
requesting payments to a third party are to be via the Expense Request
process.

Customers who are meeting their own, and their dependents current and
reasonably foreseeable future priority needs, and do not have any other
expenses to pay from their Income Management funds may be eligible for a
regular UCP of the balance of their fortnightly Income Management
payment. Each request must be assessed on a case by case basis by the
Level 2 Income Management Policy Help desk and will be referred to the
Department of Social Services (DSS) if required.

20% UCP Service Offer - CPIM and SPaR

A State or Territory Child Protection Authority or Supporting People at
Risk (SPaR) approved referring authority can recommend a 20% UCP be
offered to Child Protection Income Management (CPIM) or SPaR customers.
These service offers are lodged via the Unified Government Gateway
(UGG). When a 20% UCP service offer is received via the UGG, an Income
Management Contact Officer (IMCO) will review the suitability of the
offer. If the offer is not deemed appropriate, the IMCO will liaise with
the referring authority to determine if the offer should be revoked.

A 20% UCP service offer means customers can receive 20% of their regular
fortnightly income managed payment as discretionary funds. The customer
may accept or decline the service offer.

If a customer accepts the 20% UCP service offer, the system will
calculate 20% of the customer's net entitlement each fortnight and issue
a UCP, after all priority needs have been paid. This amount may vary
each fortnight based on the customer's entitlement (due to employment
income, etc.). If a customer declines the service offer it will remain
available should the customer choose to take this up at a later date.

Approving and processing UCPs

The approval and coding of one-off and regular UCPs depends on the
reason for the UCP and the measure of Income Management applicable to
the customer. All requests for regular UCPs (excluding 20% UCP offers)
must be referred to the Income Management Policy helpdesk for
assessment.

Arrears of social security payments

Lump sum arrears of an Income Management customer's income support
payment are subject to 100% Income Management.

Where a customer is in receipt of arrears which have been credited to
their Income Management account, and hasn’t had access to their usual
amount of discretionary funds in the previous fortnight, a Service
Officer may grant them a UCP from their income managed funds equal to
the normal amount of discretionary funds they would have received for
their last fortnightly payment, less any discretionary funds already
received.

This is to ensure a person in receipt of arrears has access to their
regular fortnightly amount of discretionary funds and is not placed in
financial hardship. Care must be taken to ensure that the customer does
not access more discretionary funds than they regularly would.

FTB reconciliation payments

Customers on any measure of Income Management can be paid up to 50% of
their Family Tax Benefit reconciliation payment as an UCP if the Service
Officer is satisfied the amount currently available in their Income
Management account is sufficient to meet the customer's and their
dependents current and reasonably foreseeable priority needs.

Income Management ends

When a customer's Income Management ends, regular UCPs will
automatically cease:

-   Immediately when Income Management ends where the UCP has been
    recorded via the service offer workflow, or
-   On the 15th day after Income Management ends where the UCP has been
    recorded via the Expense Management workflow

If Income Management is reinstated, the UCP must be recommenced, subject
to the customer continuing to meet the criteria for the payment.

The Resources page contains links to the Income Management helpdesk
webform and contact details for IMCOs.

Related links

Managing Income Management funds

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Voluntary Income Management Initial Assessment interview

Restricted direct payments (RDPs)

Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
