
Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments 103-08010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances under which a customer's tax
details may need adjusting for the taxability of bereavement payments.
Service Officers may need to manually adjust the customer's record to
ensure that the correct tax details are recorded, using the Tax Details
Adjustment (TXAJ) screen.

Taxability of bereavement payments and periods

In some circumstances, bereavement payments are taxable. All other
bereavement payments are non-taxable and require no tax adjustments.

Lump Sum Bereavement payment (LBP)

Lump sum bereavement payment is a Lump Sum component, payable to income
support recipients:

-   Surviving partner or the surviving caregiver - non-taxable up to the
    tax free threshold amount. Any amount above the tax free amount is
    taxable
-   Non-partner carer - non-taxable up to the tax free threshold amount.
    Any amount above the tax free amount is taxable
-   Non-partner (except the carer) - entire lump sum is non-taxable

Partner Bereavement payment (PBV)

Partner Bereavement Payment is a Lump Sum component, payable to eligible
customers on JobSeeker Payment and Youth Allowance.

PBV is non-taxable up to the tax free threshold amount. Any amount above
the tax free threshold amount is taxable.

A manual tax adjustment may need to be made to the survivor's tax record
where the survivor's new single rate is higher and no Lump Sum is
payable. The Bereavement Payment Taxation Job Aid is used to calculate
the tax free amount. The tax free amount is the difference between the
previous combined rate and the new single rate during the bereavement
period.

Ordinary Payments

Concessional tax treatment to an ordinary payment is applied to a
customer that is not entitled to a bereavement payment during the 14
week bereavement period.

A manual tax adjustment may need to be made to the survivor's tax record
where the survivor's new single rate is higher and no Lump Sum is
payable. The Bereavement Payment Taxation Job Aid is used to calculate
the tax free amount. The tax free amount is the difference between the
previous combined rate and the new single rate during the bereavement
period.

Calculating a tax adjustment

The tax status (taxable or non-taxable) applied to payments made to a
surviving partner during the bereavement period and the tax free amount
depends on whether the new single rate of payment is higher or lower
than the previous combined rate:

Ordinary Payments

-   If the survivor's new single rate is higher and no Lump Sum is
    payable, the tax free amount is the difference between the previous
    combined rate and the new single rate during the bereavement period

A manual calculation by the Service Officer will determine if a tax free
amount applies. The tax free amount is manually deducted from the
customer's taxable payment on the Tax Details Adjustment (TXAJ) screen
by entering the negative amount.

Lump Sum Payments (LBP and PBV)

-   If the survivor's new single rate is lower and Lump Sum is payable,
    the tax free amount is determined by applying the tax free formula
    using the Bereavement Payment Taxation Job Aid. The Resources page
    contains a link to the Job aid

Tax free amount

The tax free amount of all social security payment bereavement lump sums
is calculated on the payments received by the surviving partner during
the bereavement period. The amount is the sum of the non-taxable amount
the survivor would have received, and the total amount the deceased
recipient would have received, in the bereavement lump sum period if the
deceased recipient:

-   had not died,
-   had been under age pension age, and
-   had not been separated from their partner due to ill health

The Bereavement Payment Taxation Job Aid is used to determine if a tax
adjustment is required. Where the calculation indicates that there is a
tax free threshold amount, a manual adjustment to the taxable payment
amount for the period is required on the Tax Details Adjustment (TXAJ)
screen. The Resources page contains a link to the Bereavement payment
taxation job aid.

Tax adjustments for Bereavement Payments

Manual tax adjustments on the Tax Details Adjustment (TXAJ) screen can
only be applied to taxable payments for the current financial year.

Manual tax adjustments on the TXAJ screen are required when:

-   A Lump Sum, paid to a partner of a deceased customer or to a carer
    for a deceased care receiver, is above the tax free threshold. Where
    the calculation indicates that there is an amount above the tax free
    threshold, a manual adjustment is required to the customer's tax
    records to increase the taxable payment
-   An ordinary payment during a bereavement period requires a deduction
    to the taxable payment for tax free amounts. Where the calculation
    indicates that there is a tax free amount, a manual adjustment is
    required to the customer's tax records to reduce the taxable payment

When calculating the tax free threshold for Bereavement Payments,
Service Officers will need to use the Bereavement Payment Taxation Job
Aid to determine the tax free amount.

Tax adjustments are only completed by the ICT Service Desk.

The bereavement amount to be adjusted is applied via the TXAJ screen
under the survivor's current payment using component code of 'BASIC'.
Adjustments made by the Service Officer with TXAJ access, will be
automatically included in the customer's Centrelink payment summary for
the relevant financial year.

The TXAJ screen can only be used to apply tax adjustments for the
current financial year. Once the Centrelink payment summary has been
generated, any tax adjustments must be made using the Tax Payment
Summary Details (TXGD) screen. Using the TXAJ screen is the preferred
process as TXAJ adjustments will always be included in the tax
calculation. If adjustments are done via TXGD screen they will be
overwritten if a new tax calculation is done for the Centrelink payment
summary.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport, examples of tax free
threshold calculation and the Bereavement Payment Taxation Job Aid.

Contents

Taxability and tax deductions from payments

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Related links

Adjusting amounts on a Payment Summary

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Calculation of a Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

Assessing entitlement to Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
