
Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management 103-01080000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what action to take when a customer requests an
exemption from Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment
Recipients (LTWPR) Income Management, and the hand-off process to assess
eligibility.

Income Management Exemptions

Customers identified for Income Management or currently income managed
under DEY or LTWPR categories can apply for an exemption from Income
Management.

To help customers with general enquiries and to follow hand-off
protocols, staff need a broad understanding of the eligibility criteria
and assessment process for Income Management exemptions.

When a customer moves out of an Income Management area they are still
eligible to apply for an exemption from Income Management.

Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT)

While IMEAT conducts all exemption assessments, Service Officers are to
complete the following actions to ensure the correct hand-off.

Customers with children wishing to test their eligibility are warm
transferred to IMEAT for an assessment. Before hand-off, the Service
Officer must:

-   outline and discuss customer eligibility for an exemption. See the
    Process page for more information
-   ensure the customer contact details are correct
-   complete an Initial Assessment interview if the customer is on Auto
    Income Management. This ensures the customer's payment does not
    suspend while the exemption is being assessed

Do not transfer to IMEAT customers without dependent children. These
exemption requests can be assessed using information available on a
customer's Centrelink record.

Customers with dependent children

Parents/principal carers of school age or younger children, who are
income managed under the DEY and LTWPR measures, may seek an exemption
from Income Management by demonstrating that:

-   they have not had any indicators or financial vulnerability over the
    preceding twelve month period, identified as part of the assessment
    process, and
-   each of their dependent children are engaged in appropriate
    activities

If both parents of a dependent child are on Income Management, only one
person can apply for an exemption under this category. For more
information, see Requirements for an exemption from Income Management
for customers with dependent children,

Customers without dependent children

Customers who are income managed under the DEY and LTWPR measures
without dependent children and who have taken personal initiative
through participation in education or training, may qualify
automatically or seek an exemption if they:

-   are a full-time student or an Australian Apprentice in receipt of
    Youth Allowance, or
-   have received less than 25% of their maximum basic rate of payment
    for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights

An automatic exemption is not granted when the customer:

-   starts study or an apprenticeship while on Income Management, or
-   previously had an automatic exemption ended reason 'customer
    request' (CLR)

Note: If an automatic exemption has not occurred and a customer believes
they meet one of the above criteria, the IMEAT will complete a manual
assessment. For more information, see Determining an exemption from
Income Management for customers without dependent children.

Customers receiving Special Benefit (SpB)

Customers who are income managed under the DEY and LTWPR measures and
receiving SpB, may be granted an exemption from Income Management where
both of the following are met:

-   they are not a principal carer of a child under 6 years of age, and
-   they are aged 16 years or older

For more information, see Determining an exemption from Income
Management for certain customers receiving Special Benefit (SpB).

Timeframe to supply evidence for exemptions

Customers have 28 days after seeking an exemption from Income Management
to provide evidence in support of their request for an exemption. If
they are not currently being income managed, Income Management will not
be applied during this time.

Note: customers seeking an exemption under the without dependent
children category are not required to lodge evidence to support their
application.

Period of exemptions

The assessment of an application for an exemption is a point in time
decision and is applied for a 12 month period, however, exemptions may
be ended earlier where an individual's circumstances have significantly
changed. For example, a customer enrols as a full time student and
withdraws from the course or no longer has children in their care.

Customers granted an automatic exemption will have their circumstances
automatically reviewed after 12 months. If they continue to meet the
criteria, a further exemption will be granted for another 12 months.

For manually assessed exemptions, customers need to re-apply for an
exemption after the 12 month period if they want the exemption to
continue. A new exemption would only be required if the customer
continued to be eligible for Income Management.

Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

Customers granted an exemption from Income Management, under the DEY or
LTWPR measures can volunteer for Income Management,

Note: customers on VIM will revert to Income Management under the DEY or
LTWPR measure if their exemption ends and they continue to meet the
criteria for those measures.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator for the contact
details for the Income Management and Exemption and Assessment Team and
Locator for National transfer numbers.

Contents

Identifying customers for Income Management under the Disengaged Youth
(DEY) measure

Identifying customers for Income Management under the Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measure

Determining an exemption from Income Management for customers without
dependent children

Requirements for an exemption from Income Management for customers with
dependent children

Conducting the financial vulnerability test for an exemption from Income
Management for customers with dependent children

Providing evidence and finalising the assessment for an exemption from
Income Management for customers with dependent children

Determining an exemption from Income Management for certain customers
receiving Special Benefit (SpB)

Change of circumstances and ending exemptions from Income Management

Recording Exemption Service Offer for customers with dependent children

Related links

Voluntary Income Management eligibility

Customer moves out of an Income Management area

Approved courses of study for Centrelink administered payments for
students

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
