
Adjusting amounts on a payment summary 103-07020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when to adjust amounts on a customer's payment
summary.

On this Page:

Adjustments to payment summaries

A payment summary can be amended due to adjustments. This will result
in:

-   an amended payment summary, or
-   multiple amended payment summaries, if the adjustment covers
    multiple financial years

Where a payment summary is amended:

-   the customer will get a letter of amendment advising why the details
    have changed
-   these details will also transfer to the Australian Taxation Office
    (ATO) who will pre-fill the customer's tax return

Automatic adjustments to payment summaries

An automatic adjustment can recalculate the customer's payment summary.
This can include:

returned payments - the customer did not receive the payment. Adjustment
to the payment summary is not required

Benefit Transfer (BTR) - adjustment the payment summary if the period
covers a previous financial year. No BTR processing for Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) payments is required

debt processing -

-   standard debts - once the first repayment for a debt has been
    received, an amended payment summary is issued to the customer. This
    will change the payment amount
-   special debts: the amended payment summary is issued to a customer,
    if there is a change to the payment amount. The Resources page
    contains a list of special debt codes.

Arrears payments

The ATO require payments to be recorded on the payment summary, for the
financial year in which they were received. If arrears are for a
previous financial year, but are delivered in a different financial
year, the payment summary will not be amended.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport and a list of special
debt codes.

Related links

Payment Summaries

Issuing Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Payment Summary

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

Related links

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
