-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage Income Management and Enhanced
Income Management customers who enter or leave prison.

Income Management

Income Management is a way to help people manage their money to meet
essential household needs. If a customer's payments are income managed,
a percentage of their regular payments are set aside and the rest is
paid to them in the usual way. Advance and lump sum payments are 100%
income managed.

Customers can access their income managed money using the BasicsCard or
setting up regular or one-off direct payments to stores, landlords or
other services providers.

Enhanced Income Management

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM) is a tool to help people manage
their money and ensure they are getting the basic essentials. Customers
have a percentage of their eligible payments paid into their quarantined
account. In addition, 100% of lump sum payments are paid into their
quarantined account.

Enhanced IM customers have an enhanced IM account with a dedicated BSB
and account number. This is linked to a SmartCard that uses chip
technology and can be used at over one million EFTPOS terminals across
Australia and online. Customers may also set up payment transfers or
BPAY payments from their enhanced IM account.

Customer enters prison

Income Management

When an income managed customer enters prison, payments are subsequently
suspended as they are not entitled to a social security payment while in
prison. If their payments are cancelled, Income Management will
automatically end.

Enhanced Income Management

When an enhanced IM customer enters prison, if their qualifying payment
is suspended or cancelled for 13 weeks or more, enhanced IM will
automatically end.

Any funds in their enhanced IM account will not be disbursed and can be
accessed using their SmartCard.

Customer leaves prison

Income Management

Income Managed customers leaving prison may have Income Management
reinstated if they are granted an eligible payment and continue to meet
the criteria for Income Management.

Prison release customers may be identified for Income Management if they
meet the criteria for Income Management.

enhanced Income Management

Enhanced IM customers leaving prison may have enhanced IM reinstated if
their eligible payment is restored or re-granted and continue to meet
the eligibility criteria for enhanced IM.

Prison release customers may be identified for enhanced IM if they meet
the criteria for the program.

Exemptions and exclusions

An exemption or exclusion from Income Management or an exemption from
enhanced IM may continue for a customer on release from prison. This is
only if, before their period of imprisonment, the agency granted an:

-   Income Management customer an exclusion or exemption
-   enhanced IM customer an exemption

However, Income Management or enhanced IM may apply if their
circumstances have changed.

The Resources page contains:

further information about declared Income Management areas

links to Locator for:

-   customer 13 and 1800 numbers
-   National Transfer Numbers
-   contact details for the Access Support Centre

links to intranet pages for:

-   the Income Management prison servicing contacts
-   Service Officers in the Face to Face Incarcerated Customer Servicing
    team,
-   Centrelink pre-release processes
-   State Income Management Coordinators and Income Management Contact
    Officers

scenarios when a VWPR (Crisis Payment) Income Management period may be
extended

Related links

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Effect on Income Management when payment is restored or re-granted

Disbursement of funds when Income Management ends

Changes to Income Management priority needs

Coding Income Management expenses

Payment of income managed funds to Third Party Organisations (TPO)

Income Management for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)

Enhanced Income Management (enhanced IM)

Ending enhanced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
