
Advance payments obtained fraudulently without customer consent 103-05040090

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to follow when a customer's advance
payment appears to have been fraudulently applied for and directed to an
account the customer cannot legally access. In this circumstance it may
be appropriate for a Service Officer to re-issue any advance payment
amounts recovered from the customer's payment and suspend any further
repayments.

Customer contacts to advise they have not applied for an advance payment but are repaying one.

When a customer contacts to advise that they are repaying an advance
payment but never applied for one, steps need to be taken to ensure the
situation is investigated and the customer is not left in financial
hardship during the process.

Staff need to:

-   Suspend recovery of the advance payment. Recovery can only be
    suspended for a maximum of 3 months at a time
-   Refund any amount already recovered to the customer and adjust the
    advance balance by this amount
-   Issue a Request for Refund letter to the financial institution where
    the payment was sent
-   Report the details of the suspected fraud to the Intelligence and
    Investigations Branch using the Report a Fraud tool

Re-issue of advance payments

The re-issue of advance payment amounts recovered from the customer's
regular payment will need to be undertaken through the Payment
Adjustment (PYAJ) screen. In addition to this the outstanding advance
balance amount must be adjusted back to the full advance amount
originally granted. Where a customer has also had their regular income
support payment directed to an account which they do not have legal
access to, a replacement payment may be issued. The re-issue of payment
should only occur if the customer is in severe hardship due to the
reduction in their fortnightly payment. In this case, the service
officer assisting the customer should make the refund/adjust the advance
balance as this should not be referred to the Intelligence and
Investigations Branch to action.

If the customer wants to apply for their advance payment immediately,
the Service Officer will need to submit an incident to ICT via mySupport
using the webform appropriate to the payment type.

Adjustments for Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans
must be completed by the Home Equity Access Scheme National team only.

Referral to Intelligence and Investigations Branch

The Service Officer must refer any cases of suspected fraud to the
Intelligence and Investigations Branch as an  identity fraud.

A suspected case of fraud must be referred in this manner to enable the
Services Australia to take appropriate recovery action of any payments
which have been fraudulently obtained so that prosecution action can be
undertaken, where appropriate.

Recovery action

Any recovery action of the advance payment will be undertaken as part of
the investigation and the re-issue of the recovered amount should only
be completed once the suspected fraud has been reported through the
'Report Suspected Fraud' application. The Intelligence and
Investigations Branch will determine the appropriate recovery action and
initiate this action as part of their investigation. They will also
undertake any additional processing required on the customer's record.

The Resources page contains links to the Report Suspected Fraud
application and the mySupport reporting form.

Related links

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments at a customer's request

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Deletion of advance granted on incorrect record or fraudulently claimed

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
