
Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution 103-04040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstance when a payment has been received
electronically by the financial institution, and how to reissue the
payment.

MFU activity

Services Australia has a responsibility to ensure that the customer's
payment is replaced (if eligible) as quickly as possible.

When a payment has been returned to the agency by a financial
institution, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity titled 'unsolicited
refund' will appear on the customer's record stating 'Unsolicited direct
credit return'.

Checks before reissuing

Before reissuing the payment to the customer, the Service Officer must
check the customer's:

-   payment destination details are correct
-   entitlement to the payment

Payment not showing as returned

If the customer advises payment delivered via direct credit or RTGS has
not been received, and claims to have been advised by the financial
institution that the payment has been returned, but it does not appear
as a returned payment on the customer's record, follow the process in
Replacing direct credit or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) at a
customer's request procedure.
Note: it can take up to 2 working days from the date a payment via
direct credit or RTGS was automatically returned to appear on the
customer's record.

Any unsuccessful payments delivered via the NPP will be returned
immediately.

Financial Institution or customer has returned payment via bank cheque or cash

If a financial institution, customer or third party has returned a
payment via bank cheque or cash to a Service Centre, due to it being
received in error or because the customer objects to receiving the
payment, a manual return needs to be created. Follow the process in
Processing a returned payment.

Note: it can take more than two working days from the date payment was
returned by bank cheque to appear on the customer's record.

Income Management payment

For customers who have a payment issued from their Income Management
account returned from a financial institution, the funds will be
automatically re-credited to their Income Management account. A new
payment will need to be issued to the customer from their Income
Management account.

PPL delivered by an employer

The Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) is responsible
for re-issuing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) returned payments where PPL
delivery is via the employer See Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

Third party payees

If an ABSTUDY third party payee such as an Education institution,
Residential college or Boarding schools/hostel has changed their bank
account details without notifying the agency, this will result in
payments to these third parties being returned and a MFU activity
created. See the Returned payments to third parties step in the Process
tab.

The Resources page contains information on how to find the MFU activity
and frequently asked questions, links to Office Locator, Help Desks,
Notice to prepare a Refund Account (SF030) form and the Stop Customer
Payment webform in mySupport).

Related links

Changing payment destination

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments at a customer's request

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Reissuing a rejected payment

Processing a returned payment

Requesting the return of a direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment made to an incorrect recipient

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
