
Issuing Payment Summaries 103-07010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed to generate and issue
a Centrelink payment summary on the system. The page also identifies
where customers can go to access their Centrelink payment summary.

Eligibility to issue/access a payment summary

A payment summary is generated for customers who receive a reportable
payment. This can include:

-   Customers who have received a taxable payment from Centrelink within
    a financial year
-   Customers who have received a reportable tax exempt payment from
    Centrelink within a financial year
-   Customers whose reportable payment is cancelled within a financial
    year. Note: the Centrelink payment summary is generated at the end
    of the financial year following the cancellation

Note: Centrelink payment summaries are no longer automatically issued by
surface mail at the beginning of each financial year. However, when
adjustments are made on a Centrelink payment summary, an amended
Centrelink payment summary will be automatically sent to the customer's
preferred mail channel.

Inability to issue/access a payment summary

A Centrelink payment summary is unable to be issued to or accessed by a
customer even though the customer has received a reportable payment in
the following circumstances:

-   Where the taxable entitlement, non-taxable entitlement, Remote Area
    Allowance (RAA) or tax deducted amount is less than zero
-   Where an error has occurred during the calculation of a customers'
    Centrelink payment summary

A Debt Raising ACTion DOC Request Fast Note is to be used in Customer
First to refer these cases to the specialist debt processing team
advising that the payment summary cannot be issued. See Resources for
information on locating the Fast Note.

For more information, see General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU)
tax activities.

Accessing a Centrelink payment summary

[] Centrelink payment summaries are available for customers to access on
request through a range of self service channels, including:

-   their online account though myGov
-   the Express Plus Applications
-   the Self service line for customers
-   Self Service terminals at service centres

Note: Centrelink payment summaries can be requested/accessed through the
self service channels for the last seven financial years.

The Resources page contains links to Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
Legislation and Online Services and information about access the Fast
Note.

Related links

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Request for Part Year Tax Statement

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

How Payment Summaries are calculated

Using the Tax Year to Date (TXYTD) screen

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Electronic transfer of Payment Summary details to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)

General information on Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities

Disclosing information to third parties

Documents and Statements option online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Requests for information after someone has died

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
