
Protection of customer payments 103-04050000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers if they contact about their
income support payment or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) payment
being used to repay an overdrawn account. Service Officers will advise
customers of relevant protections and advocate for customers under the
Code of Operation agreement.

Code of Operation and overdrawn bank accounts

The Code of Operation: Recovery of debts from Services Australia income
support payments or Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) payments (the
Code) is a non-legally binding statement of best practice between the 2
agencies and participating banks and credit unions. The Code guides the
recovery of debts arising from overdrafts from bank accounts of
customers in receipt of income support and/or DVA payments. The
representative financial industry are:

-   the Australian Banking Association (ABA) for member banks
-   the Australian Finance Industry Association (AFIA)
-   Customer Owned Banking Association (COBA) for member credit unions,
    mutual building societies and mutual banks.

The Code details the arrangements that apply when a customer’s account
is overdrawn. The Code recognises that customers require a reasonable
amount of money to live on in these circumstances and states that that
participating financial institutions (also known as Authorised
Deposit-Taking Institutions) will not impose unreasonable requirements
for the repayment of money after direct credit of an income support or
DVA payment.

The Code provides that:

-   customers will be able to access at least 90% of their income
    support or DVA payment in any payment period even though their
    account may be overdrawn (the remaining 10% will be offset against
    the overdrawn amount, although the customer can agree to pay more
    than 10%)
-   consultation will occur between the financial institution and the
    customer on the debt and levels of repayment.

Customers should contact their bank or credit union about the protection
offered by the Code. A Centrelink Service Officer can act as a liaison
officer to deal with any customer difficulties. The Process page
contains more details on providing assistance.

Payment garnisheed from bank account by another organisation

Once a Services Australia payment has been paid into a customer's bank
account, it is no longer a Services Australia payment under social
security law. It is now part of the customer's funds.

A garnishee order on the account, even if it is equal to the amount of
the customer's payment, is no longer covered by the inalienability
provisions and is also not covered by the Banking Code of Conduct
provision.

Social security law and family assistance law do provide for a 'saved
amount' that cannot be taken. The saved amount is equal to the
following:

-   the total amount of the customer's payment, including advances, paid
    into the account in the 4 week period immediately before the order
-   less the total amount withdrawn from the account in the same period.

The Resources page contains links to the Code of Operation and customer
information on the Services Australia Website, websites of parties to
the Code of Operation for a list of participating financial
institutions, and examples and contact details for Australian Financial
Complaints Authority.

Related links

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Garnishees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
