
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document outlines the School Enrolment and Attendance Measure
(SEAM) operated in select locations in the Northern Territory (NT) and
Queensland.

Government intent - SEAM

SEAM was an Australian Government initiative which supported parents and
carers to make sure their children were enrolled in and attending school
regularly.

SEAM put in place assistance such as conferences and the development of
attendance plans between parents and the Northern Territory Department
of Education (NT Doe). Services Australia (the agency) provided the
assistance of social workers to support parents to resolve attendance
issues.

SEAM ran in selected Northern Territory and Queensland communities from
January 2009 to 31 December 2017.

On this Page:

Cessation of SEAM

The School Enrolment and Attendance Measure (SEAM) ended on 31 December
2017.

The Australian and Northern Territory Governments remain committed to
supporting families and communities to get their children to school
every day and to improve school attendance in remote communities:

-   The Remote School Attendance Strategy continues in the communities
    where it currently operates, with local staff working to help
    families to get their kids to school every day possible
-   The Northern Territory Department of Education (NT DoE) Senior
    Attendance and Truancy Officers (SATOs) continue to monitor
    attendance in select communities
-   Services Australia Social Workers continue to visit communities as
    part of their general work

About SEAM

SEAM encouraged customers SEAM target locations ensure their children
were enrolled and regularly attending school by linking enrolment and
regular attendance with the parent/guardian's schooling requirement
payments.

Where enrolment and/or attendance requirements were not met for a child,
the customer's schooling requirement payment may have been suspended or
cancelled.

Customers were subject to SEAM requirements if they:

-   lived in one of the SEAM target locations
-   were claiming or receiving a schooling requirement payment
-   had at least 14% care of one schooling requirement child, and
-   the child was not in receipt of a schooling requirement payment in
    their own right (for example, Youth Allowance (YA))

The Resources page contains the list of SEAM target locations.

Enrolment component

School enrolment information was obtained through an information
exchange between the agency and Northern Territory Department of
Education (NT DoE). Where a child was not confirmed as enrolled the
customer was sent an enrolment notice and given 21 days to provide their
child’s enrolment details or advise of a reasonable excuse or special
circumstance.

If a customer failed to satisfy the enrolment requirements a sanction
may have been applied and the customer’s schooling requirement payment
suspended. If the enrolment information was provided within 13 weeks of
suspension, the payment was able to be restored with arrears paid for
the suspension period. If the suspension continued for more than 13
weeks the payment may have been cancelled.

Attendance component

Education authorities along with the agency supported families to ensure
their children were regularly attending school by holding conferences
with parents/guardians (with social work support where required) and
developing attendance plans.

Where a customer failed to attend the conference and/or failed to agree
to a school attendance plan, or the child failed to conform with the
school attendance plan the education authority issued a compliance
notice.

If the customer did not comply with the requirements of the compliance
notice and no special circumstances existed, a sanction was applied and
the customer's payment suspended.

Automatic and manual cancellations

Where an enrolment or attendance sanction was applied for 91:

-   consecutive days the customer’s schooling requirement payment was
    automatically cancelled, or
-   cumulative days (as sanctions had been ended and reapplied or
    special circumstances existed), the customer’s schooling requirement
    payment may have been manually cancelled. In some cases a customer’s
    payment could remain suspended for more than 13 weeks

Reviews

A customer may request a review of one of the following decisions in
relation to SEAM. These include:

-   payments were suspended/cancelled due to them failing to comply with
    an enrolment notice
-   payments were suspended/cancelled due to failing to comply with a
    compliance notice
-   schooling requirement payment was granted and immediately suspended

If a customer requests a review for one of the above reasons, see
Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK).

The Resources page contains links to the Australian Government
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PM&C) and the Northern
Territory Department of Education (NT DoE) websites. It also lists the
SEAM target locations.

Related links

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection reason codes (CLK)

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
