
Temporary Cashless Debit Cards (CDC) 103-20021919

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to issue a temporary Cashless Debit
Card (CDC) to a CDC card holder and request the card issuer send a new
personalised replacement card. A CDC cardholder can be a CDC participant
or a CDC participant’s payment nominee.

A cardholder may request a temporary card, if their card is lost, stolen
or damaged, or if they have commenced on the CDC before their
personalised card has arrived. In some locations, customers may also
request a temporary card if they want to bring forward their CDC start
date. Temporary cards can be issued face-to-face in a service centre, by
a Remote Servicing Team (RST), in a Traditional Credit Union branch (TCU
participants only), at participating Services Australia Agents in the
Northern Territory and Cape York, or at selected Australia Post outlets.

Cashless Debit Card

CDC participants are issued a personalised card by the card issuer.
Personalised cards will have the participant's name printed on the front
of the card and include their BSB and account number on the back of the
card.

Where a participant has a payment nominee, the nominee will be issued
the personalised card by the card issuer. The card will have the payment
nominee's name printed on the card and the participant's name printed
underneath and include their BSB and account number on the back of the
card. The online account linked to the CDC will also be managed by the
payment nominee.

In some cases the payment nominee may request the card only be issued in
the participant’s name, in these instances the participant and the
payment nominee will have access to the online account.

Temporary cards

Cashless Debit Card participants can access temporary cards at the
following locations.

Service centres

All service centres across Australia have access to temporary Indue
cards.

Select service centres have access to temporary TCU cards. For full
details, see Service Centres and Agents stocking temporary Cashless
Debit Cards.

All temporary cards and PIN Mailers must be kept in a secure location on
site and accessible to multiple staff on site.

Temporary cards and PIN Mailers will be sent and packaged separately in
envelopes.

On the front of each envelope will be identifying numbers that match a
card with the accompanying PIN Mailer. When issuing a temporary card
that requires a PIN, Service Officers must issue the card with the
associated PIN Mailer by matching the series of numbers on the front of
the card envelope and the PIN Mailer envelope. For example - 000014-XXX
/ 000014-XXX.

Remote Servicing Teams (RST)

Staff attending a remote visit must take:

-   temporary cards and associated PIN Mailers (only Indue cards can be
    assigned through the Inventory Tracking System)
-   Indue Conditions of Use booklets
-   information on how to access TCU Conditions of Use

Note: temporary cards with PINs are available to support Remote
Servicing Teams (RST) with limited system connectivity.

Agent sites in the Northern Territory and Cape York

Participating Agents in the Northern Territory and Cape York have
temporary Indue cards with PIN Mailers.

Participating Agents in the Northern Territory have temporary TCU cards
with PIN mailers.

For a full list of participating agents, see Service Centres and Agents
stocking temporary Cashless Debit Cards.

Agents cannot issue temporary cards through the Inventory Tracking
System (ITS). If a participant presents to an Agent Site, the Agent
hands the participant a temporary card with a matching PIN Mailer and
the participant will be required to contact the card issuer to activate
the card.

For additional support, Agents are able to contact their Agent Support
Coordinator for assistance.

Other temporary card providers

Selected Australia Post outlets or Local Partners have access to
temporary Indue cards with PIN Mailers.

Traditional Credit Union branches will have access to temporary TCU
cards.

Temporary replacement cards - Indue

Temporary Indue cards can only be issued to a CDC participant or a CDC
participant’s payment nominee.

Where a temporary card is issued in a service centre via the ‘Issue
Temporary Card’ workflow, this results in a request being sent to the
card issuer to send a personalised replacement card to the participant
or their payment nominee. The temporary card will continue to work until
the personalised replacement card has been received and activated.

Temporary replacement cards - Traditional Credit Union (TCU)

Temporary TCU cards are only available to participants or their payment
nominee in the Northern Territory (NT) if they selected TCU as their
card issuer.

The ‘Issue Temporary Card’ workflow cannot currently be used to issue a
participant a temporary TCU card. Participants will be provided a
temporary card and associated PIN mailer and will be required to contact
the card issuer to activate the card.

From 24 February, TCU may be listed as the card issuer in the ‘Issue
Temporary Card’ workflow in Customer First, however a temporary card
cannot be issued from the ‘Issue Temporary Card’ workflow and must be
issued manually.

For more information on receiving and issuing TCU temporary cards
manually, See Resources for a link to the Temporary TCU CDC TaskCard.

Temporary card ID

Each temporary card has a Card ID. This is different to the card number.

The Card ID is the 11 digit number on the back of the card. Internally,
this number will be used for inventory tracking and for issuing
temporary cards to participants. Externally, the Card ID will be used by
participants when calling the card issuer to obtain the account balance.

Expiring cards

The card issuer will automatically send out a personalised replacement
card to participants. The card will be posted to the address on the
participant’s record and should arrive prior to the current cards
expiry.

For more information, see Talking Points – Cashless Debit Cards reaching
expiry date in Resources.

Conditions of use

When a participant receives their first card, the card issuer will
provide a Conditions of Use (CoU) booklet or information on how to
access the CoU.

If a participant has not yet received their initial Indue card and is
requesting a temporary card in a service centre or Agent site, a copy of
the card issuer’s CoU must also be provided.

If a participant has not yet received their initial TCU card and is
requesting a temporary card in a service centre or Agent site,
participants should be directed to the digital version of the CoU. See
Resources for a link to the TCU Conditions of use.

Each card issuer will have their own CoU, please ensure the correct
document is provided to participants.

Resources contains links to contact details for the CDC Hotline, card
issuer websites where the CoU booklets are located.

Related links

Cashless Debit Card (CDC)

Housing and Other Expense Limits for Cashless Debit Card (CDC)
participants

Transferring Cashless Debit Card (CDC) funds

Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Community Panels

Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation

Income Management (IM) to Cashless Debit Card (CDC) Transition in the
Northern Territory

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
