
Organisation wants to become a Group Payment organisation 103-04010120

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about requests to participate in the
Group Payment Scheme from an organisation that cares for customers or
manages their financial affairs.

On this Page:

Requests to participate in the Group Payment Scheme

An organisation may contact Services Australia requesting group payment
for the residents in its care, or customers whose financial affairs they
manage. A group payment is where the payment of pensions for a group of
customers is made in one bulk bank deposit (the schedule) directly to an
approved Third Party Organisation (TPO). The residents must give their
authority voluntarily. If there is an involuntary arrangement in place,
the authorisation must be provided by the person or organisation that
has legal authority to manage the customer's affairs.

There are a number of criteria that must be met before an organisation
can be approved to participate in the Group Payment Scheme. When a group
payment arrangement has been entered into, the organisation has an
obligation to notify Services Australia of changes in circumstances.

Conditions for organisations

In order for an organisation to qualify for payment under the group
payment method, the organisation must meet all of the following
conditions and obligations:

-   The organisation must have a minimum of 10 pensioners in its care at
    all times that have their pensions paid by this method
-   The organisation must be registered as accredited with the
    Department of Social Services (DSS) or be a reputable organisation
    (such as a religious order)
-   The payment can only be made by direct credit to an account in the
    name of the organisation
-   The pensioners, other than where the group payment organisation is
    their nominee and the basis for the nominee arrangement is an
    involuntary one (for example, public trustees), remain free at any
    time to revoke this arrangement and elect to receive payments into
    their own bank accounts
-   The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the organisation or the person
    they nominate must agree to be legally responsible as stated in the
    Service Level Agreement which will be drawn up between the
    organisation and Services Australia

When an organisation makes contact to enquire about participation in the
Group Payment Scheme, Service Officers should provide a copy of the
'Group Pension Payments - A Factsheet' for Institutions - see
Resources - to the organisation and email the contact details for the
organisation to the Seniors, Carers, Nominees and Bereavement Programme
and they will make contact. For contact details, see Bereavement. The
group payments business team will make contact with organisation.

TPO obligations

Once approved, TPOs have an obligation to advise Services Australia of:

-   any new customers who will be on the group payment schedule
-   any customers to be removed from the group payment schedule
-   admissions, discharges and deaths in the case of residential care
    organisations

Admissions and discharges from Commonwealth-funded aged care homes are
advised by DSS electronically. However, aged care homes should still
inform Services Australia of admissions and discharges, because they are
not all Commonwealth funded facilities.

If a pensioner (whose name appears on the group payment schedule) has
died, the Advice of death form (SA116) may be completed and returned to
Services Australia.

Organisations should not redirect payments to customers on their
discharge from the organisation or to the executor of the estate on the
death of the customer. This is because, when details of the change of
address/date of death have been received, Services Australia will
reissue the required payments and recover any amounts from the next
available group schedule.

Group payment schedules

Organisations can receive their group payment schedule through Letters
in Business Hub.

The schedule can be viewed in Letters in Business Hub on Thursday,
delivery day code D (traditional pension payday). The fortnightly
schedule can be viewed and reprinted from the History Summary (HS)
screen by Service Officers if requested.

If the organisation does not receive their group schedule printout,
Services Australia can arrange another printout for them.

The Resources page contains links to Advice of death form (SA116),
Please send my payment to an institution - Group Payment form (SS270)
and Authorising a person or organisation to enquire or act on your
behalf form (SS313), a link to mySupport, a listing of organisations
approved to receive their schedules through our online service, a
factsheet for organisations and contact details for the Senior Carers,
Nominees and Bereavement Programme.

Related links

Appointing nominees

Business Hub

Forms

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Group payment schedules and payments to organisations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
