
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Income Management (IM) under the Disengaged Youth
(DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipients (LTWPR) measures.

On this Page:

Overview

Income Management and enhanced IM is compulsory for customers identified
under the Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare Payment Recipient
(LTWPR) measures.

These measures are directed at groups of income support payment
recipients based on the period of time on income support and who are at
a higher risk of disengagement from economic and social participations.

Eligibility for DEY and LTWPR

Customers will be identified for enhanced IM under the LTWPR or DEY
measure if they live in or permanently move to the Northern Territory
and they are:

-   aged 15 to 24 years inclusive and who have been in receipt of an
    eligible Welfare Payment for 13 of the past 26 weeks (DEY)
-   aged 25 years and not reached Aged Pension age and who have been in
    receipt of an eligible Welfare Payment for 52 of the past 104 weeks
    (LTWPR)

Note: these periods do not have to be continuous and can be any
combination of eligible Welfare payments (that is, does not have to be
the one payment for 52 or 13 weeks). Periods of current zero rate and
periods where payment is suspended count towards the 52 or 13 weeks.

Customers will not be identified under the LTWPR or DEY measure where
they:

-   are already income managed under a measure which is higher on the
    hierarchy of Income Management and enhanced IM measures
-   have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management purposes

DEY customer turns 25 years old

Customers on Compulsory enhanced Income Management (CeIM) under the DEY
measure may qualify for the LTWPR measure when they turn 25 years of
age. In this case they will continue on enhanced IM under the LTWPR
measure from their 25th birthday. If they do not qualify for the LTWPR
measure they will automatically cease enhanced IM on their 25th
birthday.

Since 4 September 2023, a customer on Compulsory Income Management (CIM)
under the DEY measure who qualifies for the LTWPR measure when they turn
25 years of age will commence enhanced IM when this change occurs.

Quarantined percentages

Under the DEY and LTWPR measures for IM or enhanced IM, eligible welfare
payments are quarantined at 50% and lump sum payments are quarantined at
100%.

There are specific payments not quarantined.

Exemptions from Income Management and enhanced Income Management

IM and enhanced IM customers may qualify for an  exemption under both
LTWPR and DEY measures.
Different exemption criteria apply depending on whether the customer has
dependent children or not.

For more information see: Customers requesting an exemption from Income
Management or Customers requesting an exemption from enhanced Income
Management

Ending Income Management or enhanced Income Management

Customers will end IM or enhanced IM under the LTWPR and DEY measures
if:

-   they have updated their address and it has been more than 13 weeks
    since they moved out of the Northern Territory on a permanent or
    indefinite basis
-   they qualify for a measure higher in the hierarchy of measures (in
    which case they would commence enhanced IM under that measure)
-   their eligible Welfare payment is cancelled
-   they are granted an exemption from IM or enhanced IM
-   they have an excluded payment nominee
-   the customer has passed away

Reviews and Appeals

Customers can request a review of decisions to apply Income Management
to their payments under the LTWPR and DEY measures at any time. Normal
review processes apply.

The Resources page contains assessment examples and links to Eligible
Welfare Payments.

Contents

Initial Assessment interview for Disengaged Youth and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipients

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

Related links

Enhanced Income Management

Enhanced Income Management processing for Service Delivery staff

Enhanced Income Management processing for manual processing staff

Customers requesting an exemption from Income Management

Customers requesting an exemption from enhanced Income Management

Overview and Hierarchy and movement between Income Management and
enhanced Income Management measures - Overview

Disbursement interview for Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long Term Welfare
Payment Recipient (LTWPR) Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
