
Weekly payments 103-05010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when customers can get paid each week instead of
each fortnight. This can help them budget.

Service offer

Most customers are paid fortnightly. Some may have trouble making their
money last until the end of the fortnight. They may suffer hardship.
These customers may benefit from weekly payments.

Getting weekly payments must be the customer's choice. They need to be
able to make an informed choice. They should not change to weekly
payments if it will cause them financial stress.

Weekly payments are part of a broader service offer to help customers
budget.

Check out other options such as:

-   referrals to financial support
-   referrals to specialists like social workers
-   offsetting Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Double Orphan Pension (DOP) and
    Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Centrepay deductions to help pay bills
-   Rent Deduction Scheme to help pay for government housing
-   Income Management

To start, stop or review weekly payments, Service Officers must be SO3
or above and have completed the training module.

Payments

Customers will continue to have fortnightly instalment periods. They
will get the same amount, but it will be paid as 2 weekly payments
instead of 1 fortnightly payment.

The system calculates the customer's full payment for the fortnight. It
pays half of this on their normal payday, the other half a week later.
See Calculating weekly payments.

Weekly payments can include:

-   income support payments
-   add-ons that can be paid weekly

Some add-ons cannot be paid weekly.

Eligibility

To change to weekly payments, customers must:

-   live in Australia
-   get an eligible payment
-   be financially vulnerable
-   not get a hardship advance or urgent payment in the current
    instalment period
-   not get payments through a nominee or group payment schedule
-   agree they can no longer get urgent payments

Note: to remain eligible for weekly payments under the legacy model
after a gap of 8 weeks or less, the customer (and their partner) must
not have income that reduces their payment. For more information on
legacy model customers, see Calculating weekly payments.

Customers cannot get weekly payments if they get the Home Equity Access
Scheme payments with their income support payment.

Customers who may benefit

Job seeker claims

The online claim offers weekly payments to some job seekers based on
their responses about their circumstances. If they accept the offer, no
assessment is needed outside the claim process.

Current customers

Weekly payments can help financially vulnerable customers.

This can include customers affected by these issues:

-   homeless or at risk
-   gambling or substance misuse
-   poor literacy or numeracy
-   poor mental health
-   recent traumatic relationship breakdown

It can also include customers who:

-   often ask for urgent payments
-   often ask to change their pay day
-   have trouble meeting their requirements due to their finances

Talk to the customer before offering weekly payments.

No immediate payments

Customers on weekly payments cannot get an urgent payment.

The system will not start weekly payments if the customer got a hardship
advance or urgent payment in the fortnight.

Reject requests for urgent payments. This is a condition for starting
weekly payments.

If the customer insists on changing to fortnightly payments to get an
urgent payment, tell them:

-   they cannot go back on weekly payments until their next fortnight
-   if they are paid under the legacy model, this will change to the new
    model

Stopping weekly payments

The system will end weekly payments if the customer:

-   has a break in payments. This includes gaps when granting, restoring
    or transferring payments
-   goes overseas and no longer qualifies for their payment
-   failed to meet their requirements (for some compliance actions)
-   is paid under the legacy model and payment is reduced due to earned
    income

When weekly payments end, the customer will get fortnightly payments.

If a customer asks to change to fortnightly payments, check if this will
cause them financial stress.

Contents

Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly payments

Calculating weekly payments

Related links

Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Frequency of payments

Immediate payments

Special arrangements for customers with budgeting difficulties

Offsetting Family Tax Benefit, Double Orphan Pension and Carer Allowance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
