
Suspending an Income Management, BasicsCard, Electronic Verification of Rent, Centrelink Confirmation eServices or Centrepay business 103-17062900

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Deduction and Confirmation
Branch, Third Party Programmes (TPP), Business Design Team (BDT), and
National Business Gateway (NBG) about suspending a business's approval
to use Income Management (IM), BasicCard, Electonic Verification of Rent
(EVoR), Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS) or Centrepay.

Suspending a Centrepay business

An approved Centrepay business may be suspended due to a non-compliant
event in line with the Centrepay Policy and Terms. The decision to
suspend a business is delegated to the Business Online and Assurance
Team in the Deduction and Confirmation Branch.

Most non-compliant events are identified during reviews conducted on
Centrepay approved businesses.

Before implementing a suspension, the agency may send a letter stating
its intention to suspend the business’s Centrepay approval. The letter
outlines:

-   the agency’s concerns
-   provides the business with an opportunity to fix the non-compliant
    event and avoid a suspension

If the agency does not receive a satisfactory response by the due date,
a suspension is applied.

Under the Centrepay Policy and Terms, the agency may apply a suspension
at any time. The agency is therefore not required to send an intention
to suspend letter and may instead apply an immediate suspension.

When the agency applies a suspension, a letter is sent to the business.

There are two types of Centrepay suspensions, a partial suspension and a
full suspension.

Partial Centrepay Suspension

A partial Centrepay suspension imposes certain restrictions but allows
the business to keep Centrepay deductions already in place. During a
partial suspension:

-   The Centrepay contract status for the business is ‘Suspended’
-   No new Centrepay deductions can be set up by customers, agency staff
    or by the business
-   Existing Centrepay deductions remain in place
-   Businesses and agency staff are not able to increase existing
    Centrepay deductions or their target amounts
-   Existing deductions can be varied down, cancelled or have their
    target amounts varied down by customers, staff or by the business
-   Agency staff can suspend deductions at the request of the business
    or a customer
-   The business continues to have access to view DAPA (display of
    customer deduction and payment information within Business Online
    Services) and view and download Payments and Deductions reports
-   The business will not be viewable online via Find an Organisation
-   The business will not be viewable online if a customer attempts to
    set up a new Centrepay deduction

Full Centrepay Suspension

A full suspension imposes restrictions on the business and any Centrepay
deductions currently in place are cancelled. During a full suspension:

-   The Centrepay contract status for the business is ‘Suspended’
-   No new Centrepay deductions can be set up by customers, staff or by
    the business
-   All existing deductions (including future deduction instructions)
    are immediately cancelled
-   The business will have access to view DAPA (display of customer
    deduction and payment information within Business Online Services)
    and view and download Payments and Deductions reports
-   The business will not be viewable online via Find an Organisation
-   The business will not be viewable online if a customer attempts to
    set up a new Centrepay deduction

Suspending access for an Income Management, BasicsCard, Electronic Verification of Rent or Centrelink Confirmation eService business

The agency may suspend a business’s access to:

-   Income Management (IM)
-   BasicsCard
-   Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR)
-   Centrelink Confirmation eServices (CCeS)

This can be for numerous reasons, but is generally to ensure compliance
or if, in the agency’s opinion, the business may be, or is no longer,
suitable for approval to use the program.

The agency will notify the business, in writing, of any decision to
suspend its access to these programs.

For Income Management (IM) there are two suspension types:

-   No new deductions
-   Cease all existing deductions and no new deductions

Before a suspension is implemented, approval and advice must be sought
from the Deduction and Confirmation Branch - Business Online and
Assurance Team.

Roles and responsibilities

When a suspension is required, a referral must be made to the Deduction
and Confirmation Branch - Business Online and Assurance Team.

The referral should provide details of the:

-   non-compliant event, and
-   clause/s of the Policy and Terms or Framework the business has
    breached

The Business Online and Assurance Team (BOAT) is responsible for making
all suspension determinations. This includes:

-   if a suspension is required
-   the type of suspension applied
-   how it is implemented, and
-   supplying text for any letters associated with the suspension

BOAT directs the following teams as appropriate to implement these
suspensions:

-   Business Design Team (BDT)
-   Third Party Programmes Team (TPP)
-   National Business Gateway (NBG)

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
business information for Centrepay, BasicsCard, EVoR, CCeS. This
includes information on how a business can apply for each program, the
Policy, Terms and Procedural Guides. This page also contains links to
relevant intranet pages.

Related links

Withdrawing a business's approval to use a deduction and confirmation
service

Review process for Third Party Organisations (TPO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
