-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the process to be followed when a
customer becomes eligible or ineligible for Nominee Income Management
(NIM) and Nominee enhanced Income Management (NeIM).

Payment Nominee impact on Income Management and enhanced Income Management

Where a payment nominee's payments are welfare quarantined under one of
the below measures, the person for whom they are a payment nominee (the
principal) will also have their payments welfare quarantined. This only
affects payment nominees, not correspondence nominees:

-    Child Protection Income Management (IM) and enhanced IM
-    Supporting People at Risk (SPaR), or
-    Compulsory IM) and enhanced IM - Disengaged Youth (DEY) and Long
    Term Welfare Payment Recipient (LTWPR)

The IM program closed to new entrants on 4 September 2023. This means
any customers who profile for or are referred for IM must start enhanced
IM. This includes customers who have a payment nominee whose payments
are managed under IM or enhanced IM.

A review of the payment nominee arrangement must occur if a payment
nominee is referred to enhanced IM to ensure they can continue to act in
the best interests of the principal. Further, if at any time there is
concern that the nominee arrangement is not in the best interests of a
customer, the appointment must be reviewed. Payment nominee arrangements
should be cancelled or revoked if not in the best interests of the
principal.

Eligibility for Nominee Income Management

A principal for Income Management and enhanced IM purposes will have
their payments welfare quarantined under the same measure as their
payment nominee, unless they qualify for a different IM and enhanced IM
measure on their own. The Resources page contains examples of Income
Management and enhanced Income Management hierarchy. However, when a
principal is no longer eligible for IM and enhanced IM in their own
right, they will automatically be transferred to Nominee enhanced IM.

Principals who are welfare quarantined under NIM or NeIM are not
required to meet the eligibility criteria of the measure applicable to
their payment nominee. That is, there is:

-    no requirement to be receiving any qualifying payments
-    no requirement to be on an eligible payment for a certain time
    period
-    no partner processing rules
-    no need for a notice/agreement
-    no age restrictions, and
-    no requirement to be living in a certain area

Excluded Payment Nominee

Staff should manually end the customer if they:

-    have an excluded payment nominee for Income Management and enhanced
    IM purposes, and
-    are currently on IM or enhanced IM

Under 18 year old YA dependent customers

If the parent/guardian that is receiving payments for an under 18 year
old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent customer is welfare quarantined,
there is currently no functionality for the YA customer (principal) to
be welfare quarantined under Nominee Income Management or enhanced IM.

Service Officers should take the opportunity to remind YA customers that
once they turn 18, payments must be directed to an account in their own
name or a formal payment nominee arrangement must be made.

Note: the above restrictions relating to NIM and NeIM does not affect a
YA customer's eligibility for IM or enhanced IM in their own right.

Ceasing Nominee Income Management

Principals will cease to be welfare quarantined under Nominee Income
Management or enhanced IM if:

-    they are recorded as deceased
-    their payment nominee is not subject to IM or enhanced IM
-    their payment nominee is granted an exemption from IM or enhanced
    IM (Note: principals are not eligible to apply for an exemption
    under NIM or NeIM - DEY or LTWRP)
-    the payment nominee relationship ends, and no new payment nominee
    is appointed

Enhanced Income Management eligibility when payment nominee arrangement ceases

A principal who no longer has a payment nominee may qualify for a
measure of enhanced IM in their own right.

The Resources page contains additional information about IM or enhanced
IM measures that will apply to a principal with a payment nominee and
manual follow-ups, links to the Income Management helpdesk, Office
Locator and contact details, and details of nominee IM suspension rules
and examples of IM or enhanced IM hierarchy.

Related links

Nominees

Nominee arrangements under Income Management

Enhanced Income Management

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth Allowance (YA) dependent
customers

Nominee Income Management (NIM) processing for National Business Gateway
(NBG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
