
Determining an exclusion from automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management due to rate of payment 103-01180080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the Income Management Exemption
and Assessment Team (IMEAT) to manually assess an exclusion from
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR Youth) Income Management
because of the customer's rate of payment.

On this Page:

VWPR Youth Income Management customer groups

Customers living in a Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Income
Management area will automatically be identified for VWPR Youth Income
Management if they are:

-   aged under 16 years of age, and in receipt of a Special Benefit
    (SpB-USY)
-   aged 16 years or over and in receipt of an independent rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or ABSTUDY Living
    Allowance due to meeting the Unreasonable to Live at Home (UTLAH)
    criteria, or
-   under 25 years and received a Crisis Payment (CrP) within the last
    13 weeks due to release from prison or release from psychiatric
    confinement

Customers will not be identified for Income Management if they are a
full time student or Australian Apprentice, or currently on Voluntary
Income Management. For more information see Eligibility for Income
Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)
measure.

Exclusion from Income Management due to rate of payment

Customers who have received less than 25% of their maximum basic rate of
payment for at least 4 out of the last 6 fortnights will automatically
be granted an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management.

Where an automatic exclusion has not occurred, customers can request to
be assessed for this exclusion if they believe they meet the criteria.
Manual assessment and coding of these exclusions is completed by the
Income Management Exemption and Assessment Team (IMEAT).

If a customer requests an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management
for any other reason, the customer is to be referred to a social worker
for assessment. For more information see Exclusions for automatically
triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income
Management for Service Officers.

Period of exclusion

The assessment of an application for an exclusion is a point in time
decision, and is applied for a 12 month period.

Customers still eligible for Income Management may need to re-apply for
an exclusion after the 12 month period if their exclusion is not
automatically re-granted.

Where it is determined an exclusion has been applied incorrectly, the
exclusion can be manually terminated by the Income Management Exemption
and Assessment Team (IMEAT) and the customer may again be identified for
Income Management.

Reviews of exclusion decisions

Normal review and appeal processes apply to exclusion decisions. This
means customers can apply for a formal review of a decision to reject a
request for an exclusion from VWPR Youth Income Management.

Related links

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR) Income Management

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

Exclusions for automatically triggered Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipients (VWPR) Youth Income Management for Service Officers

Determining and recording eligibility for Income Management as a
Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) by a social worker

Reviews of Income Management decisions

Recording Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Youth Exclusion
(Detrimental) Assessments in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR) Exclusion (Not Practicable
due to Support and Demonstrated Capacity) Assessments in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Disbursement interview for Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipients (VWPR)
Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
