
Advance payments for pension customers 103-05040070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualification requirements for an advance
payment for pension customers. Eligible customers can ask for an advance
payment of part of their future entitlement as a lump sum. There is no
requirement for a customer to advise Services Australia how they intend
to use the advance payment.

Non-pension customers

The process for advance payments for non-pension customers contains
information for non-pension payment customers including those in receipt
of Parenting Payment Single and ABSTUDY payments.

Qualification for an advance payment

To qualify for an advance payment a pension customer must:

Be receiving one of the following pension payments:

-   Age Pension
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension, and

Have been in receipt of an income support payment for three months
including short periods off payment immediately before the customer's
application for the advance payment. There are payments that may count
towards the three months in receipt of an income support payment for an
advance payment, and

Be in Australia when the application is lodged, and

Not owe a debt to the Commonwealth, and

Be able to repay the advance payment without suffering financial
hardship, and

Be eligible for an advance payment of at least the minimum amount
applicable to their relationship status, and

Not have received an advance payment whether as a lump sum or in
instalments more than 12 months ago which has not been fully repaid

Customers participating in the Home Equity Access Scheme may be eligible
for an advance payment of their loan. See Home Equity Access Scheme
advance payments for more details.

-   

Amount of advance payment

The maximum amount a pension customer can receive is capped at 3 weeks
of the Advance Payment Qualifying Amount (APQA). The minimum amount is 1
week of the APQA.

The APQA is the sum of the:

-   maximum basic pension rate (relevant to the customer's marital
    status and before the income or assets tests are applied), and
-   pension supplement minus the minimum pension supplement amount

The minimum and maximum amounts of an advance payment are subject to all
other criteria that may apply to the individual's assessment. For
minimum and maximum amounts of an advance payment, see the Pension
Advance rates link on the Rates and Threshold page.

The maximum amount may be reduced by:

-   the amount the customer can afford to repay each fortnight
-   the comparison with 7.5% of the customer's annual payment rate on
    their last payday
-   previous advance payments granted in the last 12 months

How often an advance payment can be paid

Customers must be advised of how often they can be paid an advance,
prior to any advance being finalised, so the customer has a chance to
change the amount.

Customers can receive multiple advance payments (as long as the minimum
amount is available each time).

Over a 13 fortnight period, a pension customer could choose to receive:

-   one advance payment of the maximum amount available, or
-   one or two advance payments of an amount greater than the minimum
    and up to the maximum, or
-   three advance payments equal to the minimum amount

Note: before finalising the application, fully inform the customer of
the payment amount available and the option of receiving up to 3
multiple advance payments over a 13 fortnight period.

A consumer price index (CPI) increase can affect a customer's
entitlement for an advance due to the increasing minimum and maximum
rates. The Resources page contains further information and an example of
advance eligibility based on changes to the CPI.

Applying for an advance payment

[] To apply for an advance payment, or to access other advance payment
options, customers should be strongly encouraged to use the available
digital channels, unless they are ineligible. Digital services available
include Online Services, Express Plus mobile app or Interactive Voice
Recognition (IVR).

Customers ineligible to use digital services to apply for an advance
are:

-   Customers who have a nominee arrangement in place
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers who are under 18 can claim via
    telephone or a service centre. They are required to have a
    discussion either over the phone or in person prior to applying to
    ensure consideration has been taken regarding the impacts/risks or
    an advance payment
-   Weekly payment customers can apply via telephone or at a service
    centre but cannot use self service channels
-   Independent customers under 18 years of age are considered 'at risk'
    customers and must have a face-to-face interview when applying for
    an advance (except if rural and/or remote). Rurally isolated
    customers are those who live in rural or remote areas who live more
    than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no access to a
    service centre
-   Customers who face physical or intellectual barriers to accessing
    digital options can apply over the telephone or in person
-   Customers applying for Pharmaceutical Allowance Advance, Farm
    Household Allowance Advance and/or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Note: if the customer states self-service options are unavailable, check
NNU, Newsflash and Bulletins to confirm this prior to processing the
Advance manually.

'At Risk' customers

Customers aged under 18 years are considered to be 'at risk' and must
have a face-to-face interview when applying for an advance payment
(except if rural and/or remote).

A thorough assessment of the customer's individual circumstances is
required before the advance is assessed.

Rural and/or remote customers are those who live in rural or remote
areas who live more than 90 minutes from a service centre and have no
access to a service centre.

Weekly payment customers

Weekly payment customers cannot use self service channels to apply for
an advance payment. These customers must either have a face to face
interview or contact Smart Centre Call.

Note: the information currently displayed in the advance payment
workflow in relation to weekly customers requiring a face to face
contact to request an advance payment is incorrect.

Weekly payment customers require a thorough investigation of their
circumstances and ability to repay without placing themselves in
financial hardship prior to an advance being granted. If a recipient has
a gambling, alcohol, other addiction or financial issues, consider other
options such as:

-   referring the recipient to a social worker
-   suggesting the customer apply for a smaller advance, or
-   after thoroughly assessing the customer's expenses, a rejection
    under hardship may be appropriate

Under no circumstances should an advance be granted and repayments
immediately reduced.

Customers must be made fully aware of the impacts of taking the offer of
an advance payment.

Before any advance is granted staff should take into consideration:

-   The customer's living arrangement (Do they have stable
    accommodation? If not any additional expense may impact on their
    ability to secure this)
-   Any expenses they already have, that will be reducing their
    fortnightly available funds
-   Is the amount the customer has declared to have left each fortnight
    after expenses reasonable? As weekly payments is used to help
    customers with their budgeting needs, if the customer is declaring a
    large excess each fortnight, this may not be realistic and careful
    investigation of financial situation may be required

Customers with a nominee arrangement

If a customer with a nominee applies for an advance payment, the Service
Officer must determine if there are any restrictions preventing the
advance payment from being granted. If an involuntary nominee
arrangement is in place the Service Officer must contact the nominee
before granting the advance. If a voluntary nominee arrangement exists,
the nominee should be contacted if it is considered to be in the
customer's best interest.

Involuntary nominee arrangements

An involuntary nominee arrangement is where a third party has been given
legal right, as the result of a court, tribunal, guardianship or
administration order to administer the customer's affairs.

Under no circumstances is an advance payment to be granted at the
request of the customer without the nominee's approval

If the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, contact must be
made with the nominee and approval obtained before granting it

-   It will be extremely rare for an advance payment to be approved by
    the nominee, particularly where the nominee is a state/territory
    trustee organisation

If the nominee does not provide approval for the advance payment, or
cannot be contacted, the Service Officer must reject the application.
The name of the officer and/or organisation with who contact was made or
attempted, must be included in the DOC

If the nominee approves the granting of an advance payment, the names of
the officer contacted who provided the approval, and the organisation
must be annotated in the DOC

Under no circumstance is the nominee arrangement to be cancelled, or the
payment destination changed without approval from the nominee

Voluntary nominee arrangements

A voluntary arrangement is where a third party has been appointed as a
nominee at the request of the customer. Only the customer, or their
correspondence nominee on the customer's behalf, can apply for an
advance payment.

If the customer appears eligible for an advance payment, but during the
interaction with customer the Service Officer has concerns regarding the
customer's understanding of:

-   what an advance payment is
-   their capacity to repay
-   the excess income per fortnight they are declaring (after expenses)
    seems to be unrealistic, or
-   what the impact on their regular fortnightly payment the repayments
    will have, for example, they do not understand that their payment
    will be reduced by the fortnightly repayment amount

The Service Officer is to contact the nominee (correspondence or
payment) if possible before approving the advance payment to ensure due
consideration is given as to the benefit to the customer of granting the
advance.

If the customer has different correspondence and payment nominees, the
Service Officer will contact the correspondence nominee.

If the customer has a payment nominee only, or the correspondence
nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to discuss only very
basic information about the application with the payment nominee,
including:

-   that an application for an advance payment has been made, and
-   the fortnightly rate of repayments.

If a reason for the advance application has been provided by the
customer it should not be discussed with the payment nominee.

If the nominee cannot be contacted, the Service Officer is to action the
advance payment request and annotate the DOC with the information. The
customer should not be disadvantaged if the nominee cannot be contacted
in a timely manner.

If the nominee does not think payment of the advance is in the
customer's best interests, the Service Officer must discuss this with
the customer. If after this discussion the Service Officer is satisfied
that granting the advance payment will be for the customer's benefit and
will not place them in hardship, the Service Officer is to action the
request based on the customer's request and annotate the DOC with this
information.

Note: if the advance payment is to be approved for the customer who has
a payment nominee, ensure the customer is aware the payment will go to
the nominated person's bank account as per their normal payments.

Determining whether the customer can afford the repayments

An advance payment can only be granted if the customer can afford to
repay the advance without being placed in financial hardship. This is
determined by the amount the customer states they can afford each
fortnight after they consider their regular fortnightly expenses.

If a customer states they have $40 left over each fortnight they will
only be offered an amount equal to 13 times this amount even though they
may have otherwise been eligible for a higher amount.

If a reduced or suspended repayment arrangement is in place for an
existing advance (for example, Family Tax Benefit (FTB)), this should be
reviewed before any new advance is assessed. If the repayments on the
existing advance cannot be returned to the standard rate without causing
financial hardship, a further advance should not be granted.

Comparison with the actual payment rate

The maximum advance payment amount may be less than the Advance Payment
Qualifying Amount (APQA) because it is compared to 7.5% of the
customer's annual payment rate on their last payday (disregarding Remote
Area Allowance, the minimum Pension Supplement and Energy Supplement,
except for Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers who will have the
Energy Supplement included).

The lesser amount then becomes the maximum advance payment amount the
individual can receive.

Previous advance payments may affect the amount that can be paid

Following the results of the affordability test and the comparison with
the actual payment rate, the amount that can be paid may be reduced by:

-   the amount of any Social Security Entitlement advance payments paid
    during the 13 fortnights immediately before the new application was
    lodged, as well as
-   the amount of any previous Social Security Entitlement advance
    payments paid within the 6 to 12 months before the new application
    was lodged that have not been repaid

The result is then rounded to the nearest cent (for example, 0.5c and
above is rounded up).

The minimum advance payment that a pensioner can receive is set at 1
week of the Advance Payment Qualifying Amount (APQA).

Note: the maximum amount displayed on the customer's record is the
result of the calculations explained above. If the maximum amount
displayed is less than the minimum amount, the advance payment
application will be rejected.

Both the maximum and minimum amounts will increase in line with the
pension rate increases.

Applications when a previous advance payment has been made

When the customer has been paid an advance payment any new applications
may be affected if:

-   An advance was paid more than 13 fortnights before the new
    application and that advance has been fully repaid, the previous
    advance payment has no effect on the new application. The customer
    may be eligible to receive up to 3 separate advance payments
-   An advance was paid more than 13 fortnights before the new
    application and that advance has not been fully repaid, the total
    amount paid for the earlier advance payment will be subtracted from
    the maximum amount in the new advance calculation
-   An advance was paid less than 13 fortnights before the new
    application, the whole amount of that advance will be deducted from
    the maximum amount in the new advance calculation. If the first
    advance amount is taken out at the maximum amount available, if the
    amount left is less than the minimum amount, the customer will not
    be eligible for a further advance until the 13 fortnights after the
    date the advance was paid
-   The customer repays the advance early with the intent of claiming a
    new advance, the full amount of this advance will still be
    subtracted from the maximum amount until 13 fortnights after the
    date the advance was paid

For customers who had previously requested an advance payment to be paid
in 2 instalments and the second instalment is yet to be delivered, the
future delivery of the second instalment has no effect on any new
application for an advance payment.

The 'next possible advance date' field in the workflow

The advance payments workflow will provide the following information
about entitlement to future advances on the overview page. If:

-   An advance is able to be paid now, today's date will display
-   A date in the future can be determined the date will be displayed.
    The customer should be advised that the next possible advance date
    is only a guide. If there is any change to their rate, the date they
    may be able to have an advance may also change. The information is
    not a guarantee of the date they will be eligible. The customer
    should not rely on this information as a basis to enter into
    financial obligations or incur expenses

[] The 'next possible advance date' will also be available via online
and phone self service channels.

Note: the date is calculated from the information currently held on the
record, and it may change if the customer's circumstances change. The
only accurate assessment is on the day of application.

Manually calculating the next available date

Due to the complexity of the rules it is difficult to provide a future
date when a customer might become eligible for an advance payment. The
only accurate assessment is on the day of the application. Any
calculation of the next available date is an estimate only, and may be
impacted by the customer's circumstances at the time of the next
application, including:

-   the amount a person can afford to repay each fortnight
-   increases to the Advance Payment Qualifying Amount (APQA) and the
    minimum amount that may be paid
-   any delays in repaying a previous advance payment granted more than
    6 months ago

A system limitation exists for advance payments of pensions that arises
when an advance payment was granted on the customer's Entitlement Period
End Date (EPED). The Resources page contains further information and
examples of calculating the next advance date manually.

Note: it is not appropriate to estimate the next available date for an
advance payment by using the Deduction End Date field within the Manage
Advances action in Process Direct as this is not the only factor that
affects eligibility for an advance payment.

Advance payments for income managed customers

Income managed customers who apply for an advance payment will have 100%
of their advance (excluding SEA) income managed. This means the full
advance amount is credited to their Income Management account and not
their nominated bank account. Funds are available in the Income
Management account the following day and customers can access these
funds in the usual way, such as transferring money to their BasicsCard
or arranging payments to a Third Party Organisation.

Other options if customer is not eligible for an advance payment

Centrepay is a free bill-paying service offered to customers receiving
Centrelink payments.

Through Centrepay they choose to pay bills by having a regular amount
deducted from their payments and transferred electronically to an
approved organisation.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions, information
relating to grant on Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) impacting on
next available date calculation, an example of determining suitability
for a weekly payment customer to be granted an advance payment, and
examples of advance payment calculations.

Related links

Advances

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Changes to the repayment rate of an advance payment

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Raising debts of advance payments

Home Equity Access Scheme advance payments

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advances

Advance payment options

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Repaying a debt to obtain a Social Security advance payment

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Transfer income managed funds to BasicsCard online

Deletion of advance granted on incorrect record or fraudulently claimed

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
