
Refunding Australian Taxation Office (ATO) excess tax deductions 103-08030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the appropriate times to refund tax deductions
sent to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) on behalf of customers.

Refunding tax deductions

The process which allows the refunding of tax deductions from the ATO is
provided for three purposes:

-   It allows Services Australia to recover a debt more quickly by
    reducing the liability of the customer. For example, when a debt is
    raised, the tax instalments deducted during the debt period, if any,
    can be refunded and recovered by the department to reduce the
    customer's debt liability
-   It allows refunding of tax deductions which were deducted from a
    customer's payment in error, and the reissue of the tax deduction to
    the customer
-   It allows refunding of tax deductions which were deducted from a
    customer's payment if the customer "benefit transfers" from one
    payment to another in the current financial year, and the reissue of
    the tax deduction to the customer

All refunds of tax deductions must occur on payments delivered before 30
June of the financial year in which they were made. After the end of
financial year processing occurs, the customer must lodge a tax return
with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to determine if a tax refund
is payable.

When to refund tax instalments due to a debt

If a debt is raised and during the debt period the customer has had tax
deducted from their payment, then the tax deductions withheld from the
payment for the debt period must be recovered. The period to consider
for this calculation is the part of the debt period that overlaps with
the current financial year pay periods where the customer's new
determined entitlement is less than the tax amount deducted.

Once the debt becomes due (28 days after issuing an account payable),
the amount must be refunded and recovered against the debt. This action
does not require the customer's consent.

When to refund tax deductions due to an administrative error

If a service officer has failed to cancel a tax deduction or has
processed a deduction in error, the extra amount deducted may be
immediately refunded to the customer. This means that the customer does
not have to wait until after the end of the financial year to lodge an
income tax return.

When to refund tax deductions due to a retrospective benefit transfer

If a customer is in receipt of a taxable payment whilst being assessed
for another payment, the customer can elect to have tax deducted from
the taxable payment. In the event of a retrospective benefit transfer,
any tax deducted from the losing payment in the current financial year
should be refunded to the customer.

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) provided by employer

Tax instalment deduction refunds cannot be applied where Paid Parental
Leave (PPL) was provided by an employer.

The Resources page contains scenarios to assist with understanding debt
management procedures when recovering excess tax instalment deductions.

Related links

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions

Centrelink Payment Summaries

Apportioning Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debts between employers and
employees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
