-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy and process for all service delivery
staff (Medicare, Centrelink, Child Support and National Redress Scheme)
to identify instances when a customer's consent can be implied for
Services Australia to discuss and disclose their information to a third
party.

Implied authority

When a customer authorises another person (a third party) to deal with
Services Australia on the customer's behalf, the customer is also
consenting to Services Australia discussing with and disclosing their
information to that third party.

Services Australia usually requires customers to provide express
authority (written or verbal) that another person is authorised to make
enquiries or act on behalf of the customer. However, there are
situations where it is apparent from the circumstances of the customer
that a third party is dealing with Services Australia on behalf of the
customer and with the implied authority of the customer. Usually these
will be single issue or one-off type of contacts by third parties on
behalf of a customer.

When authority may be implied

Services Australia may presume there is implied authority of the
customer when contacted by third parties who are members of 'helping'
professions, and:

-   the contact is clearly related to the type of service or assistance
    those professions would provide to the customer
-   Services Australia is satisfied the professional is assisting the
    customer in relation to the customer’s business with Services
    Australia, and
-   it is reasonably certain the customer would provide express
    authority if they were able to, or if Services Australia required it

A helping professional must generally be a 'professional' in the sense
that they are subject to professional and ethical obligations as a
registered member of a professional organisation or body (for example,
Australian Medical Association, State or Territory law society).

Examples of 'helping' professions include:

-   Community legal centre lawyers and social workers
-   Guardians
-   Administrators
-   Public Trustees
-   Doctors
-   Emergency personnel (for example, Ambulance, Police)
-   Social workers*
-   Members of Parliament and their staff
-   Lawyers
-   Financial counsellors
-   Accountants and Tax Agents

* May include social workers and financial counsellors employed in those
roles by State/Territory or Commonwealth government agencies, even if
not registered with the relevant professional body.

When authority will not be implied

Authority must not be implied if there is any reasonable doubt,
ambiguity or uncertainty about:

-   whether the customer would consent to the third party acting on
    their behalf, or
-   the authenticity of the third party

Authority should not be implied in circumstances where express authority
should be required, including:

-   where the third party contact is not related to a specific
    assistance activity
-   enquiries by family members or partners
-   contact by persons who should be able to produce documents of
    enduring authority (for example, power of attorney or guardian)
-   a nominee or representative authority (or similar) arrangement is
    more appropriate for the nature of the enquiry (for example, because
    the enquiry is likely to be an ongoing matter rather than a single
    or one-off type of contact)

Confirming customer third party relationship

Staff must be satisfied that the third party is:

-   properly authenticated, and
-   providing the service or assistance to the customer

Third party authentication means staff ensuring that the person is who
they claim to be, and they are in fact a helping professional. This may
be done by using a call back procedure to the office or employer they
claim to be from. Another option may be to obtain their identification
number for cross-reference with a professional register.

Staff may be satisfied the third party is providing a service or
assistance to the customer by obtaining from the third party a completed
form or letter signed by the customer or an email from the customer
indicating the third party has been approached for assistance by the
customer. Similarly, if the third party can provide a current bill
showing the service is being provided to the customer that may be
sufficient evidence of the relationship.

In some instances, an indication by the third party that the customer
has approached them to assist with a particular matter or represent them
may be enough. For example, in relation to inquiries made by Members of
Parliament on behalf of a constituent who is also a customer of Services
Australia.

In limited circumstances, authority may be implied where there is no
other logical reason for the helping professional to be contacting
Services Australia, such as the police or ambulance service. This is
based on the presumption the customer would authorise the person if they
could, but may not be able to - for example if the customer is
unconscious or too ill to provide express authority. These details
should be restricted to only what is necessary in the circumstances,
which will often be emergency-type situations.

Smart Centres should still issue call receipt numbers accordingly.

Information that may be provided

Each instance must be judged on its merits. However, the usual
expectation is Services Australia will only provide the minimum
information that is clearly relevant to the type of help the
professional is providing to the customer. See the Resources page for
examples. Note: the agency cannot update customer records from the
information supplied.

Recording the contact

Staff must document on the customer’s record:

-   the name and organisation/agency/company of the helping professional
-   how the person was authenticated
-   what evidence showed the person was providing a service or
    assistance to the customer
-   how or why they are satisfied the customer would provide express
    consent if able to or if required by Services Australia
-   the issue or matter the person contacted Services Australia about,
    and
-   what information was disclosed to the person and, where appropriate,
    collected from the person

The Resources page contains a link to the Privacy and Secrecy homepage
and examples of types of assistance provided by a third party and
information Services Australia may provide.

Related links

Disclosing information to third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
