
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information for staff when they are a
correspondence or payment nominee for a Centrelink claimant/recipient
while an employee of Services Australia. For nominee purposes, the
claimant/recipient is known as the principal.

Employee's duties to Services Australia

As both a staff member and a nominee, staff should avoid situations that
present, or may be seen to present, a conflict of interest.

When interacting with Services Australia as a nominee, it is important
that staff continue to observe the Australian Public Service (APS) Code
of Conduct, which states that staff must not make improper use of their
duties, status, power or authority, in order to gain, or seek to gain, a
benefit or advantage for themselves or any other person. Staff must not:

-   abuse their knowledge and/or position to gain any unfair advantages
    for themselves or others
-   seek to use their APS position or confidential Services Australia
    knowledge to improve their private sector employment prospects

Staff, whose duties involve access to claimant/recipient, staff or third
party records:

-   must not use staff portals (for example Customer First) to access
    their own records, or the records of their principal, work
    colleague, friend or relative. Being a nominee does not grant the
    authority to access nominee records through staff portals. This
    applies even when there is a legitimate business purpose and/or the
    principal, colleague, friend or relative has given their permission
-   are to use self-service options and Smart Centre to help avoid the
    risk of any perceived conflicts of interest
-   when conducting business with Services Australia, a nominee must
    report their own and their principal's circumstances accurately.
    Failure to report accurately or acting illegally, with the intent to
    gain a financial advantage from the social, health or welfare
    systems is fraud and will be investigated

Conducting business as a Centrelink nominee

Self-service

Self service is encouraged for all staff when dealing with Services
Australia. It provides all claimants/recipients and nominees with the
opportunity to conduct business outside work hours at their leisure from
their own home and free of any queue waiting times.

When interacting with Services Australia as a nominee, the preferred
method of contact is by digital self services such as myGov, or the
Centrelink phone self service line.

Further information is available on Services Australia's Self service
page. The Resources page contains a link to this page.

Staff as Customers phone line

If the self service options are not available, appropriate or possible
for Centrelink business, then staff should use the Staff as Customers
phone line.

The Staff as Customers phone line is dedicated for staff who are also
Services Australia claimants/recipients or nominees. If automatic or
digital options are not available, the Staff as Customers phone line
allows staff to conduct their own or their principal’s Centrelink
business in a supportive environment and minimises actual or perceived
conflict of interest issues. The Resources page contains a link to the
Ethics page which includes further information about Staff as customers.

Face-to-face contact

There will be circumstances when a face-to-face interaction with
Services Australia may be necessary, for example to attend an interview
in person. Where this is the case:

staff should, if possible, attend a different service centre from where
they work

staff should be served by an unknown staff member - served by staff who
do not know them personally

if unable to attend a different service centre - that is, if the
principal/claimant/recipient business is to occur at the service centre
where the staff member works:

-   the staff member is to liaise with the manager of the service centre
    to ensure their appointment is booked with a Service Officer where
    no real or perceived conflict of interest will arise or occur
-   in accordance with policy requirements, the manager will document
    that the Service Officer was given approval to access the record

Smart Centre contact

A call may be needed to a Smart Centre for business which cannot be
processed through the Staff as Customers phone line or using the self
service options. If the staff member or the Service Officer identify
they know one another:

-   then a conflict of interest may occur and the call will be
    redirected to another Service Officer immediately
-   the initial Service Officer is to advise their team leader and must
    then complete an Inadvertent Access Notification Form

The Resources page contains a link to this form and further information.

Report a suspected fraud

All staff and contractors have a responsibility to report suspected
fraud or unauthorised access. All suspected fraud involving an employee
or contractor must be reported, see Report Suspected Fraud and
Corruption.

If the allegation of suspected fraud relates to a Senior Executive in
Services Australia, the matter is to be reported to:

-   General Manager, Business Integrity Division
-   General Manager, People Services Division, or
-   directly to the Secretary

The Resources page contains links to further information on fraud
prevention and related forms.

Employment outside of Services Australia

Outside employment is any paid, unpaid or voluntary work undertaken for
another employer or organisation while employed by Services Australia.
This includes times when the employee is absent from duty on paid or
unpaid leave.

Outside employment can include:

paid employment such as:

-   running a business
-   maintaining a professional practice
-   being the director or partner of an organisation or company
-   accepting or holding an office in or under any state/territory
    government or any public or municipal corporation
-   working as a tax agent, financial counsellor, lawyer or accountant

voluntary work including:

-   working for charitable or not for profit organisations; and/or
    undertaking general community based activities

Staff are able to perform work outside Services Australia, provided this
work does not actually or potentially:

-   cause detriment to the performance of their official duties
-   be construed by the public as involving a conflict of interest
-   lead to a clash of loyalties
-   conflict or interfere with the performance of their official duties,
    or bring Services Australia or the APS into disrepute

Permission from manager

Paid work - staff must obtain permission from their manager before
engaging in outside employment. The Resources page contains a link to
additional information and the Application to engage in outside
employment (PP008) form.

Voluntary work - permission to engage in outside employment is not
required for unpaid volunteer work. However, employees should advise
their manager when undertaking voluntary work. This will ensure that
managers are able to assist employees with managing any real or
perceived conflict of interest. There is no need to complete the
application to engage in outside employment form for volunteer work. A
record of the conversation with the manager must be obtained for example
a saved email conversation.

Staff as National Redress Scheme nominees

For staff who are nominees for the purposes of the National Redress
Scheme, see Nominees for the National Redress Scheme.

Staff as Medicare or Child Support representatives

A claimant/recipient may also request to have a representative to assist
them for Medicare or Child Support purposes. This document does not
cover Medicare or Child Support customers.

For information on Medicare or Child Support representatives, see:

-   Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and
    Authorised Representative for Medicare
-   Authenticating a Child Support customer
-   Customer representative Cuba Process Help

The Resources page contains links to forms, additional information on
nominees, fraud, policy relating to outside employment and contact
details.

Related links

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Self service for nominees

Accepting information from nominees

Obligations of nominees

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

Authenticating a Child Support customer

Customer representative Cuba Process Help

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
