
Managing customer complaints and feedback 104-02000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the complaints and feedback management process
for Services Australia's Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare. It
includes processes for compliments and suggestions.

Services Australia complaints and feedback

The agency receives and manages customer complaints and feedback across
each service delivery brand. The management process is governed by the:

-   Customer Complaints and Feedback Policy and
-   the Customer Complaint and Feedback Management Guidelines

The agency follows the principles of complaint handling outlined in the
Commonwealth Ombudsman's Better Practice Guide to Complaints Handling.

The Multicultural and Tailored Services Branch is responsible for:

-   all policy and procedures to do with customer complaints and
    feedback, and
-   the management of all Level 2 complaints

Apolitical

The Australian Public Service (APS) is apolitical. Service Officers
must:

-   remain apolitical
-   be aware of the APS Code of Conduct
-   discuss with their manager any conflict of interest

Types of customer feedback

Feedback is a term used to reflect a complaint, compliment or
suggestion.

A complaint is made if:

-   a person expresses dissatisfaction in relation to a product or
    service, and
-   a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected or
    legally required

Compliment - an expression of praise for a staff member, product or
service provided by the agency.

Suggestion - a proposal to consider improvement or change to a product
or service, typically because of observation or experience.

General Payments and Services

All complaints trained staff are skill-tagged with Service Type ‘General
Payments and Services’. The Service Detail topics (listed below) must
not be re-categorised or assessed as being out-of-scope. Technical
assistance must be sought if help is required.

-   Advance Payment
-   BasicsCard
-   Case Management
-   Cashless Debit Card
-   Centrelink Compensation Recovery
-   Centrepay Deduction Service
-   Complaint or Feedback Handling
-   Confirmation eServices
-   Crisis Payment
-   Debt Recovery
-   Early Release of Superannuation
-   Education Entry Payment
-   Electronic Verification of Rent
-   Fares Allowance
-   Financial Information Service
-   Income Management
-   Low Income Health Care Card
-   Mobility Allowance
-   Pension Loans Scheme
-   Pension Supplement
-   Pensioner Concession Card
-   Pensioner Education Supplement
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Rent Assistance
-   Rent Deduction Scheme
-   Social Work Services
-   Telephone Allowance
-   Urgent Payment
-   Utilities Allowance

Characteristics of a complaint

Feedback can be given about the agency:

-   by phone
-   in writing,
-   in person, or
-   online

Feedback can be given about a service, process or decision of the agency
by:

-   a customer - payer, recipient, parent, non-parent carer or employer
-   a legal and/or authorised representative of a customer
-   a member of the public
-   individuals who are not customers of the agency, or
-   an external stakeholder, for example a Member of Parliament or the
    Commonwealth Ombudsman, on behalf of a customer, or
-   individuals who wish to remain anonymous

The staff member taking the complaint is responsible for:

-   confirming with the customer whether they are making a general
    enquiry or a complaint
-   managing the customer's general enquiry by providing general
    information

In this document:

-   'customer' refers to customers of the agency who lodge a complaint
-   'non-customer complaints' are made by individuals who are not
    customers of the agency

A complaint is not a review of the technical correctness of a decision.
Customers need to pursue their review and appeal rights through the
relevant channels such as:

-   agency formal review or objection processes
-   Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Complaints and feedback management process

The agency has 2 levels of complaint management. Customers are advised:

-   which level their complaint is being investigated at (Level 1 or
    Level 2)
-   the expected timeframe to finalise the matter, and
-   subsequent escalation options should they remain dissatisfied with
    the outcome

Level 1 complaint

This is the response to customers managed at first point of contact and
includes complaints received:

-   on the agency’s Feedback and Complaints line
-   via a general business queue
-   in a service centre
-   on an outbound call
-   in writing
-   online

The Service Officer who receives the complaint takes ownership of the
complaint and attempts to resolve it for the customer. This may require
support from:

-   Technical Assistance or
-   a Manager

See Level 1 -Manage customer complaints and feedback.

Level 2 complaint

A complaint that cannot be resolved at Level 1 and meets a complaint
escalation reason is managed as a Level 2 complaint.

To escalate a complaint to Level 2, see Level 1 -Manage customer
complaints and feedback or Level 1 complaints - Child Support.

To manage a Level 2 complaint, see Level 2 complaints.

The Resources page contains scenarios that show the differences and key
indicators for feedback compared to reviews, appeals, and general
enquiries.

Complaints and feedback principles

All Centrelink and Medicare Feedback must be recorded in the Customer
Feedback Tool (CFT).

If the customer has lodged their feedback online, the details page
coding schema must be reviewed in order to determine if the CFT has been
coded correctly.

First contact resolution

The staff member who first receives the feedback:

-   takes ownership of the feedback and
-   will investigate and attempt to finalise it

First contact resolution applies to all feedback including written
complaints and complaints received online.

First contact resolution is about resolving the customer feedback or
issue at the point of entry, addressing all outstanding issues and
applying a collaborative approach with specialist areas when needed.

Compliments and suggestions are managed and finalised at Level 1.

Start-to-finish management by a complaints owner

A staff member retains ownership of a complaint until it is finalised or
is escalated to a Level 2 complaint. A Level 1 complaint is considered
finalised when:

all reasonable actions have been taken to resolve the issue

the customer has been advised of:

-   the complaint outcome
-   suitable options for escalation if they remain dissatisfied

If consultation with specialists is required, the staff member managing
the complaint retains ownership of the complaint while consulting with
relevant business owners and stakeholders to resolve issues.

Address and action all outstanding business and issues. Make the
customer aware of next steps to prevent unnecessary contact.

Outcome of complaints

-   Help business areas improve the services provided
-   Highlight systemic or administrative problems in business areas. The
    References page contains more details about systemic issues
-   Customer may offer suggestions to improve service delivery

When complaints or feedback are recorded, regular reports are provided
to business areas to enable trends and systemic issues to be identified
and addressed.

Children and young people

Complaints from children and young people, under the age of 18, are
considered sensitive in nature, and must be managed accordingly. If a
staff member, in the course of their duties, identifies concerns about a
child’s safety, immediate steps must be taken.

Refer to Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or
welfare of a child and Level 1 - Manage customer complaints and
feedback.

Staff and customer safety

If the customer making the complaint is aggressive or making threats,
staff and customer safety is the top priority. Complaints Officers
should:

-   talk to a Team Leader or Manager
-   report the incident
-   use supports available

If a customer threatens to harm themselves or another person, respond
immediately.

Many customers contact the agency at times when they are vulnerable and
in crisis. Supports include:

-   Customer aggression
-   Customers talking about suicide or self-harm
-   Family and domestic violence
-   Social work services
-   Escalation Coordination team

Apologies

Acknowledging someone's feelings or point of view without necessarily
agreeing with their perspective can:

-   help build rapport
-   show empathy and care

An effective apology includes:

-   admitting to the problem, to help the person feel heard and
    understood
-   acknowledging that the agency was responsible, if that was the case
-   explaining to the person how the problem came about
-   assuring the person that the problem will not happen again, for
    example by explaining what processes the agency or service delivery
    brand (Centrelink, Child Support or Medicare) has put in place
-   recognising that a person's real grievance may have an emotive
    element and be different from how their complaint was expressed

Recording complaints, compliments and suggestions

Complaints, compliments and suggestions are recorded in:

-   the Customer Feedback Tool, or
-   Cuba

The Customer Feedback Tool is used by staff to report all Centrelink and
Medicare customer complaints, compliments and suggestions.

For information about how to record complaints, compliments and
suggestions in the Customer Feedback Tool, see Recording customer
complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool.

Cuba is used by staff to record Child Support complaints and
compliments.

For information about how to record complaints and compliments in Cuba,
see Recording Child Support complaints and compliments in Cuba.

The Staff Feedback Tool:

-   records internal feedback (that is, staff to staff or staff to team)
-   is not used to record feedback from customers or behavioural
    feedback about staff
-   gives feedback about a service failure. This is where a service
    officer has identified an internal service failure separate to the
    issue raised by the customer

Documenting customer feedback

Notes are a record of customer feedback. They give concise details of
actions taken.

Effective documentation

-   Provides an accurate record of feedback management
-   Give details for a third party to analyse and understand the issue
    and the action/s taken
-   Under Freedom of Information (FOI) feedback may be released to
    customers and third parties
-   Satisfies legislative and regulatory requirements
-   Explains decisions and gives accountability this ensures feedback is
    useful for process improvement purposes

Principles of Feedback Documentation

Must be accurate, relevant, easy to comprehend and factual

Record the customer's feedback verbatim where possible

Language must not be judgemental, speculative or emotive

Expand abbreviations in first instance

Record logon IDs rather than staff names

Details:

-   Chronology of events (that is, who, when what where and how)
-   Investigations
-   Referrals made
-   Customer contacts and conversations
-   Apology, if provided

The Resources page contains:

-   Customer complaints and feedback index
-   Services Australia Customer Complaint and Feedback Management
    Guidelines
-   Complaint escalation reasons
-   Differences between a complaint and a formal review or objection
-   Questioning techniques
-   Contact details
-   Security incident reporting link
-   Intranet links
-   Links to external websites

Contents

Centrelink and Medicare

Level 1 - Manage customer complaints and feedback (CLK) (MED)

Level 2 complaints

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool

Level 1 - Online customer feedback

Level 2 complaints (CLK) (MED)

Level 2 complaints - vulnerable customers and high risk complaints (CLK)
(MED)

Level 2 complaints - Ombudsman, Ministerial, MP, Media and executive
correspondence (CLK) (MED)

Requesting access to the Customer Feedback Tool

Child Support

Level 2 complaints

Level 1 complaints - Child Support

Level 2 complaints - Child Support

Recording Child Support complaints and compliments in Cuba

Written Complaints received - Child Support

Related links

Reviews and appeals

Reviewing Child Support decisions

Request for review of legislative decisions (Medicare)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
