
Accepting and disclosing information regarding trusts and companies 104-04040030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines accepting and disclosing information that
Services Australia has collected and recorded to assess the means test
treatment of private trusts and private companies.

Collecting and recording information

It is necessary for Services Australia to collect and record information
on the private trusts and private companies.

The information available on private trust and private company files and
computer records can often involve more than one person or customer.
Staff should be aware of this and be very careful when accessing private
trust or private company files and records. Information held on these
files and computer records is subject to the same confidentiality and
privacy provisions as all other customer information.

Disclosure of information

Services Australia staff cannot disclose the following:

-   Personal details of any shareholders or beneficiaries (including
    whether or not they are a customer) to anyone, including controllers
-   The details and names of other beneficiaries
-   Tax File Numbers (TFN)

Services Australia staff can disclose the following:

-   Information about the trust or company’s income and assets can be
    confirmed with a controller or nominated contact person
-   Information about a customer’s own assessment
-   Names of shareholders as this information is readily available from
    Australian Securities and Investments Commission

Data matching

Information provided by one customer on a Module PC - Private Company,
or Module PT - Private Trust can be used in respect of another; and
information provided by a customer may generate a request for additional
information from another customer, in line with standard data matching
procedures. Staff should be very careful when accessing and printing any
organisation details and be sure to delete information which is not
relevant to the customer they are dealing with.

CAO escalation

Where a Service Officer is unable to help the customer with their
enquiries or are unsure on privacy issues, they should refer the
customer to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). This should be done via
CAO escalation.

The Resources page contains links to the Privacy and Secrecy intranet
page and Office Locator.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
