
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage online complaints, suggestions and
compliments.

Feedback channel

Feedback refers to a complaint, suggestion or compliment. Online
feedback can be submitted using the feedback webforms available for:

-   customers on their online account or Services Australia website
-   non-customers via the Services Australia website

The feedback webform aims to capture feedback detail in the 'voice of
the customer'. Customers and non-customers are asked to provide details
of the:

-   service the feedback relates to
-   reason for the feedback
-   outcome sought, and
-   contact details if follow-up from Services Australia is needed

The feedback webform converts directly into the Customer Feedback Tool
(CFT). Feedback work items present to Level 1 Complaints and Feedback
skill-tagged officers.

Authenticated, unauthenticated and anonymous feedback

Authenticated

A feedback webform is authenticated if lodged directly from a customer's
Centrelink online account. The customer is provided with a feedback ID.

Unauthenticated

A feedback item is unauthenticated if lodged via the Services Australia
website by a customer or non-customer.

The person submitting the feedback is asked to provide a Customer
Reference Number (CRN) or Medicare number. The number given is displayed
in the feedback notes. The feedback will not be linked to a customer
record and the Customer ID will display as 'no customer ID found'. The
customer will be provided with a Feedback ID.

Note: all Medicare online feedback is unauthenticated.

Anonymous

If the person does not want to be identified, or they do not know their
CRN or Medicare number, the online feedback form can be submitted
anonymously. The person submitting the feedback has the option of
providing identifying information in the notes. A Feedback ID is not
provided when feedback is lodged anonymously.

If the person chooses not to provide a CRN or Medicare number, a message
will advise the:

-   feedback will be submitted anonymously
-   agency will be unable to contact them
-   feedback cannot be viewed from their customer record
-   feedback status cannot be viewed

Customers can view their feedback and status

Customers can use the Feedback ID provided to:

-   view the date the feedback was submitted
-   view the feedback type - complaint, compliment or suggestion
-   view the current feedback status
-   view the date the feedback was last updated
-   add comments

Note: customers cannot view the full Customer Feedback Tool (CFT) entry
and they cannot see notes added by staff.

Feedback Status

The Status field in the CFT must be kept updated. Customers can view the
status of their feedback and see the agency is actively working on it.

The customer can see the following statuses:

-   Awaiting response: We are awaiting a response from either yourself
    or another business team
-   Escalated: We have escalated your feedback to a dedicated team to
    investigate
-   Feedback received: We have received your submitted feedback
-   Finalised: We have completed our investigation of your feedback
-   Investigation in Progress: We are investigating your feedback
-   Pending Finalisation: We are near to finalising investigation of
    your feedback

Other Feedback Status options exist, however must not be used.

User added comments to customer online feedback

Customers can add comments to an open authenticated or unauthenticated
online feedback if it was not submitted anonymously. Customer comments
will display in the Notes History tab in the feedback item in the CFT
entry.

If the CFT entry is assigned to an Employee Responsible, a notification
email is automatically sent to the employee responsible.

Note: there is no functionality to respond to customers through this
channel.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms, the
intranet and Services Australia website.

Related links

Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
