
Customer password on a Display on Access DOC 104-04040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information on passwords including how to place a
password on a customer record, what to do when a password is recorded
and how to delete a password.

Creating passwords

A customer may request a password on their record. Passwords are
recorded via the:

-   Display on Access (DOA) DOCument, or
-   DOC screen alert message facility

Advise the customer to provide a password that does not contain common
information such as:

-   family names, and
-   birthdates

Action required when a password is recorded

If there is a password on a customer's record the Service Officer must
ask the customer to provide it each time they contact Services
Australia. The password is recorded as an alert on the customer record
as a Display on Access (DOA) DOC.

If there is one DOA DOC present:

-   it will auto display when the Service Office enters the record

If there are multiple DOA DOCs present:

-   access the 'Display on access documents' heading
-   the Document List (DL) screen will display a list of DOA DOCS
-   check the DL screen for a password when accessing a customer's
    record

A password does not replace authenticating a customer. The password is
in addition to authenticating a customer. The password will provide
extra assurance for customers that Services Australia is not giving out
personal information.

Note: failing to ask the customer for their password may lead the
customer to believe Services Australia is not taking their privacy
seriously and that their details may be accessed by an unauthorised
third party. A Service Officer can access the record in the course of
their duties.

A customer can amend or delete a password after being authenticated. The
customer's request and the changes made should be noted in a DOC on
their record.

If a customer has been authenticated via Voice Biometrics technology or
the Interactive Voice Response (IVR) process, the Smart Centre Service
Officer must ask the customer to provide their password.

Nominee passwords on a customer's record

A nominee will be asked to provide a mandatory password which they must
supply each time they contact the agency on behalf of the customer. The
nominee's password is situated on the Nominee Relationship Summary
(NORS) screen and therefore does not need to be recorded on a Display on
Access DOC.

If the nominee forgets their password the Service Officer should attempt
to identify the nominee using alternative methods before disclosing
information to the nominee.

If the nominee cannot be identified using an alternative method they
must attend a Service Centre with adequate proof of identity, after
which the nominee's password can be disclosed or changed.

Related links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Accepting and disclosing information

Appointing nominees

Restricted Access and eligibility

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Disclosing information to a nominee

Changing personal details of nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
