
Authorised representatives and nominees 104-17071700

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the ways that individuals or organisations could
represent a Services Australia customer for each service delivery brand.

Customer representatives

There are a number of ways individuals and organisations can represent
customers. A customer representative might be:

-   a Centrelink nominee
-   a Centrelink and aged care nominee
-   an aged care only nominee
-   Child Support authorised representative
-   Medicare authorised representative or
-   National Redress Scheme nominee

Each service delivery brand is governed by its own specific legislation.
Different brands have their own rules about what a representative can do
and when and what information can be provided to someone who is not the
customer.

It is critical to correctly identify the role and limitations of
customer representatives. If the customer makes use of multiple
services, a representative can only represent the customer in the
service offer for which they are authorised. For example, unless they
are specifically authorised, a Centrelink correspondence nominee cannot
represent the same customer for Child Support or Medicare.

An individual or organisation could represent a customer for more than
one service offer. For example, they could be both a Centrelink nominee
and a Medicare authorised representative. As a correspondence nominee is
the same for Centrelink and aged care, they can represent the customer
for both services.

The level of access to a customer's personal information varies between
types of representatives. When a customer undergoes a change of
circumstances such as a separation resulting in the unlinking of
records:

representative arrangements must be reviewed before updating any
personal details. This ensures the customer's personal details remain
protected

updates must be made separately (including ending arrangements for
another person to act on their behalf) for:

-   Centrelink
-   Medicare and
-   Child Support

There are key steps a customer should consider when reviewing their
representative arrangements because they are separating from a
relationship. This ensures they keep their personal information safe.
See Separating Safely - Protecting personal details.

Centrelink

Correspondence nominee (NOC)

A correspondence nominee is an individual, for example, a friend or
relative, or an organisation appointed to conduct Centrelink business
and aged care costs on behalf of a customer. For example:

-   make enquiries
-   advise Services Australia of changes to the customer's circumstances
-   complete and sign forms and statements
-   attend appointments with the customer or, if appropriate, on their
    behalf
-   receive a copy of all Centrelink and aged care costs mail

See Appointing nominees.

Payment nominee (NOP)

A payment nominee is an individual, for example, a friend or relative,
or an organisation appointed to receive the customer's payments on their
behalf. A payment nominee:

-   can only use the payments for the customer's benefit
-   must keep records of the payments received and how they have spent
    the money for the customer's benefit

See Appointing nominees.

Nominee for aged care

A correspondence nominees can deal with Services Australia for aged care
costs purposes for a mutual Centrelink and aged care customer.

Customers with a correspondence nominee arrangements can also have
person permitted to enquire or update arrangements with other third
parties. These can be for both Centrelink and aged care costs purposes.

Aged care nominees who are not also recorded as a correspondence
nominee, such as DVA customers, will have their nominee arrangements
under aged care provisions only.

The nominee may:

-   get details about care costs and means assessments
-   give income and asset details to Services Australia
-   get aged care letters

See Aged care request for a nominee.

Separate authorised representative arrangements apply to My Aged Care
services.

Review of a nominee arrangement

A review of a nominee arrangement can be carried out at any time for a
range of reasons. It is preferable to review voluntary arrangements:

-   annually or
-   where there is a change in circumstances such as change of address,
    new claim for payment or separation from partner

Customers can ask to cancel a voluntary arrangement []online, verbally
or in writing. Where a nominee asks to cease an arrangements, the
request must be received in writing, except in certain circumstances.

See Resources for a link to the Authorising a person or organisation to
act on your behalf (SS313).

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Person Permitted to Update (PPU) authority

Customers can give authorisation for individuals, for example, partners,
friends or parents, or organisations to enquire and/or act on their
behalf. These are known as Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Person
Permitted to Update (PPU) and are not nominee arrangements. PPE and PPU
arrangements are also applicable for aged care costs purposes.

To update authorisations, see Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or
Update (PPU) authority.

To ensure PPE/PPU arrangements are current they should be reviewed by
the customer when they have a change in circumstances such as:

-   change of address
-   new claim for payment or
-   separation from partner

PPE arrangements can be ceased by the customer online if the PPE is
their partner. Other PPE arrangements and all PPU arrangements must be
ceased over the phone.

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE)

A customer receiving SRSS payments can voluntarily authorise a person or
organisation to enquire on their behalf. The customer can request this:

-   verbally, if appointing their Department of Home Affairs contracted
    service provider, or
-   by lodging a completed Status Resolution Support Services Payment -
    authorising a person or organisation to enquire on your behalf
    (Status Resolution Support Services Payment - authorising a person
    or organisation to enquire on your behalf form (SU698))

See Person Permitted to Enquire for Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payment customers.

Other third party arrangements

In limited circumstances a third party may have authority to make
enquiries on behalf of a person in the absence of a nominee, PPE or PPU
arrangement. This includes express authority, implied authority and
public interest provisions. See Disclosing information to third parties.

Express Authority

Powers of Attorney, Guardianship and Administration orders are other
forms of express authority based on a legal document. The type of
information that can be disclosed to them depends on the scope of the
authority. A copy of the document must be sighted before any information
is released, and be stored on the customer's record to assist with
further interactions.

See Accepting information from and disclosing information to a Power of
Attorney.

Implied Authority

Implied authority of the customer may exist when the agency is contacted
by third parties who are members of 'helping' professions. Information
may be released where it is clear that the organisation is helping the
customer, the contact is relevant and the customer would provide consent
if they were able.

See Implied consent regarding third parties.

Medicare

Authorised representative

Authorised representative arrangements provide the authority to act on
behalf of a customer for Medicare purposes. They are not based on legal
documents.

A customer can only have one authorised representative at a time.

An authorised representative must:

-   be over 18 years of age
-   be an individual who is a close friend or relative of the customer
-   not be a paid carer from an organisation, institution or community
    health service

A completed Authorisation to act on an incapacitated person's behalf for
Medicare purposes form (MO050) (see Resources for a link to the form)
may be submitted online at servicesaustralia.gov.au, by post or
presented at a service centre, and must include:

-   proof of identification
-   a statutory declaration stating the relationship between the
    applicant and their responsibility to the customer
-   evidence of similar arrangements with another service brand,
    government agency or organisation
-   evidence of the customer's inability to manage their own affairs

See Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and
Authorised Representative for Medicare.

Authorised Representatives arrangements can be ceased by the customer or
Authorised representative over the phone.

To ensure Authorised Representative arrangements are current, they
should be reviewed by the customer or authorised representative when
they have a change in circumstances such as:

-   change of address
-   new claim for payment or
-   separation from partner

Power of attorney, guardianship orders and administration orders

Powers of attorney, guardianship orders and administration orders
provide the legal authority to act on behalf of someone else. The
difference between these types of documents is the way in which a person
has been appointed to act on behalf of another individual.

-   Power of attorney is a written document given by one person to
    another and authorising them to act for him/her on their behalf.
    Financial power of attorney allows interaction with Services
    Australia
-   Guardianship and administration orders are written documents given
    by a court or tribunal appointing a legal guardian or administrator
    to act on behalf of an individual

The original or certified copy of the power of attorney, guardianship
order or administration order can be submitted online at
servicesaustralia.gov.au, by post or presented at a service centre.
Service Officers must record the details in the Medicare Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS).

See Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and
Authorised Representative for Medicare.

Child Support

Child Support authorised representative

Customers can authorise Services Australia to communicate their child
support information to an individual or organisation. This is an
authorised representative with ordinary authority.

Authorised representatives can provide or receive information about a
customer's child support case, but cannot make applications or elections
for the customer.

Authorised representatives are often the customer's relative, partner,
or solicitor.

See Child Support representative with ordinary authority.

Child Support Authorised Representative arrangements:

-   can be ceased by the customer over the phone
-   should be reviewed as appropriate. For example, when a customer
    lodges an application for a new assessment, where the other parent
    was previously recorded as the representative

Child Support authorised agent

An authorised agent is a person with legal authority to act on a child
support customer's behalf. The legal authority could be a power of
attorney or an administrator appointed by a court or tribunal if the
person is unable to make their own decisions about child support.

An authorised agent acts for the child support customer as if they are
the customer and agents can make applications and elections for the
customer.

See Child Support authorised agent.

National Redress Scheme

National Redress Scheme nominee

For the National Redress Scheme, there are 2 types of nominees:

-   assistance nominee
-   legal nominee

See Nominees for the National Redress Scheme and a link to the Redress
Nominee form.

The Resources page contains a links to forms and the Separated Parents
Transformation page.

Contents

Nominees

Power of Attorney, Guardianship, Administrative Orders and Authorised
Representative for Medicare

Child Support representative with ordinary authority

Child Support authorised agent

Related links

Separating safely - protecting personal details

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Tax agents authority to enquire on behalf of customers

Reviewing nominee arrangements

Staff as nominees

Aged care request for nominee

Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Update (PPU) authority

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Disclosing information to third parties

Granting and recording parental permission to enquire

Disclosing information to parents of Youth Allowance customers

Person Permitted to Enquire for Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payment customers

Accepting information from and disclosing information to Power of
Attorney

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Customer requests access to their personal information

Administrative release

Identity checks and confirmation for Child Support

Disclosing information under child support law

Deceased Child Support Customer Management

Ministerial Correspondence regarding Child Support customers

Parliamentarian Interactions with Child Support customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
