
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains the process to use when implementing a Managed
Service Plan (MSP).

Advising customers of MSP decisions

Once an MSP is approved the customer must be advised of the decision to
implement it. Every attempt must be made to contact the customer by
phone to explain the MSP including:

-   the reasons for implementation
-   the duration of the MSP
-   the way the customer can interact with Services Australia

When telephone contact is unsuccessful, sending an MSP SMS through
desktop messaging should be considered (Centrelink customers only).

The customer must also be notified of the MSP in writing. In some
serious cases, the letter may be handed to the customer by police, if
these arrangements exist. When this happens, this must be recorded as a
note in the MSP.

There may be exceptional circumstances when it is appropriate to notify
the customer in writing only. In these cases, the reason must be
recorded as a note in the MSP.

Important information about the end date for MSPs

An MSP will end on the end date of the MSP recorded in the Customer
Incident Management System (CIMS). The customer will return to standard
servicing arrangements unless a decision is made to extend or vary the
MSP via a review.

See Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Reviewing.

Request support from the Customer Aggression Prevention Team (CAPT)

MSPs are managed through the Customer Incident Management System (CIMS)
for:

-   all Centrelink customers
-   Medicare Public (Proactive MSP with restrictions)
-   some Child Support customers when there’s an identified risk to
    other service brands

MSPs for Health Service Delivery Providers are recorded in the Customer
Incident Recording Tool (CIRT)

Staff can contact the CAPT for support and advice when implementing an
MSP. See Resources for a link to the CAPT intranet page.

The Resources page contains a link to MSP letter guidelines and a link
to the intranet page for CAPT’s contact details.

Related links

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Staff support

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Proposing, recording and approving

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer not complying

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Reviewing

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - One-off variation

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer service delivered through a One
Main Contact (OMC)

Family and domestic violence

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
