
Customer aggression – filming, recording and photography 104-07020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines support for staff in handling instances when a
member of the public, third party or nominee organisation records or
takes photos of an interaction with Services Australia. This includes
any type of audio, visual or audio-visual recording device.

General information

Privacy and security of staff, assets and customers while on Services
Australia premises are a critical focus of Services Australia.

The Audio and Audio-Visual Recording policy provides all Services
Australia staff with a clear and consistent approach for managing
instances when members of the public record, or advise that they will
record their interaction with Services Australia by using audio, visual
or audio-visual recording devices.

Services Australia does not permit a member of the public, third party
or nominee organisation to record an interaction in the face-to-face or
telephony environments with any type of audio, visual or audio-visual
recording device, other than making a reasonable adjustment for
customers with disability. For example a customer who is deaf, has
hearing loss or a speech disability.

In circumstances where permission to record is given, take steps to
minimise the risks. Where possible, the conversation should take place
in a location where third party conversations cannot be picked up by the
recording. Use an interview room (in line with the guidelines for the
use of interview rooms) so there is no risk of other interactions being
overheard and recorded. Note this on the individual's record.

Where information relating to a third party may be discussed with the
customer, the customer should be advised of the sensitive nature of that
information, and to only use the recording for the purposes of helping
the customer’s understanding of the conversation.

While not illegal, the privacy of other customers could be adversely
affected if a customer records, films or takes a photograph in a service
centre. Australian Privacy Principle 11.1 in the Privacy Act 1988
requires Services Australia to take reasonable steps to protect the
personal information of its customers from misuse, interference and
unauthorised access.

This policy is consistent with Services Australia's:

-   obligations under the Australian Privacy Principles to control and
    protect customer and staff information
-   right as an occupier of premises to determine the circumstances
    under which a person is permitted to enter its premises

Any kind of surveillance undertaken by Services Australia is not covered
by this policy.

If staff become aware that a member of the public or a customer is
recording their interaction, the staff member should:

-   tell the person that recording is not permitted by Services
    Australia
-   ask the person to stop recording and to delete the recording
-   if necessary, seek support from their leadership team
-   not try to take the device from the person

If a person refuses to stop recording:

Authorised staff can direct them to leave the premises under Section 12
of Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971 Act using
the following script:

"I am an authorised person for the purposes of paragraph 12(2)(c) of the
Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971, and I am
directing you to leave by virtue of the powers conferred under that Act.
You will be liable to prosecution if you do not comply with this
direction."

The authorised person can use a shorter version in some circumstances,
as long as they achieve substantial compliance with the wording of the
direction, including that:

-   they are authorised under the Public Order Act to direct that the
    person leaves the premises, and
-   that the person will be liable to prosecution if they fail to comply

See the Resources page for a link to the Public Order Act intranet page.

Telephony staff can end the call.

Any kind of surveillance undertaken by the agency is not covered by this
policy.

Contact with external organisations

At times, Services Australia staff may need to contact an organisation
to confirm or get information about customers. Some third party and
nominee organisations may use call recording.

While Services Australia generally does not permit a third party or
nominee organisation to record interactions and can ask that they stop
the recording, ending a call may prevent the department from conducting
its business. It may not be practicable or warranted in circumstances
where the privacy risk is small.

Such organisations are typically required to comply with Commonwealth,
state or territory privacy legislation, and know and comply with any
surveillance legislation applicable to their call recording practices.

In these cases, if a caller identifies themselves from a Third Party
organisation, confirming their organisation’s terms of usage, Services
Australia Staff may proceed with the call when satisfied they are
speaking to an authorised person/representative.

For further advice and information, refer to the Customer Aggression
Prevention Team (CAPT) or the Employment Law Team. See the Resources
page for contact details.

Recording conversations in a service centre or via phone call

Conversations can occur when a customer calls Services Australia, or
interacts with a staff member face to face.

Private activity

Generally, it is not illegal for a person to make audio or audio-visual
recordings where they are party to a private activity. Given the public
usually communicate personal information when conducting Services
Australia business, it is likely that these interactions are private.

Recording without consent

Where a person is not a party to a private conversation, it is unlawful
to record audible conversations without the consent of each party
involved.

If a staff member believes that someone has unlawfully recorded an audio
or audio-visual conversation, the staff member should discuss this with
their manager. They may be directed to contact Services Australia’s
Employment law and FOI branch and/or police for further investigation. A
police report is an avenue open to all Services Australia staff.

Where a customer does not comply with a request to cease recording and
to leave the premises, refer to Step 5 of the Recording in a service
centre table on the Process Page.

Where a customer or third party organisation informs a staff member that
a phone call is being recorded, Services Australia’s preferred position
is that the staff member should end the call, see the Recording a phone
call table on the Process page.

Recording visual content inside Services Australia premises

Visual content can include photographs, video recordings (with or
without audio) or social media live streaming.

While Services Australia does not permit a member of the public to
record face-to-face or phone interactions, it is generally not illegal
for a person to photograph or film another person without their consent,
unless it is considered a private activity or a private conversation the
person is not a party to.

Due to the nature of activity in Services Australia premises offering
face to face services, it is unlikely that a photo or film could be
classified as a private activity. Services Australia therefore has
limited ability to prevent publication of content.

If content is published, the staff member’s manager can contact the
Media Branch to investigate whether the content can be removed. In order
for a removal request to be successful, the content must breach the
relevant platform’s terms and conditions and/or be illegal.

Recording content outside a Services Australia premises

Outside a Services Australia premises can include footpaths or entrances
outside service centres. It can also include any other location if the
recording is made in connection with a staff member’s employment.

It is generally not illegal for a member of the public (for example, a
customer or journalist) to photograph, film, or make an audio recording
of a staff member outside of a Services Australia premises without their
consent.

However, for staff safety and security, if a member of the public
photographs, films or makes an audio recording of a staff member outside
the workplace without their consent, the staff member should alert their
manager as soon as possible and, if impacted, record the details in
ESSentials. For more information about ESSentials recording, see
Customer aggression - Reporting and recording incidents.

The manager should seek advice from a Regional Security Adviser (RSA) if
there are concerns about the staff member's safety.

The manager can also get advice if relevant from Employment Law Team and
the Media Branch. See the Resources page for contact details.

If the person has a Services Australia record, document details of the
incident and the person’s response in the appropriate reporting system
(CIMS, CUBA, CIRT, ESSentials). For more information, including when the
person is a non-customer or unknown, see Customer aggression - Reporting
and recording incidents.

Published recordings

Published recordings can include audio, visual or audio-visual
recordings of staff or customers. They can be published on social media,
websites, or in hardcopy format.

If a member of the public publishes a recording, the staff member’s
manager should contact the Media Branch to investigate whether recorded
content can be removed. See the Resources page for contact details.

For a removal request to be successful, the content must breach the
relevant platform’s terms and conditions and/or be illegal.

This is particularly in relation to social media platforms. It is
important to note that removal of posts is at the discretion of each
individual social media platform. Social media platforms allow a broad
range of commentary, which can include criticisms about Services
Australia and its employees.

Services Australia’s use of recording technology

Call recording

Verint is a call recording application that records inbound and outbound
work related calls for staff located in business areas to which call
recording has been deployed. The primary purposes of call recording is
to support staff learning and development and quality assurance and
analysis. For more information about the process and how to respond to
callers about call recording, see Call recording - information and
access

Closed Circuit Television (CCTV)

CCTV is used to assist in the protection of staff, customers, visitors
and resources from criminal or antisocial behaviour. CCTV is used during
the opening hours of the office. Images are stored for at least 30
working days. CCTV coverage includes customer entrances, waiting areas
and customer service areas, interview rooms.

The Investigation Toolkit contains a link to the CCTV Guidelines, which
outlines the process for requesting CCTV footage. See the Resources page
for a link to the Intelligence and Investigations Policy page.

If the person has a Services Australia record, document details of the
interaction and their response.

The Resources page contains links to contact details for staff seeking
advice, and links to relevant intranet pages.

Related links

About customer aggression

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Post incident contact

Customer aggression - Staff support

Level 2 complaints - Ombudsman, Ministerial, MP, Media and executive
correspondence (CLK)(MED)

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Optical surveillance

Customer aggression - Reporting and recording incidents

Contact with Child Support customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
