-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for staff when identifying and
escalating a third party Data Breach.

Third party Data Breach and Services Australia protocols

A data breach typically occurs when personal information an organisation
or agency holds is lost or subject to unauthorised access or disclosure.
For example, when:

-   a device with a customer's personal information is lost or stolen
-   a data base with personal information is hacked
-   personal information is mistakenly given to the wrong person

Data Breaches can be caused by (but are not limited to):

-   malicious actions (external or internal party to the organisation)
-   human error
-   a failure in information handling or security systems

The obligation to report data breaches depends on various factors. For
instance, the notifiable data breach scheme applies to organisations
covered under the Privacy Act 1988. The scheme does not necessarily
apply to state and territory agencies. The Resources page has a link to
the scheme.

Although third party data breaches occur external to Services Australia,
the information the third party holds can relate to our payments and
services, for example, Medicare and Health or Centrelink related
information. This, along with other personal information the customer
provided to the third party may increase the risk of identity fraud,
particularly if the data breach is the result of malicious actions.

Data breaches within Services Australia (not a third party Data Breach)
are the responsibility of the Legal Services Division. For more
information, see Privacy incidents.

Reporting third party Data Breaches

If a customer has become a victim of a third party data breach and their
personal information has been stolen/lost, refer the customer to the
Scams and Identity Theft helpdesk. Staff can provide the number to
customers if they do not wish to be transferred immediately.

The Helpdesk plays an important role in supporting customers whose
personal information was subject to a third party data breach and is
being misused (or is at risk of misuse) to commit fraud against the
agency or in the community.

The Resources page contains links and contact details for Office of the
Australian Information Commission (OAIC), Identity Security Section and
the Scams and Identity Theft Helpdesk.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
