
Customer aggression - Response 104-07020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If an incident is occurring:
• for sites providing face to face services, follow Emergency Response
Procedures - Aggression (ERPAs)
for contemporary connected Service Centres, follow Emergency Response
Procedures - Aggression for Contemporary Service Centres
• for non face to face sites, follow Emergency Response Procedures -
Aggression (ERPAs)
• for agents, follow Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression (ERPAs)
for agents
• with customers at risk of suicide or self-harm, see Customer talking
about suicide or self-harm

This document explains how staff respond to threats, customer aggression
and counterproductive behaviour. It also includes instructions for
coordinating a response to an emergency.

Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression (ERPAs)

The Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression (ERPAs) include:

-   instructions for staff responsible for coordinating an emergency
    response
-   the assigned responsibilities, actions and equipment required in the
    event of an emergency specifically relating to aggressive incidents.
    This could be an event, which requires a significant and coordinated
    response

ERPAs complement the site’s Emergency Response Procedures for other
emergencies to which the site may need to respond. These include:

-   fire
-   chemical
-   bomb threats
-   medical emergencies

Site leaders:

-   should implement ERPAs in combination with customer aggression
    training
-   must communicate the ERPAs to staff
-   give all staff a Quick Reference Guide. The guide must include key
    information about their role and responsibilities when responding to
    aggression

Aggression Response Team (ART)

The ART is a group of specified senior staff at a site who have defined
responsibilities for responding to customer aggression incidents. The
ART should include:

-   the manager
-   team leaders
-   other senior staff

If the site is on shared premises, the ART should include
representatives from co-located agencies. ART members are listed in the
site’s Emergency Response Procedures, under the key contacts heading.

When ART members are offsite or on leave, they should:

-   arrange for backup staff to take on their responsibilities
-   communicate the backup arrangement to all staff

During an incident, the ART will:

-   respond when staff activate a duress alarm. Any staff member can
    activate a duress alarm to alert others and get support in the event
    of aggression
-   assess whether staff or other people are at risk of injury
    (including self-harm)
-   decide if staff or other customers should move away from the person
    or incident
-   consider whether support is required from police, fire, or ambulance
-   initiate a Code Grey or Code Black, including evacuating the
    immediate area or site
-   coordinate first aid attention for staff or others

Aggressive Behaviour Response Model (ABRM)

The Aggressive Behaviour Response Model describes how the agency
responds to customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour. It
includes a focus on de-escalation, disengagement when people feel
unsafe, and an emergency response when a customer is violent or staff
and customer safety is at risk.

There are 4 stages of the ABRM:

-   respectful interaction
-   de-escalation
-    disengagement
-   emergency response

An interaction may move through different stages in any order. It can
escalate at any time, depending on the type of behaviour and the
response options available. Skipping stages or steps may be necessary to
respond safely to a situation. Some incidents may only need a single
stage. All decisions should be made with consideration of personal
safety and the safety of people in the site.

Violence and threats of violence require an emergency response. This
response can include:

-   using the duress alarm
-   code grey or code black procedures
-   locking the customer entrance
-   calling the police

Non-physical offensive conduct

Non-physical offensive conduct is behaviour that offends another person.
This may include threats, offensive language, or intimidating
communication or behaviour.

Staff must try to de-escalate this behaviour using the Aggressive
Behaviour Response Model. Start by asking the customer to stop their
behaviour. If the customer refuses, staff must tell them to leave the
premises.

Responding to threats

Threats of harm can be made through any service channel. The threats can
be:

-   to staff
-   other customers
-   property

For threats made on the phone, see:

-   the Process page for procedures in non-customer facing sites
-   the Resources page for the ERPAs for face-to-face staff and
    Contemporary Service Centres

COVID-19-related incidents

Incidents related to COVID-19 are managed in line with the Aggressive
Behaviour Response Model and Emergency Response Plans.

COVID-19 related incidents include when the customer:

-   escalates their behaviour after refusing to answer screening
    questions, wear a mask without a lawful exemption, or check in with
    a QR codeanswers yes to COVID-19 screening questions
-   says they have COVID-19, but then says it was a joke
-   says they have COVID-19 and changes their mind when asked to leave
-   says they are in breach of their isolation or quarantine
    requirements
-   coughs towards staff
-   makes a direct physical threat that could result in injury such as
    spitting, threatening to spit, or infect others with COVID-19
-   deliberately breaches 1.5 metre social distancing
-   becomes abusive when support with self-service is unavailable

Locking the customer entrance in response to threat or incident

At times, a site will lock the site entrance rather than initiate a Code
Grey or Code Black response. This can include when a threat is made with
advance warning.

In non-customer facing sites, a Code Grey response is the same as a site
closure. Staff and customer safety is the main priority when deciding to
lock the entrance. See the Process page for more information.

Important: Staff/Security Guards must not exit the premises to serve the
customer.

Directing a person to leave a site

Any staff member can direct a person to leave the premises.

Reasons for doing so include:

a person’s behaviour makes it unsafe to keep serving them, such as:

-   escalating behaviour
-   verbal abuse
-   yelling
-   intimidation
-   threats of violence

a person has damaged property or is threatening to do so

people are arguing, fighting or being disruptive

a person has assaulted another person

Staff should always consider their own safety before asking a person to
leave. Do not approach an aggressive person in order to direct them to
leave. Staff should keep a safe distance between themselves and the
customer.

If a person refuses to leave the premises, an employee authorised under
the Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act 1971 (PoPPA)
can direct the customer to leave under the provisions of the act. The
legislation makes it a criminal offence for a person to refuse or
neglect, without reasonable excuse, to leave Australian Government
premises upon being directed to do so by an authorised person (section
12(2)(c)).

Scenarios where a direction can be issued include:

-   a non-violent demonstration at a site
-   when a person refuses to leave a site after being asked to do so
-   when a person attends a site in breach of their Managed Service Plan
    (MSP)

Only authorised staff can give the direction.

See the Resources page for links to the Public Order Act and Ministerial
delegations and authorisations information.

If the person refuses to leave, call the police immediately. An
emergency response may be necessary. A customer who refuses to leave is
trespassing or failing to follow a lawful direction under the PoPPA. See
Resources for links to the Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression
(ERPA).

Security guards

Security guards may be deployed to service centres to help:

-   protect people and assets
-   prevent crime
-   support incident management

Security guards are not required or appropriate for all sites, and not
all sites have guards.

Security guards are trained to respond to incidents, such as:

-   violence and threatening behaviour towards staff and other people on
    site
-   intoxicated people
-   removing or escorting people from the site
-   fighting between customers
-   destruction and theft of property

Security guards:

-   can escort or remove people from the site, but they should not go
    outside with a person
-   must not use physical force, unless to defend people, and only if
    the force is reasonable and appropriate
-   should not restrain an aggressive person to prevent them from
    leaving the site

See the Security Guard Guide for more details about guards’ roles.

Managed Service Plans (MSP) with service channel restrictions

A customer may have a Managed Service Plan (MSP) in place. This is a way
to tailor how services are delivered to the customer, and can include
restrictions on how they can contact the agency.

After an incident of customer aggression, consider an MSP to minimise
any risk of customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour.

If a customer has an active MSP and contravenes the plan’s service
channel restrictions, refer to Customer not complying with a Managed
Service Plan (MSP).

Unreasonable complainant behaviour

Unreasonable complainant behaviour goes beyond the usual behaviours
customers display when they have a grievance or a dispute. It exceeds
what a reasonable person would consider acceptable in the circumstances.
Unreasonable behaviour hinders the agency’s ability to manage the
customer's case and may obscure genuine issues. The Customer Complaints
and Feedback Policy is available on the Process page in Managing
customer complaints and feedback.

The Resources page contains links to:

-   Emergency Response Procedures - Aggression (ERPA)
-   COVID-19 resources
-   Phone bomb-threat checklist
-   Services Australia Workspace Quick Reference Guide
-   Public Order (Protection of Persons and Property) Act (PoPPA)
    information on the intranet
-   Services Australia Security Hotline
-   Customer Aggression Prevention - Frequently asked questions
-   Intranet links

Contents

Customer aggression - Post incident contact

Psychological consultation service and referral process for forensic
matters

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Filming, recording and photography

Escalating incidents

Related links

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Customer aggression - Recovery

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Family and domestic violence

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Social work services

Customer aggression - Reporting and recording incidents

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Escalating incidents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
