
Managed Service Plan (MSP) - One-off variation 104-17022800

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains the process staff use when a one-off servicing
variation to a Managed Service Plan (MSP) is being considered due to
exceptional circumstances.

One-off servicing variation

A one-off variation to a Managed Service Plan (MSP) may be implemented
in exceptional circumstances. The One Main Contact (OMC) or Personalised
Services (PS) Officer considers alternative servicing options before
making a recommendation for a one-off servicing variation to the
delegate.

The delegate for this decision is the Service Leader or National
Manager, Multicultural and Tailored Services Branch. This recognises the
significance of the decision to vary the existing arrangements.

Circumstances when a one-off variation may apply

In certain circumstances, customers with an MSP that includes service
channel restrictions may be required to attend a service centre or
contact the One Main Contact (OMC) or Personalised Services (PS) Officer
outside the provisions of the MSP.

These instances may include, but are not limited to:

-   lodging supporting documents for a claim, such as Proof of Identity
    (POI)
-   where the customer's third party representative is also on an MSP
-   change of assessment (Child Support)
-   achieve a confirmed identity or document lodgement confirmation of
    identity for the National Redress Scheme
-   Income Management matters
-   customers affected by a major natural disaster
-   other exceptional or unforeseen circumstance as determined by the
    delegate

Alternative servicing options

It is important that alternative servicing options for customers with
restrictions are considered first, to minimise the risk to safety for
staff, property and other customers. A variation to the MSP should only
be considered after all other options have been exhausted.

Request support from Customer Aggression Prevention Team (CAPT)

Staff can contact the Customer Aggression Prevention Team (CAPT) for
support and direction in applying an MSP or making a decision to apply
for a one-off servicing variation in exceptional circumstances. The
Resources page includes a link to the CAPT intranet page for contact
details.

Customer Incident Management System (CIMS) processing assistance

MSPs for Centrelink customers are recorded in the Customer Incident
Management System (CIMS). For assistance with CIMS processing refer to
the task cards on the Customer Incident Management System page. The
Resources page includes a link to this page.

Suggested task card relevant to one-off servicing variations:

-   Recording and Approving a One-Off Servicing Variation to a Managed
    Service Plan (MSP) in Exceptional Circumstances

The Resources page contains information about letter template One-off
Variation of Restrictions, the Managed Service Plan (MSP) and Warning
Letters Template Guide, contact details for the Customer Aggression
Prevention Team (CAPT) and links to the Customer Incident Management
System (CIMS) and Security for Service Managers intranet sites.

Related links

Customer aggression - Prevention and management

Customer aggression - Response

Customer aggression - Recovery

Customer aggression - Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Proposing, recording and approving

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Implementing

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Reviewing

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer not complying

Managed Service Plan (MSP) - Customer service delivered through a One
Main Contact (OMC)

Family and domestic violence

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

National Redress Scheme overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
