-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the guidelines regarding Services Australia
accepting information from and providing information to a person holding
Power of Attorney (POA).

Accepting information

The agency can accept information from any source about a customer's
circumstances without confirming or disclosing that the person who the
information is about is a customer of the agency. However, before taking
action on the information provided, staff must be confident of the
caller's competence to provide accurate information.

For example, a Family Tax Benefit customer's partner advises of an
increase in income. This income is the only income recorded on the
customer record. The partner in this case is the best person to provide
this information.

If any doubt exists about the validity of the advice or the bona fides
of the caller, the customer should be contacted by phone or in writing
before the change is actioned.

POA authority

Staff must check the POA arrangement carefully to ensure its scope is
relevant to the action they want to perform.

If the terms of the POA allow it, a person holding POA can:

-   Sign and lodge agency forms (including claim forms) on behalf of the
    customer
-   Advise the agency of changes to the customer's circumstances
-   Request information held by the agency on the customer
-   Change the customer's payment destination, however, the new account
    must still be in the customer's name or their name must appear on a
    joint account. If the person holding a POA wants the customer's
    payments to go to an account in their name then they need to become
    a payment nominee
-   In urgent cases, request that the outcome of the customer's aged
    care means test assessment be faxed through to the aged care
    service, providing certain criteria are met

A POA arrangement does not give the attorney online access to the
customer’s Centrelink Online Account or copies of the customer’s
letters. To do this the attorney must be a correspondence nominee.

If there are any concerns about the validity of the POA, that is
incorrect names and/or addresses on the form, or the limitations of the
authority contact the level 2 Policy Helpdesk for advice.

Multiple attorneys

If two or more attorneys have been authorised, the POA document will
state how decisions are to be made:

-   Jointly - all attorneys must make decisions together (and all sign
    any document). It is the responsibility of the attorney making
    contact with the agency to provide written evidence all the
    attorneys agree
-   Jointly and Severally - the attorneys can make the decisions
    together or each attorney can independently make the decision (for
    example, either all sign any document, or one attorney alone can
    sign any document)
-   Severally - each attorney can independently make decisions (and one
    attorney alone can sign any document)
-   Majority - a majority of the attorneys need to agree to make a
    decision (and the majority who agree sign any document). It is the
    responsibility of the attorney making contact with the agency to
    provide written evidence most of the attorneys agree

Disclosing information to a person holding POA

The agency often receives requests for information from a person holding
a POA. The person holding the POA may be appointed in various ways, for
example:

-   by the deceased in a will
-   by a court of law
-   by an administrative agency of a State or Territory concerned with
    the protection of a person and their property
-   by a person who needs help to manage their affairs

Service Officers must check the terms of the POA arrangement as some
arrangements are for a limited, specified period and subject matter and
may not cover obtaining agency information. The POA document must be
photocopied and stored on the customer's file. Details of the scope of
the POA must be clearly outlined in a DOA DOC on the customer's file.
See Online Document Recording (ODR) and Creating, reviewing and deleting
documents (including Fast Notes and DOA DOCs).

Often a customer authorises the person to manage their affairs under a
POA. A common situation is where the person is physically unable to
manage their own affairs (for example they are losing their sight and
can no longer read, or they are bed ridden and cannot go to a service
centre).

If such a person requests information from the agency about a customer,
they may be given any information within the scope of the authority of
the POA. For example, the customer may have given the third party POA to
assist the customer with their finances or to operate their bank
account. In such a case, only information relative to that authority
should be discussed with the third party. The POA is regarded as an
express authority and information or updates can be made in accordance
to any limitations set out in the POA.

Note: if a customer wishes the holder of a POA to act as a payment or
correspondence nominee on their behalf, an Authorising a person or
organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form must be
completed and lodged with the agency. A person holding a POA does not
automatically become a nominee as this is legislated separately under
social security and family assistance laws.

Information about another person, for example a spouse, cannot be
released unless they have given express authority for release. All
requests must be in writing.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Privacy page and Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query form.

Related links

Accepting information from nominees

Disclosing information to a nominee

Nominees

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

Implied consent regarding third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
