-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines:

-   details about research activities
-   details for service officers when communicating with customers about
    research activities
-   how to update a customer's record if they do not want to be
    contacted for research (opt-out list)

About customer research activities

To help improve our services, Services Australia regularly:

-   undertakes a range of research activities, and
-   requests feedback from people who use our services

Current and non-current customers may be contacted by the agency or
invited to participate through a research company.

Providing customer details to a research company

Services Australia give contracted research companies details about
customers when it is needed for their research. This includes for
delivery of the Customer Satisfaction Research Program. The details are
confidential and are:

-   not used for any purpose except for the specific research activity
-   not given to anyone else
-   destroyed or returned when the research is over

During research activities customers are never asked for their personal
financial details, including bank details.

The agency and research companies are bound by confidentiality and
privacy laws. The contracts with research companies contain legally
binding provisions to protect customers privacy.

Customers can get details about privacy on the Services Australia
website. See Resources page for the link.

Why give research companies customer details?

There are provisions in the legislation governing most of the programs
that Services Australia delivers that allow the release of limited
recipient details for government research purposes.

Customer details are released after there has been appropriate internal
checks and approvals for each project. Only the details that are
relevant and needed for each research project is given. It may include:

-   their name
-   contact phone number
-   contact email
-   the type of payment or service they get

Services Australia and the research providers used are bound by
Commonwealth Privacy and Confidentiality Laws.

The contracts with the research providers also contain specific
provisions to protect customer and the agency's information.

Voluntary participation

Customers do not have to take part in any research activities. The
choice to participate is voluntary and will not affect any payments or
services a customer receives. Customers may agree to participate in one
research project and decline another.

Customer requests to opt-out of research

A customer's Centrelink record can be updated to be excluded from any
research lists given to a researcher in the future.

For health research, see Health research mailouts - Medicare.

There is not an equivalent system based process for Child Support
customers.

Note: research is different to telemarketing. The Do Not Call Register
does not cover these research activities.

Confirming research is genuine

Staff can access a list of current research projects commissioned by the
agency. This can help them respond to public queries about contacts from
a research company.

Services Australia use reputable, independent research companies to do
research work on their behalf. Customers may prefer to give their
responses about the agency to someone who is not staff.

Customers can view Australian research companies that comply with the
Code of Professional Behaviour. The Resources page contains a link to
the Research Society website.

Customer feedback or complaints

If the customer has any concerns, feedback or complaints about the
research, see Research Providers index item in the Customer complaints
and feedback index. This gives details on how to record it in the
Customer Feedback Tool (CFT).

The Resources page contains links to:

-   contact details
-   Current Research, Satisfaction Research Programme, Information
    Release Assurance and Market and Social Research intranet pages
-   Services Australia website
-   Do Not Call Register
-   The Research Society

Related links

Disclosing information to third parties

Health research mailouts - Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
