
Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 104-04010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions taken when a customer lodges a
request for documents under the FOI Act.

Administrative access processes

Services Australia has a number of administrative access processes in
place that allow for access to information without the need for a formal
FOI request. All staff must help a person access information and/or
documents where the secrecy provisions of the appropriate legislation
and/or the Privacy Act 1988 allow, and where the information and/or
documents are not otherwise sensitive.

If a customer requests access to their personal information all staff
should first determine whether the information or document is available
under the department’s administrative access processes. This is
generally termed administrative release. See the related links section
on this page for links to the administrative release of specific
document or information types.

A person should not be asked to complete an FOI request where the
information and/or documents can be routinely provided through the
department’s administrative access schemes.

FOI requests

To request access to a document that cannot be provided under
administrative access processes, a person can make a request in writing
under the FOI Act.

If a person lodges an FOI request, it must be immediately forwarded to
the FOI Team. For more information, see Step 6 in the Processing FOI
requests table.

Time limits for processing FOI requests

If a person makes an FOI request, the FOI team must:

-   acknowledge the request within 14 days of receipt within the
    department
-   Notify the applicant of a decision on access to the documents within
    30 days. This can be extended in certain circumstances (the FOI team
    will contact the applicant about any extension of time)

Amendment or annotation of personal information

A person can apply under the FOI Act for amendment or annotation of
their personal information held in agency records, where the information
is incorrect, incomplete, out of date or misleading.

Where a FOI delegate makes a decision under the FOI Act to amend or
annotate personal information the document containing the personal
information is annotated. This is generally achieved with the assistance
of network staff. All staff must be made aware of the FOI decision to
amend or annotate document/s. For example, this may be achieved through
the creation of a specific Display on Access (DOA) document.

The Resources page contains links to information on the Services
Australia website, contact details or the FOI team, relevant forms and
contact details.

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Customer requests access to their personal information

Release of Disability Support Pension (DSP) Medical Assessment reports

Call and screen recording - information and access

Handling mail received in Child Support (CS)

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
