
Restricted Access and eligibility 104-06000000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Restricted Access and its
application for protection of customer information and the roles of
Restricted Access Service Officers. Restricted Access for Centrelink
customers was formerly known as the Deny Access Facility (DAF).

Government intent

Restricted Access is available for Centrelink customers seeking
additional protection of personal information held by Services
Australia. It is a computer based security system, which denies access
to the customer's Centrelink computer record for the majority of staff.
Only a limited number of the agency’s staff can access the record.
Temporary access may also be authorised for specialist staff. The
purpose of Restricted Access is to protect the customer's location
details.

Restricted Access is available to customers:

-   who have genuine fears for their safety
-   have a Security Notice Issued (SNI) by the Attorney General applied
-   where there is a risk that a staff member could endanger the
    customer by accessing the customer's computer record
-   special interest customers

Restricted Access should only be used in exceptional circumstances.

Determining eligibility

Customers may be considered eligible for Restricted Access where they
fear for their safety because of, but not limited to, the following
reasons:

-   they are escaping family and domestic violence and the other party
    has links with staff
-   they are under police protection
-   they may have short term needs, where additional protective measures
    against potential breaches of privacy, high media coverage and/or
    fraud are a consideration
-   their details become or remain particularly sensitive because of
    their activities or high community profile
-   they are fleeing involvement in cults or religious sects, and
-   their privacy or confidentiality has been breached in such a way as
    to endanger the customer

Using the above eligibility criteria as guidelines, each case should be
judged on its merits. In most cases, the Restricted Access manager makes
the final decision to approve or reject the Restricted Access
application. Note: if a customer is under police protection, Restricted
Access must be approved.

Restricted Access is also applied to records of customers whose welfare
payments have been cancelled - Security Notice Issued.

In these cases:

-   customers subjected to a security notice must not be provided with
    contact details of the responsible Restricted Access Officer
-   records subject to a security notice will be 'Restricted Access' to
    minimise application or re-application for payment. These records
    are managed by a central processing team within Business Integrity
    Division

See also Witness Protection Information and Centrelink customer requests
a new Customer Reference Number (CRN).

Discuss alternate options

As Restricted Access limits the customer's access arrangements with the
agency, it should only be used in the most serious cases. Intermediate
security measures, such as passwords, should be considered as a more
user-friendly option.

Customers engaged in Family Court matters should be made aware that
Restricted Access will not prevent the agency from disclosing their
location to the Family Court when ordered to do so.

Level of protection

Restricted Access only offers protection to a person's electronic
Centrelink record. Their paper file, if one exists, remains in Records
Management Unit (RMU). It is important that customers seeking protection
are made aware of this. Restricted Access does not replace other forms
of protection which are in place for all customers. It is the highest
level of protection the agency offers to customers assessed as requiring
protection above that offered by the 100% logging process and other
security measures.

If the customer who is granted Restricted Access is partnered, both
records must have Restricted Access applied, as the customer's
information may be accessible via the partner's record. If Restricted
Access is not applied to both members of a couple, the link between the
records may cause problems when accessing the records. Other customers,
who reside with the Restricted Access customer, may need to have
Restricted Access applied to protect the customer's whereabouts. All
customers who have Restricted Access applied must be notified of their
serving arrangement.

Staff with access to Restricted Access records

Only staff holding specific skill tags and security role can access a
Restricted Access record.

All Restricted Access customer records are assigned an ORG unit. The
National Restricted Access Team (NRAT) or Restricted Access Business
Administrators control access to the record. Temporary access for up to
7 days can be provided to specialist staff for completion of specific
tasks.

Access by non-Restricted Access staff for specific tasks

Staff may require access to a Restricted Access record for a specific
task, for example, Compensation, Debt Recovery and Review staff. If
staff without access to the Restricted Access record attempt to enter
the record, the Sensitive Data Warning (SDW) screen displays advising
that access to the record is restricted.

Temporary access for up to 7 days can be provided with the access
automatically removed at the end of the period set by the National
Restricted Access Team or after 7 days.

Requesting urgent temporary access to a Restricted Access customer's
record

To make a request for temporary access, refer to the National Restricted
Access page.

Role of Restricted Access Officers

Restricted Access customers are serviced by authorised Restricted Access
Officers in the National Restricted Access Team or by a dedicated
Restricted Access Manager.

Restricted Access Officers are responsible for dealing with the
customer’s Centrelink business and processing activities relating to the
customer. If any activity is selected for Quality On Line (QOL) /
Quality Management Application (QMA), it should be referred to the
National Restricted Access Team to complete.

Role of National Restricted Access Team and Restricted Access Business Administrator

The National Restricted Access Team and Restricted Access Business
Administrators have overall responsibility for administering Restricted
Access, including the following:

Deciding whether a customer should be granted Restricted Access

Applying Restricted Access on the customer's record and, if applicable,
the partner's record; and/or family member's records

Discussing self service options including:

-   Centrelink online services
-   letters online (Centrelink Online Letters or myGov Inbox)
-   Electronic Messaging, and
-   phone self service

Ensuring the Access Officer positions are covered during absences

Arranging temporary access for other staff who require access to the
customer's records, for example, compensation, debt recovery social
workers, International Services and review staff

Conducting annual reviews of Restricted Access customers to assess if
there is a continuing need for Restricted Access

The National Restricted Access Team also provide a service to the
network and is responsible for the system administration of Restricted
Access. Where staff require access to Restricted Access customer records
or experience technical issues, staff need to refer to the National
Restricted Access Intranet page. Their role includes:

-   Maintaining the Restricted Access Relationships tab by adding or
    removing access for Restricted Access managers, officers or
    temporary officers
-   Actioning requests for temporary access for specialist staff
-   Handling urgent enquiries about Restricted Access
-   Reporting problems experienced with Restricted Access to the Privacy
    Section
-   Handling enquiries, suggestions for change or complaints about
    Restricted Access

Their role does not include:

-   Processing activities or providing assistance to Restricted Access
    customers
-   Providing policy advice to the network about Restricted Access

Contact details for the National Restricted Access Team are not to be
given to customers or external agencies.

Role of social workers

Social workers may be the first to identify customers who may need
additional protection due to their personal circumstances, for example,
if the customer is fleeing family and domestic violence. Social workers
may provide assistance and advice to National Restricted Access Team or
dedicated Restricted Access managers about the customer's circumstances
and their need for additional protection. Note: it is not appropriate
for social workers to be appointed as Restricted Access officers,
because of the need for payment area knowledge.

Social workers can advise customers of additional protection options,
such as passwords and the Services Australia Privacy Policy and discuss
whether Restricted Access is the most appropriate option. See the
Resources page for a link to the agency’s Privacy Policy.

The Resources page contains links to the privacy pages on the Services
Australia website and the contact details for the National Restricted
Access Team.

Contents

Administration of Restricted Access

Support, maintenance and FAQs for Restricted Access

Related links

Privacy, sharing and storage of customer information

Centrelink customer requests a new Customer Reference Number (CRN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
