-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the type of medical information scanned and
stored on a customer's record and explains how to access it.

On this page:

Access to electronic Medical Information File Envelope (eMIFE)

Assessors can access a customer's scanned medical information once an
appointment is made for the customer using the Online Diary.

If a review of MIFE information is required outside this period, such as
for external appeal tribunals like the Administrative Appeals Tribunal),
a manual trigger is sent by the Employment Services System (ESS) so the
Assessor can again view the medical information.

Services Australia staff who access medical information as part of their
duties can access the eMIFE at all times regardless of the status of the
referral. eMIFE information is clearly labelled and a workflow warning
prevents inappropriate or accidental access to medical information.
Access to eMIFE information via both the Services Australia systems and
ESS is logged and recorded.

Medical information related to foreign payment claims

Customers may lodge medical documents for a Foreign Pension Invalidity
claim for an International Agreement country. International Services
(CIS) process this work.

All medical documents lodged by a customer living outside Australia for
a Disability Support Pension (DSP) claim under an International
Agreement are scanned by RMU once the claim is finalised by CIS.

Paper copies of MIFE

Paper copies of a customer's MIFE are no longer sent to Assessment
Services, as historical MIFE information is scanned into the eMIFE.

The scanned medical information is stored by Services Australia and
access is provided to Assessors via a link from the Department of
Employment’s and Workplace Relations (DEWR), Employment Services System
(ESS).

Type of medical information

All medical information lodged by customers and medical
practitioners/medical specialists is scanned and held as an eMIFE.

Historical information in the paper version of the MIFE may also be
scanned by the Records Management Unit (RMU) if it is required for an
ESAt, JCA or a review. This can be requested via the Records Management
service request webform.

The eMIFE may include medical information:

-   lodged for new claims and reviews
-   lodged to support customer exemptions from their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   used to assess work capacity

Medical evidence obtained or received during an ESAt/JCA assessment

It is essential that any medical evidence obtained or received during
the ESAt/JCA are scanned or uploaded to the customer's electronic eMIFE.

A Government-contracted doctor (GCD) will be able to see all the medical
evidence scanned to the customer's record that an assessor can see. The
GCD requires all medical evidence used by the agency to complete the
Disability Medical Assessment. GCDs do not have access to the Assessor
secure notes facilities.

The Resources page contains a link to the Records Management service
request webform.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Storage and access to information for carers and disability claimants
and recipients

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Processing a foreign pension claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
