
Requesting access to the Customer Feedback Tool 104-03070010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for staff to request access to the
Customer Feedback Tool.

On this Page:

General access to the Customer Feedback Tool

The Customer Feedback Tool is accessed via Customer First. The base
Customer First security role (ZCCRM_DHS_CSO) will provide general access
to the Centrelink and Medicare components of the Customer Feedback Tool.

For more information on security roles required to access Customer
First, including how to determine if access has already been provisioned
and/or requesting access to security roles, refer to Accessing and
personalising Customer First.

The Record Customer Feedback Guided Procedure is use to record customer
feedback. Refer to Recording customer complaints and feedback in the
Customer Feedback Tool.

Customer First Workload Management (WLM), including the WLM Inbox, and
the specialised Agent Inbox are used to locate feedback items created
via the Guided Procedure or the online customer feedback webforms.

Note: Medicare staff must access the Customer Feedback Tool via the
Medicare Customer First tile in the Front of House (FoH) application,
not Customer First - Direct.

The Resources page contains a link to the Customer Feedback Tool and
Staff Feedback Tool intranet pages.

Access to the specialised Agent Inbox

Medicare staff and other specialist staff who process customer feedback
will also require another security role to access the specialised Agent
Inbox for the Customer Feedback Tool.

To access the specialised Agent Inbox in Customer First for the Customer
Feedback Tool, staff must request the ZCCRM_DHS_ICF_MANAGEMENT security
role in ESSentials.

For information on how to request security roles in ESSentials, refer to
the Task Card 'Request Access to a Role for Myself via ESSentials'. See
Resources for a link.

Once granted, the Agent Inbox can be accessed by selecting the
ZCFS_ICF_MGR-Integrated Customer Feedback business role in Customer
First.

Bulk access requests

Bulk access requests for the ZCCRM_DHS_ICF_MANAGEMENT security role can
be submitted using the mySupport Customer First and SAP Role
Organisation Unit Access webform. See Resources for a link to mySupport.

If a bulk access request is submitted, notify the Customer Feedback Tool
team via the team email address under the heading Contact details on the
Customer Feedback Tool intranet page. The Resources page includes a link
to this intranet page.

Excluding feedback records

Feedback items cannot be 'deleted' from the Customer Feedback Tool.
Where necessary, finalised feedback items can be excluded from reports
and disassociated from a recipient's record (where required). Delegated
staff in Level 2 complaints teams, subject matter experts and other
managers have the ability to exclude feedback items from reports via the
'Do not include in reports' check box in customer feedback work items.

To enable access to the 'Do not include in reports' check box, delegated
staff must have the ZCCRM_DHS_ICF_ADMIN security role in ESSentials.
Staff applying for the ZCCRM_DHS_ICF_ADMIN security role must already
have the ZCCRM_DHS_ICF_MANAGEMENT security role. For information on how
to request security roles in ESSentials, refer to the ESSentials Task
Card 'Request Access to a Role for Myself via ESSentials'. See the
Resources page for a link.

Feedback items can only be excluded via the ZCFS_ICF_MGR-Integrated
Customer Feedback business role in Customer First.

If a staff member has created or is managing a feedback item that
requires exclusion from reports, they must email their manager or
subject matter expert that has the access to be able to exclude feedback
items, with the following information:

-   their Logon ID
-   the original work item ID (to be excluded)
-   the new work item ID
-   the reason the original work item needs to be excluded from reports

Note: when recreating a feedback item, care must be taken to ensure
selection of the correct recipient record and feedback type, and that
all original information is copied over.

When excluding feedback items from reports, the staff member must:

-   complete all mandatory fields in the work item
-   select the Feedback Status of 'Finalised' in the Details tab
-   select the 'Do not include in reports' check box in the Details tab
-   disassociate the feedback item from the recipient's record (where
    appropriate), by deleting the customer identifier (for example, CRN)
    on the Parties Involved tab and removing all other
    identifying/personal information. Disassociating a feedback item
    from a recipient record may not be required every time a feedback
    item is removed from reports. Disassociating would be required, for
    example, where a feedback item was recorded on the incorrect
    recipient's record, or recorded under the incorrect Service Brand
-   if disassociating a feedback item from a recipient's record, enter
    'Removed from Reporting' in the First name and Last name fields in
    the Details tab
-   add a note in the Notes tab to clearly indicate the reasons for
    excluding the work item from reports
-   save the work item - messaging in the top right of screen will
    confirm if the work item has saved successfully

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, the Customer Feedback
Tool and Staff Feedback Tool intranet pages and other useful
information.

Related links

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
