
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, follow the risk and
referral process.

This document outlines the assessment of relationship status where one
member of a couple is under the age of consent, and they have a child in
their care.

Member of a Couple (MoC)

Under associated law and policy (see References), a person is a member
of a couple if they are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship, and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory where they
    live

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

See the References page for a link to the Social Security Guide for the
full definition of a MoC and the applicable age of consent per
state/territory.

MoC - customer and/or partner under age of consent

Both members of a couple must be over the age of consent, applicable to
the state or territory where they live, for a de facto relationship to
be recognised.

If a customer in receipt of income support payment is living in a member
of a couple relationship with a person and one or both partners are
under the age of consent where they live, they are not considered a
member of a couple under social security law.

However, although the customer and their partner are not considered a
member of a couple, their rate of income support payment is not to
exceed the rate payable if they were a member of a couple (partnered
rate). Even though social security law does not recognise the customer
and their partner as a member of a couple, they are still paid at the
partnered rate.

The income and assets test is to apply as though they were a member of a
couple and a manual ‘partnered’ rate is to be paid to the customer and
their partner.

Parenting Payment (PP)

As a customer under the age of consent cannot be considered a member of
a couple, they also cannot be linked to a partner and must be assessed
under general qualification requirements for PP as a single person
instead of as a partnered person. They will be paid a manual partnered
rate but still qualify for any relevant add-ons under the single rate,
for example, Pharmaceutical Allowance. The partnered income and assets
test will still be applied to the recipient in this circumstance when
calculating the manual rate of entitlement.

The age of consent differs for each state and territory. See the
References page for a link to the Social Security Guide, 3.2.5.20, De
facto relationships (YA & DSP), to identify the applicable age of
consent per state/territory.

Family assistance

The definition of a member of a couple under family assistance law is
the same as social security law. Therefore, the customer is treated as
single. They cannot be considered a member of a couple, because one
person is under the age of consent.

The rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
is based on the adjusted taxable income circumstances of the customer
only.

FTB Part B is not income tested if the customer is assessed as single
and receiving an income support payment. If the customer is not
receiving an income support payment, FTB Part B is payable if the
customer's adjusted taxable income does not exceed the Part B primary
earner income limit.

Child support/maintenance action

While there is no minimum age for claiming child support, if either
member of the couple are under the age of consent and living with the
parent of their child, they are not required to take reasonable action
to obtain child support against that person.

The customer will need to have their maintenance action for the
applicable child/ren manually coded to show they are passing the
Maintenance Action Test (MAT). Maintenance action will need to be
reviewed when the youngest partner reaches the age of consent, or when
the parents separate if this occurs first.

Related links

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets test

Relationship Status for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Centrelink action when an application for child support assessment is
rejected by Child Support

Assisting a customer aged under 16

How to code and action a manual review

NSS system coding for manual rate of payment

Non NSS systems coding for manual rate of payment

Reporting employment Income online

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
