
Residence requirements 106-06000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the basic residence requirement for all
Australian pensions, allowances, benefits and Concession Cards.
Assessing a customer's residence is necessary to determine if they have
lodged a legal claim, if they are eligible and if they remain eligible.

On this Page:

Government intent - Australian residence

The procedures within this topic cover Australian residence rules for
all social security payments and concession cards, and family assistance
and parental leave payments. To be considered an Australian resident,
the person must be residing in Australia and they must have legal
permanent residence status. Some payments and concessions can be granted
to customers who are not Australian residents but they must still
satisfy certain residence requirements to be considered qualified.

Confirmation of residence

The Department of Home Affairs provides Services Australia with
residence and movement information automatically, electronically and in
near real time via a datalink. Where a datalink can be established, and
a customer has a travel or visa record, Home Affairs will advise the
customer's visa and movement details. Customers will generally be
required to provide additional residence information with their claim or
when other relevant changes occur. Where information has been provided
directly from Home Affairs, the residence information from this source
will take precedence over any conflicting information provided by the
customer.

International social security agreements

Australia has international agreements with a number of countries.
Agreements may help a customer receive an Australian social security
pension if they are not an Australian resident or in Australia, and/or
if they do not meet the minimum Australian residence period to qualify.

Agreement provisions also modify the rate of payment so generally a
customer is better off receiving an autonomous payment where possible.

Contents

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residency decisions for Child Support customers

Updating residence screens (CLK)

Working Life Residence (WLR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
