
Cancellation due to foreign exchange processing 106-08020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reassessments that may follow the
cancellation of a payment due to foreign exchange rate processing.

Loss of entitlement due to exchange rate conversions

Foreign pensions, income and assets received and owned by customers are
generally held on the system in foreign currency and converted into
Australian dollars automatically so the income and assets tests can be
applied.

Each month the exchange rates for all countries are reviewed and a
customer's income and assets are re-valued according to the new exchange
rate. Current legislation and policy allows that where foreign income or
assets are temporarily over the income or asset limit due to a variation
in exchange rates, the payment is to be treated as suspended rather than
cancelled.

Restoration of payment treated as suspended

Customers inside Australia may have their payments restored if they
become payable again within 6 months following the cancellation.

Customers outside Australia may have their payments restored if they
become payable again within 12 months following the cancellation.

Note: the system is designed to cancel customers for reason 'EXR' should
their income or assets exceed allowable limits as a result of the
monthly foreign exchange rate processing. Customers will automatically
be issued a letter advising of the cancellation and possible future
restoration should the exchange rate variations reduce income/assets
below the allowable limits.

Restoration of payments cancelled due to foreign exchange rate processing

A payment cancelled for reason 'EXR' can only be restored within the
Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity which has a keyword of 'FXCAN'.

When a customer's payment is cancelled as a result of foreign exchange
rate processing an MFU activity will be created when the exchange rate
increases within the following 6 or 12 months. The time allowed for
restoration will depend on where the customer is at the time of
cancellation. The MFU allows the Service Officer to check the customer's
entitlement based on the latest exchange rate and restore payment if
appropriate.

Entitlements and responsibilities during any non-payment period

Customers cancelled due to monthly foreign exchange rate processing:

-   are not entitled to any add-on payments such as Rent Assistance
    (RA), Pension Supplement, concession cards or any fringe benefits
-   may remain subject to notification provisions
-   may apply for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Note: this procedure does not apply to zero rate customers affected by
the Agreement with New Zealand.

Related links

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Reviews of foreign exchange rates

Foreign income and assets

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
