
Late commencement of course for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), Austudy, PES, and Youth Allowance (YA) 106-05010120

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine the start day for a student
claiming ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), Austudy,
PES, or Youth Allowance (YA).

Correct start date

To work out the correct start day for a student, staff must take into
account the actual date the student started classes.

Note: this procedure is not applicable for Australian Apprentice
customers.

ABSTUDY, including ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Services Australia will not regard a student as starting late if they
start full-time or concessional study-load study in the approved course
within the first 3 weeks of classes. That is, by the Friday of the third
week of the term or semester.

If they 'started' full-time study on the Friday, regardless as to what
time they started on the day, the agency considers this as being the
first day of attendance.

If they start late (i.e. after the Friday of the third week), Living
Allowance or ABSTUDY PES entitlement will start from the date they
started full-time or concessional study-load study in the approved
course. This is, unless they started late because of circumstances
beyond their control.

Austudy, PES, and Youth Allowance (YA)

YA, Austudy and PES customers must start their studies by the second
Friday after the relevant education provider course start date.

If they start late, (i.e. after the Friday of the second week of the
study period), Services Australia will not consider them to have
undertaken full-time study until the date they start full-time study in
the approved course unless they started late because of circumstances
beyond their control.

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

The start day for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments
(including AIC PES) has some differences.

Related Links

Start day

Closing date for ABSTUDY claims

Determining the Entitlement Start date for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Calculating the start date for ABSTUDY

Calculating the start day for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students
and Australian Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
