
Alternative Identity reviews 106-07040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Alternative Identity reviews.
Use Alternative Identity processes when customers experience genuine
difficulty providing identity documents.

On this page:

Reasons for reviews

Reviews are created on a customer's record when a Service Officer needs
to make a future action or assessment.

Alternative identity review periods:

-   are needed where a customer may be able to lodge identity documents
    in the future
-   vary between 4 to 36 weeks, depending on the outcome of the
    Alternative Identity assessment

Customers are asked to provide further identity documents to confirm
their identity before the end of the review period:

-   through an online task, and
-   by mail

All Alternative Identity reviews must be completed in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard.

-   Complete reviews initiated in Customer First in the Identity
    Confirmation Dashboard
-   Cancel the original review in Customer First

Note: Centrelink International staff (CIS) may grant Alternative
Identity assessments under International Social Security Agreements
through the POI screen. Contact the Identity Policy helpdesk for help.

Review lengths

Review periods allow payments to be granted, while giving the customer
extra time to get identity documents.

Alternative Identity reviews in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard

When completing Alternative Identity assessments, the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard automatically applies a category and review
period based the customer's circumstances.

The customer will receive a letter asking them to provide the required
identity documents before the review due date:

-   4 weeks before the review period ends, or
-   2 weeks before the Identity Review Period ends

Code any identity documents the customer provides through the Identity
Confirmation dashboard in Process Direct.

If the customer can lodge 3 identity documents but cannot complete
linkage, see the Process page in Alternative Identity.

Manually code 'RF' on the POI screen after completing the Alternative
Identity assessment in the Identity Confirmation Dashboard.

System limitations prevent Process Direct from sending this code
automatically for claims processed outside Process Direct. For example,
claims for:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP), and
-   ABSTUDY

Centrelink International Staff (CIS) only

-   Do not use the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct to
    code identity reviews for customers granted under International
    Social Security Agreements
-   Use the Identity Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct to verify
    identity documents
-   Manually apply a Gathering Document (GD) review period of 8 weeks in
    Customer First
-   When the International partner confirms the identity of the
    customer, manually override GD with OS in Customer First

Alternative Identity reviews in Customer First

When applying an Alternative Identity assessment through the POI screen,
the customer is:

-   subjected to a review managed in Customer First, and
-   will display on the Future Activity List (FAL)

These reviews are distributed through workload manager and require
manual action.

Two weeks before the end of the review period, ask the customer to lodge
the required documents:

-   at a Service Centre, or
-   by mail

There are several codes to choose from, each with an set of conditions
reflecting a set of circumstances. Each code has its own set review
period.

Service Officers can manually extend Alternative identity review periods
(automatically applied) if the customer needs more time to:

-   lodge the identity documents, and/or
-   complete linkage

Customers receive a letter 2 weeks before the review expiry asking them
to provide the required identity documents at:

-   a service centre
-   Agent site
-   by mail, or
-   by phone

If the customer has completed linkage, they can upload the required
documents through Centrelink Online Services.

If a customer has not completed linkage, they must attend in person with
an approved photo identity document.

See Identity documents A to Z for more information.

The Resources page contains links to Identity Confirmation requirements
published on the Services Australia website and forms.

Related links

Alternative Identity

Identity Confirmation

Identity documents A to Z

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
