
Employment Separation Certificate (SU1) 106-07060050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines why an Employment Separation Certificate (SU1) is
issued and what information it obtains. It also outlines employers'
options in providing the information.

Payments requiring an SU1

An SU1 is a document that can be completed and provided by an employer
for any person who has ceased any paid work within the last 12 months
and is claiming, or currently in receipt of, any of the following:

-   Austudy
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) (except customers who are
    permanently blind)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit (SpB), or
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Information contained in an SU1

An SU1 provides information that is used to ensure that any applicable
waiting periods or non-payment periods are assessed and the customer
receives only the income support payments they are legally entitled to.

Key evidence provided by the SU1 includes:

-   the date the person ceased work
-   the period and amount of any leave or redundancy payment paid at
    termination of employment
-   the amount of the person's final payment
-   the amount of any moneys still owed by the employer to the person
-   reasons for ceasing employment
-   if a person left work as a result of industrial action or
    voluntarily
-   any personal injury compensation details

Note: if a Service Officer believes an SU1 provided by a customer is
false or misleading, or if it is incomplete, contact should be made with
the employer to confirm the details.

Obtaining an SU1

When a customer claims, or is currently in receipt of, an income support
payment and advises they have ceased employment within the last 12
months, they are advised they must source and supply an SU1 from their
previous employer(s) in order for their claim to be assessed or to
determine how their and/or partner's current income support payment may
be impacted.

The employer does not have to hand the completed SU1 back to the
ex-employee. The employer can forward the SU1 directly to the National
Business Gateway (NBG) who will then scan the SU1 to the customer's
record. An employer can register via the Business Hub to provide an
electronic SU1. You can view the electronic SU1 via Customer First Third
Party Information Summary (TPIS) screen on the customer's record.

If an International Employer contacts the National Business Gateway
(NBG), a verbal SU1 should be obtained.

While a written SU1 is preferred, Services Australia can make a decision
about the customer's entitlements for income support if the information
normally contained in an SU1 is provided in another format. This can be
gathered verbally, in a letter, or other written form or statement, from
the employer (for example, letters written on business letterhead).

Employment cessation details via Single Touch Payroll (STP)

Employers registered with Single Touch Payroll (STP) report employment
income, leave and termination payments and employment cessation details
to the Australian Taxation Office. Services Australia can access this
data for mutual clients.

Customers who cease work for an STP employer, have cessation details,
which may include any unused leave and termination payments pre-filled
when reporting employment income online. Staff are presented pre-filled
STP data when assisting customers to report employment income using the
Earnings and Reporting workflow in Process Direct. Customers are able to
check, confirm or change the employer reported data.

When an employee ceases work for an STP employer and claims certain
income support payments, cessation details, leave and termination
payments paid in the past 12 months may pre-fill in online and staff
assisted claims.

The data collected via STP is different to that collected on the SU1
form and better aligns to what appears on an employee's payslip.

Customers with mutual obligation requirements will be able to provide
additional information when the reason for ceasing work is voluntary
cessation or dismissal. This will help to streamline the assessment of
non-payment penalty periods.

When cessation, leave and termination details are confirmed via STP,
customers will not be required to provide an SU1 form, unless changes
are made to amounts paid or where there is doubt about the number of
days that leave or termination payments paid covers. In many cases,
customers and employers will not need to be contacted for further
information.

Note: STP data does not prefill the number of days or period covered for
these payments. Therefore it is important to review the days provided by
the customer is reasonable for the amount paid, example: $3,000 for one
day's leave is not reasonable and would need to be verified.

As more employers report employment income via STP, this will become the
primary channel for employers to notify the circumstances surrounding
cessation of employment. Currently, this service is not available to
capture partner's employment income or cessation details.

Verbal SU1s

While the responsibility is initially the customer's to contact their
previous employer(s) and ask them to complete an SU1, if it is not
available at the time of the customer's new claim interview, Service
Officers must make one genuine attempt to contact the employer(s) to
obtain verbal Employment Separation Certificate information.

When collecting a verbal SU1, Service Officers must be assured they are
speaking to the employer, see Authenticating an employer. Information
provided by the employer must be clearly documented on the customer's
record, using the Verbal SU1: Employer Fast Note.

If the employer cannot be contacted, is not able to provide the details
required at the time of contact, or indicates they would prefer to
provide an SU1 in writing, a Q267 - First Request to Employer, Refuses
to Issue ESC (SU1) letter should be sent to the employer.

Q267 Letter

A Q267 First/Second request to employer, refuses to issue ESC (SU1)
letter is a formal notice, issued to the employer under Social Security
Law advising them they are required to provide an SU1 for their
ex-employee. The employer has 14 days from the date of request to
provide the SU1 to Services Australia.

A Q267 letter should be issued to the former employer where:

-   the customer advises they cannot reasonably source a copy of the
    SU1, and
-   Services Australia has attempted, without success, to source a
    verbal SU1 from the employer

Only one Q267 letter should be issued to an employer, before exploring
alternative options for providing SU1s, see SU1 cannot be completed or
returned.

Note: a Q267 letter should only be sent to Australian-based employers.
For more information on determining when an SU1 is required and the
alternate processes that apply to overseas employers - see Overseas
Employers.

SU1 cannot be completed or returned

Service Officers do not have the discretion to decide that an SU1 is not
necessary.

All avenues to obtain the required information must be exhausted first,
including attempts to contact the employer to source a verbal SU1. If a
Q267 letter has been sent and the employer has not responded within 14
days, alternative evidence from the customer may be requested.

Payment to the customer can then be made, but efforts should be made to
confirm the details later with the employer.

Overseas Employers

There are no provisions in Social Security Law exempting a customer from
providing an SU1 for overseas employers.

While Social Security Law authorises Services Australia to request
relevant information from persons or entities based outside Australia,
requesting a written or verbal SU1 from an overseas employer is
generally impractical.

Single Touch Payroll data is not available from overseas employers.

Attempts to call the employer and/or issuing letters to overseas
employers is not appropriate. Service Officers should instead source the
required information using the alternative methods - including other
written letters the customer may have, or accepting the information from
the customer directly.

Issuing SU1s to Employers

Although SU1s are not accountable documents, Service Officers are
strongly encouraged not to hand them over the counter, and especially
not in bulk.

If the Service Officer is aware the employer will have large numbers of
staff leaving, they can suggest the employer register for Business Hub
to provide SU1 information online or contact the National Business
Gateway (NBG), and have a third party portal user code and password
activated. This will allow the employer to input future SU1 details
online. For contact details, see National Business Gateway (NBG).

The Resources page contains common questions and answers and links to
the online version of the SU1; Seasonal, Contract and Intermittent Work
Details (SU496); and Module F - Business details (MOD F), information on
how to complete Q267 letter fields and contact details for National
Business Gateway (NBG).

Related links

Waiting periods for income support payments

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Business Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
