
Rejecting a Centrelink claim 106-07130000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to reject a claim for specific payments.

Basic qualification and eligibility

A customer who has lodged a claim for an income support payment may not
be eligible for payment because they do not meet the basic
qualification, payability or customer obligation provisions for payment.

Sometimes customers may withdraw their claims voluntarily. In these
instances, the claim is not to be ‘rejected’. See Withdrawal of claims.

Inappropriate or incorrect claims

Customers who have lodged an inappropriate or incorrect claim should
have their claim rejected. See Inappropriate claims, and Incorrect
claims.

Rejecting claims where all required supporting documents have not been provided

Customers are notified during the claim process if further supporting
documentation is required to enable their claim to be assessed.

The notification method and time period for providing required
documentation will vary depending on the claim type, and how the claim
is submitted.

An extension of the timeframe to lodge required documentation should
only be given if special circumstances apply. See Requested
documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim.

Where the customer fails to provide all required supporting
documentation within the specified timeframe, including where multiple
documents were requested and only some of the documents were provided,
the customer’s claim must be rejected (or made not effective for
families claims) unless special circumstances apply.

Note: if the customer has intentionally provided inappropriate
documentation to allow their claim to be submitted under Circumstance
Change Monitor (CCM), for example, a bank statement has been requested
but the customer has uploaded a completely unrelated document or image,
the claim must be rejected (or made not effective). No request for
information or documentation requests should be issued.

Where a claim has been submitted through Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
and it is identified that a ‘Required Tasks’ has been incorrectly
completed by a Service Officer, the claim should not be rejected where
the documents have not been provided. In these instances:

-   issue the customer a formal request for the information. See
    Requesting information
-   consider issuing the Service Officer feedback through the Staff
    Feedback Tool

Residence related

A customer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may
have the claim rejected based on information the customer has provided.
However, in some cases visa, citizenship and movement information
provided directly from the Department of Home Affairs datalink may cause
the claim to be rejected. If the datalink with the Department of Home
Affairs has provided the information, this will take precedence over any
conflicting information provided by the customer.

If a customer advises a change in their previous circumstances, but does
not provide verification (for example, they have separated from their
current partner on the system) this information should not be included
in the rejected claim. All relevant information advised by the customer,
but not verified, should be included in the rejection document.

Some rejection reasons have to be coded manually. When manually
rejecting a claim, ensure an advice is sent to the customer with the
rejection reason(s) and rights of review and appeal.

Note: claims for Partner Allowance (PA) have not been available from 20
September 2003. For Special Benefit, see 'Related links' below the
Contents.

Consider change of circumstances advised in a claim

A customer may advise of changed circumstances as part of their claim.
Even if the claim is rejected, the changes need to be reviewed as this
could affect other current payments. If the customer and/or partner has
provided evidence or documents that may affect qualification or
payability of their ongoing entitlement, the change of circumstance must
be processed once the rejection of the claim is finalised.

Contents

Rejecting an ABSTUDY claim

Rejecting a claim for Age Pension

Rejecting an Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme claim

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) claim

Rejecting a claim for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Rejecting a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Rejecting a family assistance claim

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(Job seeker)

Rejecting a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) claim

Rejecting a Mobility Allowance (MOB) claim

Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Assessing claim for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Related links

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Inappropriate claims

Incorrect claims

Process Direct

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment Other Extreme Circumstances

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

Home Equity Access Scheme cancellation and rejections

Withdrawal of Claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
