-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the general rules and exceptions to these rules
when calculating the start day for a claim for Parenting Payment (PP).

Start day rule

The general rule is that if a person claims PP and is qualified on the
day the claim is made, that day is the start day.

Exceptions to start day rule

Exceptions:

Early claim - qualification: If the customer is not qualified for PP on
the day they claim but will become qualified within 13 weeks, the start
day is the date they become qualified. It is not possible for early
claims for PP to be lodged in expectation of the birth of a child. See
Early claims

Advanced start day - payability: The start date is to be advanced to
Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD) of the first period that PP becomes
payable only where the customer is:

-   qualified on the date of claim, and
-   they or their partner have ceased work and expect to be paid final
    employment income that would preclude PP from being payable, and
-   they will become payable within 13 weeks

Backdated start day: If the customer claims PP within 4 weeks after
giving birth to a child or after the date a PP child became a dependent
child of the customer, the start day is the first day the customer is
qualified for PP from the date the PP child became a dependent. This
applies whether the child is the first PP child of the customer or a
subsequent PP child. It does not apply when a child who is already a
dependent child of the customer becomes a PP child of the customer (for
example, due to an increase in shared care arrangements)

Claim made after partner’s claim: a customer’s start date may be
earlier. See Calculating the start day for a claim made after partner’s
claim

Partner died: If the customer is claiming within 4 weeks after their
partner's death. See Calculating the start day soon after a partner's
death

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP): If PP was
previously cancelled due to income during a PPL or DAP period, check if
the customer is eligible for PP to be resumed. See Resumption of income
support payments (ISP) after the end of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad
and Partner Pay (DAP).

-   Transferees: If a customer transfers to PP from another income
    support payment, the start day for PP is the date the previous
    income support payment ceased if PP claim is lodged within 14 days
    after that date. If the transfer is due to the birth of a child, or
    a PP child becoming the dependent child of the customer the
    backdated start day rules will apply
-   Transfer from Carer Payment (CAR) after death of partner: In this
    case, the customer is not required to lodge a claim for PP. The
    start day for PP is the day following the end of the bereavement
    period. See Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect
    on Carer Payment (CP)
-   Intent to claim provisions may apply to customers in vulnerable
    circumstances

The Resources page contains examples of calculating the start day when a
customer claims PP.

Related links

Start Day

Contact in relation to an intended claim

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Calculating the start day for a claim made after partner’s claim

Calculating the start day soon after a partner’s death

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
