-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Agreement including the
process of making a claim and coding of New Zealand payments.

Commencement date

Social Security agreements with New Zealand (NZ) commenced in the 1940s.
The latest version was implemented on 1 July 2017.

Claiming and benefits covered

The Agreement generally allows customers to lodge a claim for payment
from either country. It also allows customers to add together periods of
residence in Australia and periods of social security coverage in New
Zealand, to meet the minimum requirements for payment.

Australian payments covered:

-   Age Pension
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) for the severely disabled
-   Carer Payment for carer partners of DSP customers

Note: there are additional requirements that must be met before payment
can be made.

Customers can claim Australian payments under the Agreement by
contacting Services Australia or the New Zealand authorities.

New Zealand payments covered:

-   New Zealand Superannuation (equivalent of Age Pension)
-   Supported Living Payment (formerly Invalids Benefit)
-   Veterans Pension

Customers can claim a foreign pension by contacting Services Australia
or the New Zealand authorities.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in agreements is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

Procedures for claims for Australia payments under agreements are
contained in Claims for Australian payments under International
Agreements.

The Resources page contains links to the International Programme,
International Services (CIS) and the Services Australia website.

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

New Zealand Agreement debt recovery requests - action for International
Services (CIS)

New Zealand Agreement debt recovery reconciliation - action for
International Services (CIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
