
Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect 106-03020060

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the correct process to follow when processing an
incomplete paper claim for a social security payment or concession card.
For example, when a claim has been lodged with unanswered questions, is
not signed, or needs clarification or correction. This procedure applies
to all forms that make up a claim, for example, income and assets
modules.

ABSTUDY or Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

This procedure does not apply to claims for ABSTUDY or the AIC Scheme.
These schemes have different rules for incomplete claims and the date of
effect used on receipt of the missing information ed. See:

-   Accepting and checking ABSTUDY claims and form
-   Assessing ABSTUDY claims
-   Checking the Claim for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
    (SY040)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme transfers from another
    payment

Under social security law

The customer is to provide correct and up to date information on a
claim, so that their entitlement to a payment or product can be
correctly assessed.

If a claim form has been received that has not been completed in full,
the date it is received may generally be taken as the date it is lodged
if errors and omissions are then corrected. When received, the claim
form must at least contain details of the claimant's name, contact
details and the payment being claimed. Omissions such as the customer
not signing the form can then be corrected before processing the claim.

Under family assistance law

A separate procedure covers the receipt of claims, forms and
documentation for family assistance.

Incomplete medical reports for Carer Payment/Carer Allowance

Customers claiming Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance may lodge an
incomplete medical report. If this occurs, determine if the information
is required. If so:

-   contact the THP by telephone to clarify the aspects. This may
    require arranging for the THP to call back
-   in limited situations this may involve faxing a copy of the report
    to the THP with questions attached
-   if unable to contact the THP by telephone or fax, it may be
    appropriate to write to the THP to obtain the additional information
-   as a last resort issue a new medical report to the customer with a
    covering letter

Claim lodgement

Note: a claim will not be considered lodged until it is fully completed
and all Required supporting documentation is supplied.

This does not include supporting documents from a third party. For
example, additional medical documentation from a Treating Health
Professional (THP) to support their medical report.

Related links

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Completing the Partner details (MOD P)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Rejecting a Carer Allowance (CA) claim

Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) claim

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Requesting information from a claimant

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
