
United Kingdom Agreement and foreign pension information 106-04034000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the terminated Agreement
with the United Kingdom (UK). Information on contact details for the UK
pension authorities, the current eligibility requirements, process of
making a claims and coding of UK payments is contained in Eligibility
and coding for foreign pensions from non-agreement countries.

On this Page:

Agreement with the UK

Agreements on social security between the United Kingdom (UK) and
Australia commenced in 1954. From 1 March 2001, Australia terminated the
Agreement that was in place at the time because the UK refuses to apply
cost-of-living increases (indexation) to UK pensions in Australia.

Non-indexation

UK Government policy is to only apply indexation of UK pensions in
certain countries where compelled under European arrangements or
bilateral social security agreements. Australia's former Agreement with
the UK did not include indexation.

Appeals against the decision to not index UK pensions in some countries
were considered in the UK House of Lords and the European court system.
The Australian Government acted as a 'friend of the court' in the
ultimately unsuccessful appeal.

Despite the appeals and ongoing representations by various lobby groups
and the Australian Government, there has been no change to the UK
Government policy of non-indexation.

Note: a customer in receipt of a UK pension visiting the UK can receive
an increase to their UK pension while they are present in the UK. On
return to Australia, their UK pension reduces back to the normal rate
they were paid before they left Australia.

If a customer contacts about the rate we are maintaining, code the lower
rate the customer received from date of return to Australia and ask the
customer to provide evidence from the UK authorities showing the rate
they were paid while in the UK.

The former Agreement

The former Agreement with the UK that was in force at the time of
termination started on 29 June 1992.

For Australia, the Agreement covered:

Age Pension

Benefits for widows:

-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Widow B Pension
-   Bereavement Allowance (BVA)

Sickness Allowance

Note: 'widow' meant a female who had been legally married to the
deceased (de jure) and who was not a member of a couple.

The former Agreement was a host-country style meaning Australian
payments could not be granted to UK residents and could not be paid for
permanent absences from Australia. Portability under the former
Agreement was limited to 12 months for any temporary absence. After 12
months, the absence was deemed to be permanent.

As payments could only be made to Australian residents, a direct
deduction rate applied in all cases.

Where a person was paid under the Agreement, any Wife Pension or spouse
Carer Payment that was paid to their partner was also deemed to be paid
under the Agreement.

While the Agreement was in force, any UK retirement pension, benefits
for widows, sickness benefit or invalidity benefit paid under the former
Agreement to a person residing in the UK was exempt from the income
test.

Termination

After negotiations over many years to try and introduce indexation in
our bilateral Agreement, Australia officially notified the UK Government
on 1 March 2000 that the Agreement was terminated. Under the provisions
in the Agreement, the termination took effect 12 months later from 1
March 2001.

A savings provision was enacted in the Social Security (International
Agreements) Act 1999 to enable a person who had been an Australian
resident continuously since 1 March 2000 or earlier to still use the
provisions of the former Agreement as if it had not been terminated.

A person who has been an Australian resident since 1 March 2000 would
have accrued 10 years qualifying Australian residence from 1 March 2010
and would not need to use the savings provision. Accordingly, there are
no longer any Australian payments made by virtue of the former
Agreement.

The UK Government enacted similar savings provisions for former
Australian residents in the UK. There are a number of customers still
being paid a UK pension under the UK savings provision.

Exchange on information with the UK

There are still a number of cases paid by the UK under their savings
provisions. Information regarding those remaining cases may still be
exchanged.

A regular exchange of information with the UK is in place under a
separate Memorandum of Understanding. See International Data Exchange
and auto-indexation of foreign pensions.

This exchange does not allow individual liaison like other arrangements
under social security agreements. Customers who required information
from the UK need to contact UK foreign pension authority directly.
Contact details for foreign pension authorities are available in codes
facility.

Information for International Agreements

Information on how International Agreements work and general concepts
used in agreement is contained in International Social Security
Agreements.

The Resources page contains links to International Programme and
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears debts

Non embargo comparable foreign payment arrears debts

Australian residence requirements for payment

Eligibility and coding for foreign pensions from non-agreement countries

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
