-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the international data exchange
program (DEX) and auto-indexation CPI of foreign pensions from agreement
countries and the United Kingdom (UK).

International data exchange and auto-indexation

The exchange of information with agreement countries under Australia's
international social security agreements is authorised under
s208(1)(b)(iii) of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999. A
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the United Kingdom (UK) operates
under Public Interest Certificate under s208(1)(a) of the Social
Security (Administration) Act 1999.

The International Program in Services Australia has negotiated bulk
exchanges of foreign pension rates and deaths with a number of agreement
countries and the UK.

Files are exchanged via secure electronic protocols with most being on
an annual basis in line with regular indexation. An automated daily
two-way exchange applies with New Zealand. See Agreement liaisons, NZ
CICs and exchange of information.

As certain countries apply regular indexation of pensions, an
auto-update of known percentage increases may be applied to previously
confirmed rates of foreign pensions. The increases are received from
official sources and may be a fixed percentage, linear or sliding scale
increase.

Information received via data exchange or a rate updated via
auto-indexation is considered to be accurate as it is received from the
paying authority and further updates to this data may be restricted to
staff in International Services (CIS).

DEX and CPI activity is limited to foreign pension or death action and
is not a full review of the customers’ circumstances. Reviews for
foreign pensions or deceased customers that are not covered by DEX or
CPI are handled by other compliance measures such as Payment Accuracy
Reviews (PAR) or Proof of Life Certificates.

Matching

Information exchanged between the agency and other organisations must be
matched against records. After this information is matched, staff can
run the relevant business process on the matched record. For example,
death action or foreign pension updates.

Matching is highly effective but in rare cases, mismatches may occur.

If a Service Officer identifies a mismatch, they must:

-   fix any incorrect updates that have been applied at point of contact
-   use the DEX escalation process to refer the record to International
    Program. This will ensure records are updated to prevent the
    mismatch reoccurring

Date of effect

Auto-indexation increases (CPI) are applied from the 1st of the
applicable month. The updates are applied prior to the monthly exchange
rate revaluation process. The exception is United Kingdom (UK)
increases, which apply from early April each year.

For the date of effect when the system runs the DEX death action, it
uses the:

-   date of death, if known, and
-   date of receipt of the information,

Note: if the date of death is not known, a referral is generated for
investigation.

DEX foreign pension processing uses a Date of Event (DOV) and Date of
Receipt (DOR) of 'T' for today for ongoing rates of foreign pensions.

New foreign pension coding may result in an arrears debt referral, and
if arrears information is provided, the DEX process may record an
arrears lump sum. This will generate a debt shell that staff will
investigate.

For more information on the date of effect of determinations, see:

-   Death of an income support customer or their partner
-   Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes
-   Using the correct date of effect when raising debts
-   Date of receipt

Staff responsibilities

The International Program is responsible for:

-   coordinating the updates to customer records based on information
    exchanged
-   referring death notifications and arrears debts to International
    Services (CIS)
-   responding to DEX escalations

Staff with the appropriate skills tags will get follow-up work because
of a DEX update. This work may involve:

-   Investigation and processing of death advice
-   Investigation of arrears debts, and
-   Negotiation of debt repayments

International Services (CIS) is responsible for handling customer
enquiries related to DEX and CPI.

Note: the social security authority in the relevant country, not
Services Australia, determines entitlement to a foreign pension,
including the rate of payment. Customers need to discuss entitlement or
rates of payment with the social security authorities in the other
country.

Contact details for foreign pension authorities are available on the
Reference Data Enquiry (CODES) screen.

Referrals, contacts and escalations

A DEX update may create a referral when:

a death notification is received and:

-   a partial or no date of death is provided, or
-   the full date of death is provided and the death action:
    - can be run and results in a debt for investigation, or
    - cannot be run

New foreign pension coding reduces the rate paid to the customer or
their partner to check for any debt for failing to declare in time or
arrears debt may exist

Arrears lump sum is updated and results in a debt for investigation

Where a customer contacts us about a data exchange or auto-indexation
issue, Service Officers should immediately attempt to fix any issues at
point of contact or refer to a Service Officer who has the skills to do
so.

However, Service Officers must escalate all data exchange issues to
International Program to ensure corrective action is taken and to
prevent issues reoccurring.

Customers' obligations

Regardless of any data exchange or auto-indexation, customers are still
required to meet their obligations to the agency under social security
law to notify of changes in their circumstances, including changes in
foreign pensions.

In some circumstances, staff may ask a customer to supply a copy of
their statement from the paying authority even though information has
been received via the data exchange program. Service Officers should
still accept foreign pension statements presented by customers.

Customers are also required to notify the paying authorities of other
countries of changes in their circumstances that might affect their
foreign pension. Staff should:

-   help customers using their communication channels as much as they
    can
-   not tell customers they do not have to advise the foreign pension
    paying authority directly

Contact details for foreign pension authorities are available on the
Reference Data Enquiry (CODES) screen.

The Resources page contains links to the International Program homepage,
the International Services homepage and tables showing the current
DEX/CPI status for different agreement countries and the United Kingdom.

Related links

Foreign Pension coding

Foreign income and assets

International Social Security Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
