
Completing the Separation details MOD S 106-07110080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to help customers receiving entitlements
complete a Separation details MOD S form when they separate from their
partner.

Customer advises of separation

A person is a member of a couple if they are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory they live in

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

If a marriage, registered relationship or de facto relationship ceases
to exist, the partners of that relationship are no longer members of a
couple.

Living separately and apart

To be considered to be living separately and apart, it must be
established that:

-   they are living apart either permanently or indefinitely (physical
    separation), and
-   there has been an estrangement or breakdown in their relationship
    (emotional separation)

Living separately and apart does not need the customer to have
physically moved out of shared accommodation. It must be established
that:

-   there is a genuine separation in the relationship, and
-   they are living separate lives

Generally, living separately and apart should not be accepted if the
couple are living apart because of ill health. Explore all other options
before determining that a couple are living separately and apart.

A customer’s relationship may break down but they continue to live
together. Additional assessments may be required for these customers.
For more information, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under
one roof (SUOR) assessments.

When to issue a MOD S

To decide if a MOD S needs to be issued, see Change in relationship
status from partnered to single.

Verifying a separation

When a customer separates, verify the separation. The MOD S contains a
section the customer must get a suitable referee to complete.

A referee must:

-   be 18 years of age or over
-   not be the customer’s parent, step parent, sibling or child
-   not be the customer’s correspondence nominee
-   not be the customer’s most recent ex-partner

The referee should be familiar with the customer’s circumstances. It is
preferable that a referee be a person of some standing in the community.
For example, minister of religion, doctor, police officer, counsellor,
social or welfare worker, solicitor, community leader.

See Change in relationship status from partnered to single for more on
when verification of separation can be provided after the customer has
been unlinked from their ex-partner.

Completing the module

-   Customers must answer all relevant questions on the module
-   Many questions only need a Yes or No response
-   Depending on the answer, some questions may be skipped
-   The customer must sign the module
-   Identity Confirmation may be required
-   Customers may need to complete other forms before the module can be
    assessed. Service Officers issue these forms if required. For
    example, a customer may indicates on the MOD S their income and
    assets have changed. If so, they need to attach a completed Income
    and assets (MOD iA) form
-   Customers may indicate on the MOD S that they live in the same home
    as their ex-partner. If so, they must complete the Relationship
    Details - Separated under one roof (SS293) form

Helping customers complete the module

Customers may ask for specific help to complete the module. For
information and standard requirements, see Standards for helping
customers complete claims and forms.

Considerations for customers in multiple relationships

A multiple relationship is where a person has more than one member of a
couple relationship at the same time.

Multiple relationships are not recognised under social security law.
Assess all other parties to the relationship (outside the central
couple) for entitlements under Section 24 provisions.

If a customer in a multiple relationship separates from one partner,
take care to update the correct partner's details. Consider changing
partner links to another member of the multiple relationship if the
customer is linked to the partner they separated from.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website and
relevant forms.

Related links

Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates

Changes in relationship status from partnered to single

Family and domestic violence

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Identity Confirmation

Claiming Parenting Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
