
Foreign currency and exchange rates 106-08020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy on recording income and assets from a
country other than Australia in foreign currency and the conversion to
Australian dollars for the purposes of assessing entitlements to
Australian social security payments and concession cards.

Delivery of payments to Centrelink customers outside Australia

Information on delivering Australian social security payments to bank
accounts in other countries is covered in Delivery of payments to
Centrelink customers outside Australia.

Income and assets from outside Australia

For the purposes of Australian social security law, income and assets
includes any received from, or held in, a country other than Australia.
Income or assets from a country other than Australia must be recorded in
the originating foreign currency even if the customer actually receives
payment in another currency, including Australian dollars.

Foreign currencies

Income that is transferred outside the originating country may be
converted to another currency by an intermediary or the receiving
financial institution. There is normally a transaction cost involved in
converting currencies and remittance of funds, which may be borne by the
paying authority or the customer.

Note: the gross rate of any assessable foreign income is maintained,
that is, before any deductions or fees and charges are applied.

Official currencies may change, for example, a country may redenominate
their currency. For historical assessments, it is important to record
the foreign income or assets in the currency that applied at the
particular point in time.

Where a country adopts the Euro as their official currency, an
irrevocable exchange rate is set by the European Central Bank for that
country. In these cases, foreign income or assets for periods prior to
the relevant date must be coded in the old currency and then converted
and coded for periods after that date in the new currency using the
applicable rate. The Resources page includes information and examples of
Euro conversions and a table of the irrevocable exchange rate for each
country.

Converting foreign currencies

Foreign currency amounts are converted to Australian dollars using a
standard exchange rate before being included in calculations such as the
income or assets tests.

The exchange rate used by Services Australia to convert foreign
currencies to Australian dollars for assessing entitlement is generally
the Commonwealth Bank's buying rate. However, by necessity, some
exchange rates are obtained from other sources, for example, the Reserve
Bank of Australia.

Information on current and historical exchange rates is available on the
CODES facility.

Type ‘CODES’ in ‘Nxt’ and press [Enter]. On the CODES screen, ‘S’elect
Foreign Exchange Summary (RDFXS) and press [Enter].

On the Foreign Exchange Summary (RDFXS) screen, key country name in the
String Search and press [Enter].

‘S’elect the required country and press [Enter].

A list of all exchange rates and the relevant date of effect (DOE) for
that country will be displayed.

To convert foreign income into AU$, divide by the exchange rate.

Example: Pound Sterling GBP 10.00 divide by current month exchange rate,
i.e. 0.5658 = AUD17.67

To convert AUD amount into foreign currency, multiply by the exchange
rate.

Example: AUD 100.00 multiply by USD current month exchange rate, i.e.
0.7264 = USD72.64.

To ensure the current Australian dollar value received by the customer
is reflected in the relevant calculation, for most foreign income
sources, exchange rates used by Services Australia are automatically
updated from the first business day of every month using the rate that
was applicable on the fifth working day before that date.

For example, the first business day in March 2014 was the third day so
the exchange rate that was applicable on 25 February 2014 (5 working
days before) is applied to foreign currency amounts from 3 March 2014
until 31 March 2014 (the day before the first business day in April
2014).

Arrears lump sums that are coded as rates during the arrears period must
be converted to Australian dollars manually and coded in Australian
dollars. See Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears debts.

Other foreign lump sums that are coded as amounts on the Foreign Pension
Details (FPD) screen or the Foreign Income Details (FID) screen (Type:
‘LMP’) are automatically converted using the exchange rate that was
applicable on the date the lump sum was received. See Treatment of lump
sums.

Note: financial investments, including overseas accounts, type 'OSA' on
Direct Investments (SVDI) screen and unlisted securities, type 'OS' on
Unlisted Public Securities (SIUS) screen, are only updated in March and
September each year. See MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates.

Exchange rate information and reviews

Customers are sent an exchange rate statement in February each year
listing the rates used to convert foreign currency amounts during the
previous 12 months. Customers may use the free call number or visit the
Services Australia website for information on current exchange rates for
the 5 main currencies, Pound Sterling, US Dollar, Canadian Dollar, Euro
and New Zealand Dollar, with the option of speaking to a Service Officer
for other currencies. See the Resources page for a link to the Services
Australia website, Phone us page.

Not all customers with foreign income/assets will receive an exchange
rate statement. Only customers who are rate effected by the foreign
income/asset will receive one.

Note: overseas financial investments that are updated in March and
September will add an exchange rate paragraph to the letter only if a
letter is issued for the Australian cost of living increases (CPI).

Exchange rates may be reviewed on request if there is a difference of
more than 5% between the rate used by Services Australia and the actual
rate used to convert the foreign currency. Customers must provide proof
of the actual exchange rate that was used from the official source.
Differences of less than 5% are not reviewable.

Customers who are cancelled due to increases in income or asset values
caused by exchange rate variations may be deemed to be suspended. If the
exchange rate decreases to the point where the customer becomes payable
again, policy advice is that payments may be restored within 6 months if
the customer is in Australia or within 12 months if the customer is
outside Australia.

The Resources page contains information on how to convert old national
currencies to or from Euro, examples of Euro conversions and a table of
the irrevocable exchange rate for each country and date the currency
changed. It also contains a link to International and DVA Programmes and
the Services Australia website.

Contents

Reviews of foreign exchange rates

Cancellation due to foreign exchange processing

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Eligibility and coding of foreign pensions from no-agreement countries

Foreign income and assets

Foreign pension coding

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
