-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Australian Working Life Residence (WLR), and the
effect that WLR has on a customer's entitlement to Centrelink payments.

How WLR is calculated

Australian WLR refers to any period from the age of 16 years to Age
Pension age when a person was an Australian resident as defined in the
Social Security Act 1991. It is a measure of a person's potential
working life and does not mean that a person has to have actually worked
or paid taxes.

Calculate WLR by assessing the total number of years, months and days a
person has been an Australian resident:

-   The number of years is multiplied by 12 to give the appropriate
    number of months
-   Each month obviously equals 1 month
-   30 days equal 1 month, and any remaining days are rounded up to a
    month, then an extra month is added to the final total. See
    Resources for an example calculation

Multiple periods of residence

When multiple periods of residence are assessed, each component (years,
months, days) are added together first before the calculation is
performed. See the Resources page for an example.

The Immigration Datalink with the Department of Home Affairs will
automatically populate a customer's visa details from 1 September 1994
onwards. The datalink will automatically update any change in visa for
any customer who has already been identified as a mutual customer. If
available, the datalink will also advise citizenship and movement
information. This will allow staff to assess residence periods for the
customer and help in calculating the customers WLR.

Generally, the minimum WLR required for a full income and asset rate of
payment is 420 months (35 years). Customers paid using the International
Agreement with Greece or North Macedonia may be paid according to a WLR
of 528 months (44 years). Customers paid using the agreement with India
may be paid according to a WLR of 540 months (45 years). For more
information, see:

-   Greece Agreement and foreign pension information
-   North Macedonia Agreement and foreign pension information
-   India Agreement and foreign pension information

Customers who were either outside Australia, or inside Australia
temporarily, at the implementation of the 1 July 2014 AWLR changes may
continue to be saved (grandfathered) from the changes and assessed under
the rules in place before 1 July 2014 including being paid according to
a WLR of 300 months (25 years). Customers assessed under the pre 1 July
2014 Australian Working Life Residence (AWLR) rules has more
information.

Customers affected by WLR

WLR affects customers:

-   who are overseas for more than 26 weeks and entitled to a
    proportional rate of pension
-   who are paid under an International Agreement, and
-   who apply for a pension from an agreement country

Customers paid under the New Zealand (NZ) Agreement or who are living in
NZ long term, are paid according to Working Age Residence (WAR) rather
than WLR. The following rules do not apply to either of these customers.

WLR affected payments

WLR may affect the following payments:

-   Age Pension
-   Parenting Payment (Single) (PPS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Pension Supplement Basic Amount

WLR and Portability

A person's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia,
the day of departure is included as part of their absence regardless of
the time of departure.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence, they are considered to be inside Australia on that day and
therefore no longer affected by portability.

After a customer has been absent from Australia for 26 weeks, their
payment will be based on their Australian WLR unless they are saved
under certain portability rules. For example, an autonomous DSP customer
who became unable to work while an Australian resident, will not be
affected by proportional portability. They will be paid the normal
income and asset tested rate.

WLR and International Agreements

A minimum WLR may be required before a customer is entitled to payment
under an International Agreement.

The minimum amount is generally 12 months for customers who are residing
outside Australia and who need to totalise to qualify for payment. While
WLR is generally rounded up, the minimum working life residence of 12
months for totalisation purposes cannot be rounded up.

Customers residing in Australia generally do not require a minimum WLR
before they can totalise. Once entitlement under an agreement is
established, WLR may be used (along with the normal income and asset
tests) to determine the rate of payment a customer will receive outside
Australia. Customers paid under some agreements who are temporarily or
permanently in Australia may also receive the outside Australia rate.
Note: historical residence is used to determine qualification for
Centrelink payments, not WLR.

WLR can also affect the way certain types of income are treated. For
example, if a person is paid under an international agreement (other
than Chile, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, India,
Latvia, North Macedonia, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia), any
pension from that country is proportionalised before being added into
the calculation. A proportional rate limiter ceiling applies to these
customers.

WLR and Foreign Pension entitlement

A person claiming a pension from an agreement country may use their WLR
to add to contributions or residence in the agreement country to meet
the minimum contribution amount required to qualify for a foreign
pension.

For example, to qualify for an Austrian pension a person requires 15
years of contributions. They may add 5 years of contributions to 10
years of WLR and qualify for a part pension from Austria.

Some countries require employment periods during AWLR to qualify for the
foreign pension, see the individual agreement country for which
countries require employment periods.

Use of a partner's WLR

Most proportional rates are paid according to a person's own WLR, but
the person may be paid according to their current or former partner's
WLR.

The Resources page has information on when the customer cannot give the
exact or precise dates for residence and an example of a calculation of
Australian WLR. It also has a link to Record Search on the National
Archives, a link to Passenger Card Image System information and
Centrelink International Services (CIS) contact details.

Related links

Residence requirements

Residence and Portability screens

Recording legal residence status

Updating residence screens (CLK)

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Australian residence requirements for payment

International Social Security Agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
