
Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a Manual Follow-up activity when no match occurs 106-06020100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions taken by International Services (CIS)
staff in actioning a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity when no data match
occurs.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs provides Centrelink with
residence and travel details for customers. In some situations a
customer's details will not be provided as expected due to either no
Department of Home Affairs record matching the customer's details, or
incorrect details. This procedure explains what needs to be done when no
match occurs.

The datalink with the Department of Home Affairs automatically populates
the customer's details onto their Centrelink record for the period from
1 September 1994 to now. These details include:

-   Visas
-   Movement information
-   Australian citizenship details

The datalink will also automatically update any changes in visa, grant
of Australian citizenship and departure from or return to Australia for
any customer who has already been identified as a mutual customer. The
datalink also provides the same information in relation to the
customer's dependent children, caree or carer.

Details contained in the Department of Home Affairs

When an update is attempted on a customer's record by a Service Officer,
the datalink system will make an assumption based on certain protocols
as to whether a return of information from the Department of Home
Affairs is expected.

Details for the Department of Home Affairs via the datalink will be
expected if one or more of the following circumstances exists and is
recorded for the customer:

-   Immigration Reference Number (IRN) exists
-   Australian residence commenced after 1 September 1994
-   Movement information
-   Visa was granted after 1 September 1994
-   Change of address after 1 September 1994 from inside to outside
    Australia (and vice versa)
-   Customer's date of birth is after 1 September 1994 and the country
    of birth is not Australia, or
-   Customer's residence in a foreign country commenced after 1
    September 1994 and the customer resided in Australia immediately
    prior to the overseas residence

New claim processing

When a customer lodges a claim with Centrelink after 8 December 2008, a
question prompts the Service Officer to confirm whether the person has
lived or travelled overseas since 1 September 1994.

If the customer has answered yes to this question, the relevant
information held by the Department of Home Affairs database would be
expected to be transferred to Centrelink via the datalink process.

This data would include all travel details held by the Department of
Home Affairs and will populate the relevant Centrelink screens,
including all travel and visa and Australian citizenship details.

Search criteria

The datalink requires the following information to activate a search for
visa, citizenship or movement information:

-   name
-   date of birth
-   country of birth

MFU referral and role of CIS

Where the attempt to match a dual customer has not been successful
because there are differences in details held between Centrelink and the
Department of Home Affairs, this is known as a 'no match'.

If an exchange of information through the datalink is expected within a
new claim activity but is not successful, a Manual Follow-up (MFU)
activity will be created by the system. This MFU will be automatically
transferred and actioned by the Centrelink International Services (CIS)
Smart Centre. The new claim process can continue while the activity is
being processed. While the MFU does not prevent completion of the new
claim activity a Service Officer may prefer to wait until the MFU is
completed to ensure that all Department of Home Affairs data is
available before completing the claim.

A Service Officer can complete the claim with customer advised
information if they wish to, but full Department of Home Affairs data
will not be available until the MFU is actioned. The MFU is an integral
part of the validation process and cannot be cancelled.

If a match is expected in an activity other than a claim and is not
confirmed by the Department of Home Affairs datalink, then an MFU with a
lower priority keyword will be created for action by the specialist team
in CIS. However, this MFU will not prevent continued action on the
customer's record by the Service Officer.

The CIS Smart Centre prioritises referrals according to their urgency.
The team will endeavour to locate the correct Department of Home Affairs
record and record the information found regarding visas, citizenship and
travel directly on the customer's record. The CIS Smart Centre will
finalise the MFU, therefore allowing the activity to be further actioned
by the Service Officer as required.

Debt or reviews resulting from datalink

Any debts or reviews resulting from the Department of Home Affairs
datalink information activities are handled by the customer's home
Service Zone Debt Raising Team.

The Resources page contains links to the International Program homepage
and contact details for Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a Manual Follow-up
activity when a multimatch occurs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
