
Incorrect claims 106-03040030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for handling an incorrect claim.

Incorrect claims

An incorrect claim is where a person makes a claim for a social security
payment for which they are not qualified. If they then claim another
social security payment for which they are qualified, the second claim
is taken to have been made on the day the first claim was made.

It must be reasonable to use the date of the first claim. Consider:

-   the period between the lodgement of the initial claim and the second
    claim, and
-   whether the person was qualified for the second payment throughout
    the period between the 2 claims

Service Officers must ensure that all qualifications are met for the
second payment throughout the period between the 2 claims.

If the gap between claims is more than 13 weeks, ask the customer why
the second claim was not lodged earlier. For example, customer is
hospitalised or immobilised by a medical condition or impairment, or
lives in a remote area, or Services Australia or another Department has
taken more than 13 week to decide that the customer was not qualified
for the first payment.

Minimise inconvenience to customers by helping them complete the claim
for the correct payment. Avoid duplication as much as possible.

Incorrect claims lodged online

If a customer makes an incorrect claim for payment online, the date they
submitted the online claim can be the date used when the correct claim
is made.

When the Service Officer has deemed the online claim to be a claim for a
different service reason, for example an indexed Youth Allowance (YA)
claim should be processed as an Austudy claim, the claim may be
re-indexed using the Re-index Online Claim workflow. A new claim is not
needed unless further information is required.

An online claim cannot be considered a claim for a different service
reason if the correct claim is a supplementary payment, for example, an
online claim for YA/Austudy cannot be considered an incorrect claim for
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES).

Application to supplementary payments

Incorrect claims can also be applied to supplementary payments. Where an
incorrect claim for a supplementary payment is lodged and another
supplementary claim is lodged, the customer may have their start day
backdated to the date of original claim. The same guidelines regarding
delays in lodging the correct claim apply to supplementary payments.

Incorrect family assistance claims

For the process where family assistance claims are incorrect, see Not
effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment.

The Resources page contains an example of a customer who has lodged an
incorrect claim.

Related links

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Calculating the deemed date of claim manually

Calculating the start day general rule

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card options online

Re-indexing claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
