
Multiple enh1ment exclusions 106-05010070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines multiple entitlement exclusions. Multiple
entitlement exclusion provisions prevent more than one income support
payment being paid to a customer at the same time. This procedure is for
Service Officers required to assess claims for payments administered by
Services Australia.

On this Page:

Multiple entitlement exclusion provisions

These provisions differ from payment to payment, but the principle
remains the same. Payability of a particular benefit, or pension can be
affected by the customer receiving another payment delivered by Services
Australia or another Australian Government agency. Services Australia
has a duty of care to ensure a customer is always paid the most
appropriate (that is, beneficial) payment for their circumstances.

Payability of social security payments

Payability of a social security payment may be precluded if:

-   the customer is receiving certain payments from Department of
    Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
-   another social security pension or social security benefit becomes
    payable
-   the customer is receiving one of the payments under the prescribed
    educational scheme
-   the customer is receiving payments made by an Australian Government
    funded employment programme
-   the customer is receiving Adult Migrant Education Programme (AMEP)
    Living Allowance
-   the customer is receiving English as a Second Language Allowance
    (ESLA) - to the extent that the scheme applies to full-time students

Payability of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

FTB is not payable for a child of any age who is receiving:

-   one of the payments from DVA
-   a social security benefit and pension
-   a payment under an Australian Government Labour Market Programme,
    and
-   for a child 16 years or over, one of the payments under the
    prescribed educational scheme

Payability of Transition to Independent Living Allowance (TILA)

Payment of TILA is not treated as income and does not preclude
payability of a social security payment.

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers are able to be suspended on DSP due to specific return to work
reasons and at the same time claim and become current on another social
security benefit, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA)
or Parenting Payment (PP), if their income is below the income test
threshold for that payment. These customers are not affected by multiple
entitlement exclusion provisions.

It does not include the non-income support payment types of Exceptional
Circumstances Relief Payment (ECRP) and Farm Help (FFR).

The Resources page explains specific multiple entitlement exclusions
that apply to each payment.

Related links

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
