
Residence and Portability screens 106-06020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the residence and portability screens used to
record and ensure payments are correctly assessed.

On this Page:

Residence and qualification

Australian residence is part of the qualification requirements for
almost all Australian social security payments and concession cards.
Recording residence information accurately and completely ensures
payments and concessions cards are assessed correctly. This procedure
describes the screens used to record residence and provides information
for coding these screens.

Residence screens

The residence screens are accessible in all payments systems (for
example, PEN, NSS, FAO, ISS) and will be automatically selected during
the new claim process. These screens need to be accurately coded so the
system can correctly assess whether the customer is entitled to an
Australian payment.

Residence screens will need to be completed for all customers. The
screens display residence and movement information that can be used by a
Service Officer to help determine residence qualification for payments.
Most importantly, the information recorded will be used by the system to
calculate whether a customer has adequate qualifying residence periods
or whether they are subject to or have served a Newly Arrived Resident's
Waiting Period (NARWP).

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship when available.

If the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need to
be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with Centrelink, ongoing updates to movement information and
visa changes will be automatically recorded on the Centrelink record for
customers, partners and dependent children.

Information about residence prior to 1 September 1994 will need to be
provided, and verified when necessary, by the customer. Customers will
also be asked to provide a passport number to help verify the Department
of Home Affairs information.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

Related links

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Recording legal residence status

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Proof of Australian citizenship

Updating residence screens

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Verifying and recording Proof of Arrival (POA)

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
