
Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments 106-07120010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Intervention Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to complete a MoC or SUOR assessment. This
includes assessing a customer's living arrangements to decide if they
are a member of a couple under the relevant law. This ensures they
receive the correct payment type and rate.

What is a MoC

Under associated law/policy, a person is a member of a couple if they
are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship, and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory where they
    live

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

Two people can still be members of a couple if they do not live at the
same address, for example for work or economic reasons.

The associated law/policy outlines that 'a person is not considered to
be in a member of a couple relationship if the person is living
separately and apart from their partner on a permanent or indefinite
basis'. Living separately and apart generally means both physical and
emotional separation has occurred.

For example, living away solely for employment is not generally
considered as ‘living separately and apart’.

MoC/SUOR assessments

MoC assessments

MoC assessments are done through the Relationship Details (SS284)
form/s.

A MoC assessment can occur when a single customer advises they are
sharing accommodation with another person and there is a risk they may
be in an undisclosed member of a couple relationship.

SUOR assessments

SUOR assessments are done through the Relationship details - Separated
under one roof (SS293) form/s.

SUOR assessments can occur when a relationship has broken down and the
parties are 'living separately and apart' on a permanent or indefinite
basis, but remain residing under the same roof. Sharing may be temporary
or permanent for a variety of reasons.

For SUOR assessments, each party will need to explain why they continue
to share or resume living under the same roof. They must show how the
relationship breakdown supports a conclusion that a genuine separation
has occurred and there are no plans to resume the relationship.

Boyfriends, girlfriends and non-binary relationships

If a customer has a boyfriend, girlfriend or non-binary relationship, it
does not immediately mean they are assessed as a MoC. They may be
considered to be in a de facto relationship. It depends on the
individual circumstances of each case. If a customer in this type of
relationship does not believe they are partnered, where a MoC assessment
is required, under the associated law/policy (see References), regard
must be given to all circumstances of the relationship against the 5
factors which must be assessed to decide if they are in a MoC
relationship.

If a customer has stated they are single and a MoC assessment is
triggered, the assessment must be conducted. They must not be assessed
as a MoC simply because of their advice that they have a
boyfriend/girlfriend/non-binary relationship.

Information for a MoC/SUOR assessment

To decide whether the customer and other person are a member of a
couple, use the following:

-   for customers sharing with another person who is not their
    ex-partner, use the SS284 form/s. This form is required from both
    parties unless there is a risk of family and domestic violence.
    Forms must be issued (or stopped) via the Living Arrangements
    question set
-   for customers sharing with their ex-partner, use the SS293 form/s.
    This form is required from both parties unless there is a risk of
    family and domestic violence. Forms must be issued (or stopped) via
    the Living Arrangements question set
-   information already available on customer records
-   interviews with the customer, the other person/ex-partner and third
    parties if appropriate. Use discretion when deciding whether to
    interview the other person/ex-partner. Do not contact the other
    person/ex-partner if the customer has identified safety concerns
    against the person for whom the assessment is being conducted

Where safety concerns have been identified, see Family and domestic
violence section.

Compliance interventions are conducted by phone if possible. Forms are
not used.

Requesting information from a referee

Contacting a referee should be the last resort in MoC decision-making
process. It should only be necessary to contact a referee:

-   after contact with the customer has been made, and
-   more verification is required.

Obtaining information from a referee must be made in writing using a
Q270 Online Advice.

If the referee contacts in regard to a Q270 Online Advice, their
response to the questions can be taken over the phone.

Factors to consider

When forming an opinion about whether the customer is a MoC consider all
of 5 factors:

-   financial aspects of the relationship
-   nature of the household
-   social aspects of the relationship
-   any sexual relationship
-   nature of commitment

Also consider sensitivities around sexual orientation, cultural issues,
ethnicity, religious beliefs and other vulnerable groups.

It is also important to consider if there is a presence of family and
domestic violence within the relationship. The presence of family and
domestic violence may indicate a person is not a member of a couple and
this must be considered when making a decision about a customer’s
relationship status.

For both MoC and SUOR assessments, if one party lives alone in a
self-contained dwelling on the same property as the other
person/ex-partner, it is more likely they are living separately and
apart and there is no need for an assessment. A self-contained area is a
one that includes separate or private sleeping, cooking and bathroom
facilities.

See References for links to the Social Security Guide for verifying
membership of a couple and living separately and apart.

Risk-based MoC assessment exemptions - for MoC processing staff only

If a MoC/SUOR assessment is required, MoC processing staff use the
risk-based MoC assessment exemption process when the customer and other
person/ex-partner tell us they meet one of the following low risk
categories:

-   they are partnered with each other within 13 weeks of initial MoC
    trigger
-   they are no longer residing together within 13 weeks of initial MoC
    trigger
-   a referee has completed Section 2 of the Separation details (MOD S)
    form, confirming the customer has separated from their partner
-   they are separating for the first time but continue to live together
    as indicated by the triggering of the SS293 form through a new
    claim, change of circumstances, or via notification of separation
    through the Update Relationship details online service
-   there are future plans to live separately as indicated on the SS284
    or SS293 form

If one of the low risk categories exists, the record must be checked for
strong indications about a Member of a Couple relationship.

MoC processing staff use all information available to determine if a
risk-based assessment exemption is appropriate. This includes:

completed SS293/SS284 form(s), and

the customer and other person/ex-partner’s Centrelink records (where
they have one), including:

-   Document List (DL) screen
-   Marital Status (MS) screen, and
-   Scanned documents

Date of event

Service Officers may need to investigate the record to determine the
date of event.

For current customers, the date the customer advises a change:

-   of address/accommodation using the online service. That is, the date
    they started sharing
-   in address/accommodation when the change is recorded by a Service
    Officer using the Change in Contact Details and Address workflow or
    the Living Arrangements workflow. That is, the date they started
    sharing
-   in relationship using the Update Relationship details online service
    or MOD S. That is, the date of separation

For new claimants, if the customer is recorded as:

-   partnered and advises they are single in a new claim, the customer
    will be asked to note the date they separated from their partner
-   single and advises they are sharing with another person, the
    customer will be asked to note the date they commenced sharing

Triggers for a MoC/SUOR assessment

Service Officers must confirm the need for a MoC assessment.

A MoC (SS284)/SUOR (SS293) assessment may trigger if:

The customer advises

-   in a new claim that they share accommodation and their answers to
    the Living Arrangements (LA) question set trigger the SS284 or SS293
    form
-   a change of address or living arrangements if they are share
    accommodation and their answers to the LA question set trigger the
    recommendation to issue SS284 or SS293
-   separation via the MOD S or Update Relationship details online
    service which triggers the SS293

The customer advises they are partnered, however the alleged partner has
not confirmed the relationship

There is a relationship status (tip off) or a Relationship Status
Intervention is required

A compliance intervention exists due to a relationship risk

If possible, a MoC/SUOR assessment should be triggered by completing the
LA question set. This makes sure that the safety concern question is
asked and staff can override issue of SS284/SS293 form/s for other
reasons if an assessment is genuinely not needed. If there is a change
in living arrangements after issuing the SS284/SS293 form and the
customer is no longer sharing with the other person or ex-partner, a
MoC/SUOR assessment may still be needed for the past period. See
Confirming the need for a member of a couple (MoC) assessment.

Payments in scope for MoC/SUOR assessments

The Living Arrangement question set (therefore a MoC/SUOR assessment)
may be required for the following payments:

-   ABSTUDY (Living Allowance) if independent (ABY)
-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (student, apprentice, job seeker)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

There are limited circumstances where the system will not automatically
navigate to the Living Arrangements question set following an update to
the customer’s accommodation details, however a MoC/SUOR assessment will
be required. For example this might happen where customers only get:

-   Family Tax Benefit and/or Child Care Subsidy - need a manual issue
    of the SS293 form/s
-   Carer Allowance (CDA) - need a manual issue of the SS293 or SS284
    form/s

Family and domestic violence

There are procedures to follow for a customer who is affected by family
and domestic violence. Never contact the other person. With customer
consent, refer the matter to a social worker. They will assess the
situation and offer support.

The presence of family and domestic violence may indicate a person is
not a member of a couple and this must be considered when making a
decision about a customer’s relationship status.

Family and domestic violence is not just the presence of violence in a
relationship. It can be any conduct that is violent, threatening,
coercive or controlling.

Evidence of family and domestic violence can be identified in a number
of ways:

-   A customer discloses family and domestic violence during contact
-   ‘Family violence indicated’ messaging on the Customer Overview
    screen
-   The customer has identified safety concerns in the Living
    Arrangements question set, the MOD S or Update Relationship details
    online service (against the person for whom the assessment is being
    conducted)
-   DOCs on a customer’s record (including social worker DOCs)
-   Current or previous claims for Crisis Payment extreme circumstances
    family and domestic violence (EXV)
-   documents lodged by a customer (uploaded or scanned). For example,
    copy of a restraining order (for example, AVO, ADVO, DVO), legal
    documentation, relevant medical evidence

A customer on the single rate claiming Crisis Payment (CrP) due to
family and domestic violence may advise they separated from the alleged
perpetrator of family and domestic violence or person who experienced
the violence. In these cases:

-   After the CrP, conduct a MoC/SUOR assessment for the past period
-   Do not contact the alleged perpetrator of family and domestic
    violence. If that is the customer, do not contact the person who
    experienced the violence. Use other evidence to support the
    decision. For example, evidence from third parties. Consulting a
    social worker may also be appropriate. See Family and domestic
    violence
-   If the customer was a member of a couple before separation, their
    past rate of income support payment will need reassessment, noting
    the presence of family and domestic violence may indicate the
    customer was not a MoC during the retrospective period. The
    retrospective assessment could lead to a debt if the customer is
    assessed as a MoC for that period. For more information, see Family
    and domestic violence

Customers in crisis/hardship

A MoC assessment may be referred for urgent processing if:

-   the customer is in genuine financial hardship, or
-   there are family and domestic violence concerns

See Confirming the need for a MoC assessment.

Reviews and interventions

There may be times when evidence of an undisclosed relationship requires
a review of the relationship status (tip off) or a Relationship Status
Intervention (RSI). These reviews generally trigger from

data matching

risk profiling

information from other government departments, and

information from the public using the:

-   agency's online reporting fraud forms or
-   Australian Government Services Fraud Tip-off line

Staff can also report suspected fraud by customers.

Compliance Risk Branch and the Intelligence and Investigations Branch do
these reviews.

Retrospective MoC assessments

Undisclosed MoC relationships

If there is evidence of a previously undisclosed MoC relationship that
is recognised by either MoC processing staff or any another Service
Officer. The assessment must be escalated using the Report Suspected
Fraud and Corruption system, MoC processing staff must not undertake the
retrospective MoC assessment. An Intelligence Analysis Unit, will assess
the customer’s past entitlement.

Disclosed MoC relationships

If there is a change in circumstances since the initial trigger of the
MoC assessment (form issued), MoC processing staff must still undertake
an assessment to decide if the customer was in a MoC relationship for a
past period. This is to make sure the correct entitlement has been paid.
For example, a customer self-declares they are now partnered to the
person for whom the MoC assessment was triggered.

Note: if a customer self-declares they are in a relationship that
started on a date in the past, there is no need to report suspected
fraud or conduct a MoC assessment. Staff must issue a MOD P. See Change
in relationship status from single to partnered.

Disclosed relationships during Crisis Payment claims involving family
and domestic violence (FDV)

If a customer self-declares they are or were partnered during a claim
for CrP, even though they are single on their record and are paid the
single rate. CrP eligibility is not affected by relationship status, the
claim for CrP can be assessed before a MoC/SUOR assessment.

Whether the CrP is granted, a MoC/SUOR assessment is needed for the past
period if they:

-   are currently in a relationship not yet disclosed and recorded, or
-   were in an undisclosed relationship for more than 14 days before
    lodging the CrP claim

For further information, see New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme
circumstances family and domestic violence.

SS284 decisions

MoC decisions are not reviewed. Once a decision is made that a customer
is or is not a member of a couple there are no future scheduled reviews.
However, a change in circumstances may trigger a new MoC assessment.

Exceptions: Section 24 and Separated under one roof decisions require
compulsory reviews.

SS293 decisions

SUOR decisions require regular compulsory reviews. See Member of a
couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR).

MoC assessments and reviews/appeals

Customers can request an explanation or apply for a formal review when
an unfavourable decision is finalised and there is an operative effect
on them. A MoC assessment does not have an operative effect on the
customer until:

for current customers, they:

-   are linked to the other person/ex-partner which may result in a rate
    reduction
-   fail to respond to a request for information for partner details
    (i.e., the customer does not provide a MOD P within an allowable
    time) and payment is suspended/cancelled
-   are already linked with the other person but wish to be considered
    separated and it is determined they continue to be a MoC

for new claimants:

-   the customer fails to respond to a request for information for
    partner details (i.e. the customer does not provide a MOD P within a
    reasonable timeframe) and the claim is rejected

If new information has been provided after the MoC assessment has been
finalised, this information should be processed and the MoC assessment
can be reconsidered. The MoC assessment does not need to have an
operative effect on the customer and a formal review is not required in
order for the new information to be considered. See Request for an
explanation or application for a formal review.

Relationship status for ABSTUDY, Youth Allowance (YA) and Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Different rules apply if the customer is:

-   21 or younger and getting ABSTUDY Living Allowance or Youth
    Allowance as a student or Australian Apprentice
-   21 or younger and getting Youth Allowance as a job seeker
-   under 21 and getting Disability Support Pension

The rate of payment for dependent YA and ABSTUDY customers is based on
their parental income and not partner income. This includes customers
who have not met the independence criteria of being married or in a de
facto relationship. DSP customers that live with their parents will be
paid at the dependent rate. MoC assessments are not required for
dependent YA, ABSTUDY or DSP customers and a MoC assessment must not be
used to determine a customer’s independent status.

MoC assessments can trigger for independent YA, ABSTUDY and DSP
customers. Customers assessed as Independent will need a MoC assessment
conducted where one is triggered.

The Resources page contains user guides, help considering the 5 factors,
DOC guidelines and examples, assessment examples, letter text, and links
to forms, Office Locator and privacy.

Related links

Assessment of relationship status - processes, roles and
responsibilities

Changes in relationship status from partnered to single

Confirming the need for a member of a couple (MoC) assessment

Family and domestic violence

Initiation and customer contact for Relationship Status

Interviewing a customer about relationship details

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Requesting information (CLK)

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

The Living Arrangements question set

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Update Relationship details online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
