-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and recording of information from
the Study details MOD (ST) form.

MOD (ST) for previous and current study details

The MOD (ST) collects information on previous and current study and is
to be completed by students when an allowable time or satisfactory
progress assessment is required. The MOD (ST) can be accepted verbally
and recorded on the customer's record.

Student activity test

YA customers who are under 22 years of age continue to qualify for YA if
they change their activity from job search/other activities to full-time
study. There is no need for them to lodge a new claim. However, Service
Officers must ensure that the customer qualifies for YA as a full-time
student, and understands their activity test obligations. This
information can be obtained verbally. Note: customers who receive YA as
a job seeker and identify as an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
person returning to study may wish to test their eligibility for
ABSTUDY.

Study start dates for Youth Allowance (YA) and Austudy

Most education institutions will have an academic calendar with the
standard date many students will start or end their courses or study
periods. Service Officers can access these dates on the National Course
Approvals sub-site. Education institutions often publish their academic
calendars on their websites. It is important to note that many students
will be enrolled in a course that starts or finishes on a different date
to the standard date on the education institution’s academic calendar.

From 13 January 2019, Service Officers can accept a student start date
advised by a YA or Austudy customer, providing that date is not greater
than 14 days prior to the standard course start date published on the
National Course Approvals sub-site.

Continuing and intending students

When Service Officers are making study updates, consideration should be
given to whether the customer can be considered a continuing/intending
student. This determination may influence what date the customer is
eligible to receive a student payment. The rules for
continuing/intending students vary between different student payments.

The Resources page contains a link to the MOD (ST), and the National
Course Approvals sub-site.

Related links

Completing the Study details MOD (ST)

Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
full-time study

Proof of enrolment (POE) in a course of study

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
