
Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements 106-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains information about claims for Australian payments
under international social security agreements. All contacts about
claims under an agreement by a customer or a third party must be
recorded. See Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK).

Impact on mailing issues due to coronavirus (COVID-19)

Due to coronavirus (COVID-19), there may be mailing issues for customers
outside Australia and agreement partners.

International Agreements

Agreements override social security law and generally allow claims to be
lodged in Australia or the agreement country. Agreements also allow a
person to use periods of coverage in an agreement country to count
towards the minimum residence requirements for an Australian payment.

Note: Centrelink International Services (CIS) assess all claims under an
agreement.

Third country lodgement

Agreements usually allow a person to claim a payment covered by the
agreement while resident and/or present in the agreement country or
Australia. Some agreements also allow a person to claim while resident
and/or present in another/third agreement country. See Claim lodgement
matrix for specific third country lodgement details.

Date of lodgement and deemed claim rules

All agreements allow the date of lodgement of an Australian claim in an
agreement country to be taken to be the date of lodgement in Australia.

Deemed claim rules (such as early claims and contacts about a claim)
also apply to the date of lodgement in the agreement country. For deemed
claims, the lodgement rules under agreements can be met on:

-   the date the claim is made, or
-   the date the claim is taken to be made

Customers outside Australia are considered 'vulnerable', meaning the
Start Day may be backdated if they contact about a claim and then lodge
within 13 weeks of the contact. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers.

Some agreements allow a claim for a foreign pension (FP) from the
agreement country to be taken to be a claim for an Australian (AU)
payment. This is known as the 'claim for one = claim for the other' or
'FP claim = AU claim' provision.

A claim for an FP payment can be taken to be a claim for an AU payment
if:

-   The customer meets all the rules (qualification, lodgement and
    payability) on the FP claim date, and
-   Services Australia receive the AU claim within the prescribed
    timeframe, if one exists

Note: the FP claim = AU claim provision does not exist in all
agreements.

When coded, system processing will assess entitlement on both the date
of lodgement in the agreement country and the date of receipt of the
claim in Australia sequentially and pay from the earliest date. If a
user manually moves the Start Date on Pensions Assessment (PNA) screen,
system processing will apply the deemed claim rules.

The Resources page has examples for staff in International Services
(CIS) on how to determine the date a claim is 'made' and the Start Day
under an agreement.

Prevention of rejection of autonomous claims

Autonomous claims (claims not assessed under an agreement) are stopped
from being rejected for residence reasons if the customer has lived in
an agreement country.

Residence reasons include:

-   Not Located in Australia (NIA)
-   Not Residing in Australia (NAU)
-   Not Sufficient Residence (NSR), or
-   Non-Protected SCV Holder (NSV)

Any claims identified as needing an assessment under an agreement or
that have been prevented from rejection should be referred to
International Services (CIS).

Agreement Disability Support Pension (DSP) claim medical assessments

DSP claims inside Australia

Claims under agreements made inside Australia follow the domestic DSP
streaming and medical assessment process. That is;

-   Assessment of medical evidence by the Medical Assessment Team (MAT)
-   Assessment of non-medical eligibility
-   Job Capacity Assessment (JCA), and
-   Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) by a Government Contracted
    Doctor (GCD)

Customers applying for DSP under an agreement must also have a severely
disabled assessment completed by an International Services (CIS)
specialist Disability Officer (IDO). This occurs after the DMA
assessment.

Note: Austria, Germany and Norway do not need severely disabled
assessments

DSP claims outside Australia

Claims under agreements made outside Australia have agreed forms and a
process for medical assessments. They do not need to undergo a JCA or a
DMA.

Medical eligibility is decided by a CIS specialist Disability Officer
(IDO) with the involvement of Medical Review Boards in the other country
and the Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU) if
relevant/appropriate.

All claims for DSP lodged outside Australia need a severely disabled
assessment by a CIS specialist Disability Officer (IDO).

Note: this includes Austria, Germany and Norway for claims outside
Australia.

The Resources page has links to contact details, information about
determining the date a claim is 'made' and start day under an agreement,
date examples, International Services (CIS) new claim work item
referral, bereavement Allowance (BVA) codes, claim status per programme
attachment, intranet links and Services Australia website links

Related links

Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessments for
International Agreements

Foreign pension medical assessments

International Social Security Agreements

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Start Day and Waiting Periods (CLK)

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

Working Life Residence (WLR)

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
