
Completing the Income and Assets (SA369) 106-07110090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete an Income and Assets (SA369)
form. The SA369 is used to assess a customer's entitlement to an income
Support Payment (ISP) or Farm Household Allowance (FHA). It helps to
establish if further information and investigation is required and asks
the customer to provide supporting documents to confirm their income and
assets.

Use of the SA369 form

The form gathers information about income, assets, real estate and
compensation. Customers completing an online or assisted customer claim
are asked the same questions as on the SA369 form.

Only one form is required for partnered customers, as all questions in
the form include the partner's income and assets. Income and assets
details for both the customer and their partner must be obtained even if
the partner is not claiming. When completing the form, customers should
decide who the applicant is and who the partner is. There is also an
option on the front page where customers can indicate if they wish to
complete separate forms.

If the customer's income and assets are complex, they may need expert
help such as a financial adviser or accountant to help them complete
this form, but the customer must sign it. A non-claimant spouse is not
required to sign the form, but if both members of a couple are claiming
a payment, the signature of both members of a couple is required.

If the customer and/or their partner have more than one property, and/or
more than one claim for compensation, insurance or damages, additional
MOD R and MOD C forms should be issued.

If the customer is partnered and Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) is
'no' on the partner's record, the customer will be asked to provide a
MOD iA at Next Steps when they submit their online claim.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms.

Related links

Assessing the Income and Assets (SA369)

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
