
Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens 106-22011747

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document has information about coding the Customer Advised Travel
Details (RSCD) and the Travel Outside Australia Details (TOAD) screens
and reading the Travel Outside Australia Summary (TOAS) screen.

Portability

When a customer is planning to leave Australia to travel to or live in
another country, they should check how this might affect their payments.

Customers can check their circumstances and plans against the Services
Australia website. They can then decide whether they should advise of a
departure before leaving Australia.

If a customer advises they are planning to travel, staff must always use
the Portability Script - Departures and Returns to correctly code the
absence from Australia. If the script is not available due to technical
issues, see Leaving Australia for links to payment specific and
concession card portability procedures.

Customer Advised Travel Details (RSCD) screen

Information on the RSCD screen is cross referenced with other residence
screens to determine the customer's entitlement to payment.

RSCD is used to record information provided by the customer about:

-   a departure from Australia
-   a change of country of location while overseas, or
-   an expected return to Australia

In many cases, the screen is automatically coded with information
entered into the Portability Script, however this screen is manually
coded to record portability reasons such as overseas study, acute family
crisis or a portability extension.

Access to code certain portability reasons is restricted to specialist
officers in Centrelink International Services (CIS), for example when:

-   an approved reason has been granted, or
-   a discretionary portability extension has been granted when a
    customer is unable to return to Australia due to unforeseen
    circumstances

Correcting or deleting existing information on the RSCD screen

If a customer changes the date that they are planning to leave
Australia, it can affect their entitlement to a payment or concession
card.

Existing information on the RSCD screen will need to be corrected or
deleted when there is a change to advised travel details.

The Resources page has more information about screens and a link to the
International Programme homepage where residence information is
available.

Travel Outside Australia Details (TOAD) screen

This screen displays customer and Department of Home Affairs advised
travel details.

The TOAD screen is used to calculate the amount of remaining days of
payment a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer has entitlement to
receive while overseas. The calculator can be used to advise the
customer the number of portability days they have available in relation
to the 4 weeks portability in a rolling 12 month period.

Travel Outside Australia Summary (TOAS) screen

TOAS displays summarised departure and return information for assessment
purposes. This screen navigates to the Travel Outside Australia Details
(TOAD) screen.

Portability screens for children

Child portability screens are used to view and code information about
dependent children who do not have their own record. The screens are
accessed by selecting the child from the parent or care giver's record
through the Child Selection (CHS) screen. In most cases the name of the
screen is the same with the letters CH at the beginning.

The Resources page has contact details for staff, links to the Services
Australia website and a table with payment types which can be granted
portability for an approved reason.

Related links

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Residence and Portability screens

Discretion to extend portability period

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Restricted portability assessment procedure for Centrelink International
Services Staff

Student studying outside Australia

Suspension of payments (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
