-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers meet the requirement to
provide a TFN or have a valid TFN exemption for ABSTUDY.

Requirement to provide or apply for a TFN

ABSTUDY policy requires that the following persons must provide their
TFN when applying for ABSTUDY assistance:

-   students aged 16 or older
-   Australian Apprentices
-   parents/guardians of students aged under 16 years
-   parents/guardians of all dependent students aged 16 years or older
-   the partner of the student or Australian Apprentice

ABSTUDY customers are required to:

-   provide a TFN within their claim, or
-   request their TFN from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), or
-   apply to the ATO for a TFN

ABSTUDY tertiary student and Australian Apprentice claimants can upload
evidence of their TFN application in Next steps of their online claim.

All other ABSTUDY claimants can upload evidence of their TFN application
using the Upload documents service.

If the customer cannot provide one of these, the ABSTUDY claim will be
rejected. The claim can be re-opened if the customer later provides
their TFN or lodges an application for a TFN.

Providing a TFN

If a customer has given their TFN for a previous claim, they do not need
to provide it again. This also applies for their partner, parent or
guardian.

Record the TFN onto the customer's record when:

-   taken over the phone, or
-   provided in person

[] Customers can upload their TFN online.

TFN exemptions

Customers may be exempted from providing a TFN in limited circumstances.

The References page contains policy examples of how to assess requests
for exemptions.

ABSTUDY students turning 16

ABSTUDY customers are required to supply their TFN once they turn 16

Contact the customer to ask them to provide their TFN, TFN application
form or evidence they have submitted a TFN application with the ATO.
They need to do this to remain eligible for ABSTUDY Living Allowance
once they turn 16.

If TFN not provided by 16th birthday:

-   Send a written request to provide their TFN, TFN application form or
    evidence of lodgement with the ATO within 28 days
-   If the customer does not meet this requirement, their ABSTUDY
    payments will be cancelled
-   ABSTUDY payments may be restored once they meet the requirement

The Resources page contains details for verifying TFN applications and
TFN exemptions. It also has links to the ATO website, forms and contact
details.

Related links

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

ABSTUDY Claiming Tool process

Assessing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award

Assessing a claim for ABSTUDY Schooling B Award, Tertiary Award and
Masters and Doctorate Award

Assessing the claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Student or Australian Apprentice in
lawful custody (SY022)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Allowances and Part-time Award (SY021)

Completing the Claim for ABSTUDY Schooling A (SY018)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
