
Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new determinations 106-07120080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a partnered person may be treated as single
under Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991.

Purpose of Section 24

Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991 enables Services Australia to
apply a decision that there is a ‘special reason’ not to treat a
partnered person as a member of a couple. If Section 24 of the Social
Security Act 1991 is applied, the customer is treated as single for all
purposes of the Social Security Act and Family Assistance Act. As a
result, the customer is paid the single rate of payment. Only their
individual income and assets are included in the assessment of the rate
of payment.

Section 24 assessments must only be conducted once the customer is
linked to their partner on the Marital Status (MS) and Link Person (LP)
screens. For information on which forms are required for customers
claiming or in receipt of an income support payment, see Change in
relationship status from single to partnered. Note: where Family and
Domestic Violence (FDV) issues are identified, it may be appropriate not
to establish the initial partner link depending on the individual
customer circumstances. Engagement with a Social Worker may be
appropriate to discuss the customer’s situation to determine if they
should be linked or not.

A formal MoC assessment must not be initiated for customers who request
to be treated as single under Section 24 of the Social Security Act
1991.

Identity requirements for partners

Only specific payments require a person's partner to confirm their
identity. If a customer has a partner, the customer must provide
identity documents for themselves and their partner when they claim:

-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
-   Low Income Card (LIC)
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

If the partner's identity has been confirmed previously, further
identity documents will not be required.

If the partner has not provided identity documents in person, they will
have a status of ‘No Linkage’. See Identity Confirmation for more
information.

A Partner Details (MOD P) or Partner details (AUS174) (where the
customer is in receipt of an Australian income support payment while
living overseas) form is required if the customer is not already linked
to their partner. Confirmation from the customer’s partner may be
required before linking can occur. See Confirming a partnered
relationship.

Once the customer has been linked to their partner, there must still be
sufficient information detailing the customer's and partner's current
circumstances and financial situation to make a Section 24
determination. Generally, the MOD P/AUS174 alone does not support the
ability to make a Section 24 determination. Further information from the
customer or partner is required, see Circumstances to consider section
below

Note: exceptions to linking applies where a customer is in a multiple
relationship.

When to apply Section 24

Section 24 is intended to be the option of last resort. It must only be
applied when all other reasonable means of support have been explored
and exhausted. It is not possible to predict all the situations where
Section 24 can be applied as the circumstances of each particular
situation must be considered on a case by case basis.

The discretion to treat a customer as not being a member of a couple
should be exercised only where full consideration of all the
circumstances relevant to the individual's case would make it unjust or
unreasonable not to do so.

Responsibility for Section 24 assessments

A customer may not specifically request an assessment under Section 24
provisions, as they may not be aware of its availability. When the
agency has information about a customer's circumstances that would
indicate a Section 24 assessment may be warranted, as a duty of care the
customer should be offered to test whether they have an entitlement
under Section 24 provisions to be treated as single.

When a customer is requesting an initial Section 24 assessment,
including where a new claim is being processed, it is to be undertaken
at first contact where possible. If the Service Officer does not have
the required skill set to undertake the Section 24 assessments, a
referral may be required.

Note: Service Officers processing JobSeeker Payment or Youth Allowance
(job seeker) new claims must complete the Section 24 assessment when the
customer is residing in Australia.

If the Section 24 assessment is for a customer who resides overseas, the
assessment is conducted by International Services (CIS).

When Section 24 is not appropriate

Section 24 provisions are not to be applied to customers who are:

-   single
-   separated due to illness
-   separated due to respite care
-   separated under one roof

If rejecting a claim the Section 24 relationship qualifier code is not
to be recorded on the MS screen. The application of Section 24
provisions will be reconsidered if the claim is re-assessed.

Note: if a customer is in receipt of Family Assistance payments only,
Section 24 provisions are not to be used as a work around when the
partner is unable to supply their tax file number.

Section 24 provisions may be applied in limited circumstances to
customers:

-   whose partners are in prison (including overseas detention).
    Separate provisions of the Social Security Act provide for higher
    levels of payment in situations where the partner is in prison but
    the S24 may be applied in special circumstances. See Partner in
    prison section below
-   who are partnered and the partner is subject to the Newly Arrived
    Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and has an Assurance of Support
    (AoS) in place. See Partner serving Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting
    Period (NARWP) and subject to Assurance of Support (AoS) section
    below

Circumstances to consider

The following questions must be considered as part of the assessment
while looking at the full circumstances of the case:

-   is there a special reason to be considered in the couple's
    circumstance?
-   is there a lack of being able to pool resources for the couple as a
    result of the circumstances?
-   is there financial difficulty as a result of the couple's
    circumstances?

There must be some degree to which circumstances are outside the
couple's or individual's control and cannot be changed. A couple's
circumstances must be compared to a couple in similar circumstances but
for whom the special reason to apply Section 24 does not exist. Each
determination made must be based on the merits of each case after
careful consideration of all the facts.

It may be appropriate to apply Section 24 in circumstances including,
but not limited to when the:

customer is experiencing family and domestic violence, particularly
where a person is unable to pool resources or is in financial difficulty
because of family and domestic violence

customer has limited access to their partner's income/assets. For
example:

-   if the income of a person is not available for the use or benefit of
    their partner, or
-   the person is mentally infirm and a guardian has been appointed to
    manage their affairs, or
-   the presence of family and domestic violence

partner is overseas or goes overseas, in which case the primary
consideration is whether the customer in Australia is deprived of the
income support of the partner overseas. For example:

-   there are legal restrictions on the transfer of funds from overseas
-   the overseas partner does not have sufficient excess funds to send
    to Australia
-   the situation has arisen beyond the control of either partner, or as
    an unintended consequence of the partner's actions
-   does either party have power to alter the situation and, if so, are
    they taking reasonable steps to do so?
-   in general, the circumstances must be unusual, uncommon, abnormal or
    exceptional, which would support their description as ‘special’

partner is not residentially qualified for an income support payment
(see exception to the rule below), or

partner is in an Immigration Detention Centre awaiting deportation

If either partner has knowingly contributed to their situation, there
would be considerably less justification for exercising the discretion.
This may be the case if one partner goes overseas and leaves the other
partner in Australia with insufficient funds, despite having the means
to support their partner.

Note: where a formal member of a couple (MoC) assessment is conducted
under Section 4 of the Social Security Act 1991 and family and domestic
violence has been identified, it is intended that it is factored into
the MoC assessment rather than finding the person is a member of a
couple and subsequently applying provisions under section 24 due to the
presence of family and domestic violence.

Assessing financial difficulty

The customer's overall financial situation must be considered when
making a Section 24 determination. Financial difficulty has been
described as not being able to provide for accommodation and the basic
necessities of life or to be without adequate means of support.
Decisions from the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) and Federal
Court indicate ineligibility for a Centrelink payment, in itself, is
very unlikely to constitute a 'special reason' for a determination under
Section 24 provisions.

Financial difficulty can be determined by comparing readily available
funds to necessary expenditure. For example, taking into account all
income and readily available funds from all sources for both members of
a couple. This includes (but is not limited to):

-   wages
-   income support payments
-   foreign pension
-   foreign income and assets
-   Family Tax Benefit
-   investments, and
-   any in-kind assistance they might receive such as the value of free
    rent

If the total of these funds is insufficient to provide for accommodation
and the basic necessities of life, then the couple could be considered
to be in financial difficulty. An example of this is when a couple are
living on the one partnered rate of payment as one partner is not
eligible for any assistance and has neither employment nor investment
income.

When assessing a customer's circumstances, it is important to look at
the overall financial situation. For example, a customer has $80,000 in
a savings account, but the deemed fortnightly income is considerably
less. The total amount of the balance of the bank account is taken into
account when considering Section 24, not just the fortnightly deemed
amount.

The presence of family and domestic violence may be inclusive of
financial control. This results in a customer being unable to pool
resources or access funds, placing them in financial hardship.

Customers living permanently together overseas

If a customer is partnered with a person and living overseas and the
partner did not have any income or assets prior to entering into the
relationship, this does not necessarily constitute special circumstances
or an inability to pool resources.

In some countries the Australian Age Pension is several times the
average wage per annum in the country the couple are living together in.
This must be considered when making a Section 24 determination, it is
not appropriate to consider a couple to be in hardship in these cases.

For customers living overseas consideration must also be given to the
cost of living expenses of the country the customer is living in. This
is consistent with the requirement to assess financial difficulty and an
inability to provide for accommodation and the basic necessities of
life.

Customers living together overseas permanently who request Section 24
are assessed and reviewed by International Services (CIS).

The Resources page contains examples of whether it may or may not be
appropriate to apply Section 24.

Partner serving Newly Arrived Resident’s Waiting Period (NARWP) and subject to Assurance of Support (AoS)

The discretion to apply Section 24 may be applied in cases if the
customer's partner is not residentially qualified for an income support
payment or is subject to a NARWP or similar Qualifying Residence Period.

The Assurance of Support (AoS) scheme allows certain visa holders to
migrate to Australia, even though there is a high risk they may not be
able to support themselves. The intent is that an assurer can provide
financial support to the assuree so they do not have to rely on the
social security system.

Generally, Section 24 should not be applied to a customer:

-   if their partner (or assuree) is serving a NARWP and has an AoS in
    place, and
-   the assuree has a valid and legal means of obtaining support from
    the assurer and/or,
-   has access to a social security benefit which has not been exercised

When an AoS is in place and the assurer is a third party, and the
assuree does not receive regular income or in-kind support from the
assurer, then the assuree must be encouraged to draw on the AoS or apply
for Special Benefit (SpB) if they are eligible. If the assuree is
eligible for and makes a claim for SpB, the assuree must prove they have
made every effort to get adequate support from the assurer prior to
making the claim. Any assistance received by the assuree is taken into
account as income for SpB.

If there has been a substantial change of circumstances for the assurer
(for example illness or job loss) which means they are no longer able or
willing to fulfil the obligations under the AoS, Service Officers must

-   closely examine the assurer’s financial circumstances and
-   confirm no other forms of assistance can be provided prior to
    determining if a Section 24 assessment is appropriate.

If the assuree is to serve a NARWP for all payments, including SpB, any
assistance provided by the assurer is taken into account when looking at
financial difficulty. Certain types or classes of visas have available
funds conditions placed upon them. That is, the person needed to have a
certain amount of funds available to support themselves while in
Australia, before they are eligible for the visa. Visa conditions must
be explored when determining whether the couple are in financial
difficulty.

Note: SpB customers are generally subject to a long term available funds
test if they are likely to be on payment for more than 13 weeks. The
long-term available funds test precludes payment to the customers if the
couple have more than $5,000 in available funds. If a non-residentially
qualified partner fails the long-term available funds test when claiming
SpB, then it may not be appropriate for Section 24 to be considered.

For further information about NARWP and SpB, see Eligibility and new
claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB).

Partner in prison

Where a person has a partner in prison, this alone is not sufficient to
warrant the application of Section 24. The higher 'partner in gaol' rate
of payment is available to customers in this situation in recognition
that they are less able to pool resources while their partner is in
prison. Section 24, however, may be applied if there is a 'special
reason' in that particular case (i.e. not just the partner being in
prison), which warrants not treating the person as a member of a couple.
For example, the customer's partner is in prison awaiting trial on fraud
charges and the partner's assets and accounts have been frozen by the
courts.

Partner in Immigration Detention

If a customer’s partner is being detained in an Immigration Detention
Centre, the customer is not eligible for the ‘Partner in Gaol’ rate.
However, consider if:

-   a ‘special reason’ exists, and
-   Section 24 can be applied in these situations

Partner visas and section 24

Partner visas (309/100 or 820/801) allow a person to travel to, live, or
stay temporarily in Australia. One of the conditions for these visas to
be granted is for the person to have a sponsor. In most cases the
sponsor will be the person’s partner.

The sponsor’s obligation is to agree to support the visa holder and
their children who are granted the visa for the first 2 years after the
Department of Home Affairs grant the visa by providing accommodation and
financial assistance.

Where the customer is a sponsor and is requesting to be treated as
single under Section 24, Service Officers must look at the full
circumstances of the case to determine if there is a ‘special reason’
not to treat them as a member of a couple. As part of the investigation
it would be appropriate to:

-   question the customer’s sponsor declaration they made to the
    Department of Home Affairs and
-   determine if there may be circumstances beyond the customer’s or
    their partner’s control that have resulted in the customer no longer
    being able to provide financial assistance to their partner

In this case it may be appropriate for Section 24 to be considered.

Multiple relationships

The social security system does not recognise the existence of multiple
relationships, regardless of whether they were formed within Australia
or overseas. The policy was updated to include changes relating to
assessments under Section 24 provision, which decision makers can take
into consideration for when the customer does not form part of the
central couple.

Section 24 is a discretionary decision and the discretion exists to deal
with unfair, inequitable and/or unjust anomalies. In assessing whether
the customer in a multiple relationship should be treated as single and
paid the single rate under Section 24, Service Officers must consider
the impact in relation to any aspect of unfairness or absurdity in the
operation of the Social Security Act 1991 (the Act) and A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) Act 1999.

A Service Officer may determine, for example, if it would be unfair to
assess one partner's income and assets against multiple partners given
provisions in the Act around Member of a Couple relationships (s4 of the
Social Security Act 1991), which could generally lead to a favourable
determination. This is because, the provisions with the Act appear to
contemplate that a person has one partner or none at all.

Whilst it is understood there appears to be an anomaly with applying
Section 24 determinations to customers in a multiple relationship (that
is, to be considered under Section 24 provisions, a customer must be
partnered), the policy is clear on the requirements in relation to
multiple relationships. Section 24 remains a discretionary decision,
therefore the outcome of any assessment is determined by the Service
Officer making the decision based on the information available to them
at that time.

Where a Service Officer has determined the customer should not be
considered as single under Section 24 and is to be paid at the partnered
rate, the customer must be coded as single and paid a manual partnered
rate, as the system does not allow for a customer to be linked to more
than one partner. Note: additional partners who qualify for Parenting
Payment (PP) will be paid Parenting Payment Single (PPS) at the manual
partnered rate. It is important to calculate the manual partnered rate
by applying the Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) income test, not the
PPS income test.

Customers in hardship

When a Section 24 assessment cannot be undertaken at first point of
contact and if the customer meets the financial hardship criteria to
have the Section 24 assessment processed urgently, a referral may be
sent for urgent processing.

See the Process page for more information on how to create a Section 24
assessment financial hardship referral (this includes assessments as
part of a new claim).

Making retrospective decisions

If a customer has failed to advise within 14 days (28 days for customers
living together overseas) they have become partnered, it may be
necessary to consider any Section 24 assessment as being in 2 parts. The
first part (Decision 1) being from the consideration day. The second
part (Decision 2) may be required for any period prior to the
consideration day.

Decision 1 - A current assessment to apply Section 24 to treat a
partnered person as a single person.

Decision 2 - When a person is already receiving the single rate of
payment and fails to advise they have become partnered (for example,
married or entered a registered or de facto relationship), and their
circumstances may have warranted exercise of discretion to apply Section
24 had they advised correctly.

It would also be appropriate to consider Section 24 when investigating
if a debt exists and the amount of any debt. For example:

-   if after consideration it is determined Section 24 would have
    applied to the customer based on their circumstances, then it is
    possible no debt exists, or
-   if after consideration it is determined Section 24 would not have
    been applied to the customer based on their circumstances, then a
    debt can only be raised for the difference between what they were
    paid (single rate) and what they were entitled to receive (partnered
    rate, taking into account the full effect of the partnered
    income/assets test being applied)

Service Officers undertaking the Section 24 assessment need to determine
whether Section 24 may have been applicable retrospectively in order to
work out if a debt exists. This includes where a customer
retrospectively discloses they were partnered but paid the single rate,
however their partner has passed away and the surviving member of a
couple requests to be assessed under Section 4 provisions for the
retrospective period. Obtaining a co-signed MOD P will not be possible,
however accepting the customer’s signed form would be sufficient in
these circumstances to assess the need to recover payments the customer
was not entitled to.

Section 24 should be considered in circumstances where a partnered
person has not disclosed the relationship and it is determined that
family and domestic violence exists. The failure to disclose the
relationship may be the result of the family and domestic violence
situation. For the retrospective period, an assessment should be made on
whether Section 24 provisions should be applied due to presence of
family and domestic violence.

Reviews of Section 24

It is important for cases where a Section 24 assessment is applied to be
kept under close review, especially if there is a risk of incorrect
payments due to a change of circumstances which would warrant the
termination of the Section 24 assessment. A manual review must be
conducted every 13 weeks, or earlier if warranted. However, for
customers whose circumstances are unlikely to change, or where there is
a very low risk of incorrect payment, reviews may only need to be
conducted annually. If discretion is used to extend the review period
beyond 13 weeks, this must be documented on the customer’s record and
supported by facts.

Whenever a customer leaves Australia to visit their partner overseas, a
review must be conducted prior to departure to determine if Section 24
should continue to be applied whilst they are away. Generally Section 24
does not apply if the couple are living together overseas.

See Member of a couple reviews - Section 24 for more information.

Maintenance action for customers assessed as single under Section 24

If the customer’s children are from the current relationship no
maintenance action is required, even though the customer is now treated
as single. This is because the customer could not be expected to seek
maintenance from their own partner. If they could, they would generally
not be in a position where Section 24 would be considered in the first
place. An exemption from taking maintenance action must be coded to
avoid issues with the customer’s ongoing Family Tax Benefit
entitlements.

If the children are from a previous relationship (or if the customer
later separates from their partner), then normal maintenance action
would be required.

Customers assessed as single under Section 24 and claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for their partner's child

If the customer is claiming FTB for their partner’s child and has been
assessed as single under Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991, the
customer cannot receive FTB in respect to their partner’s child (from a
previous relationship). The child cannot be considered an FTB child of
the customer. The customer’s partner however, can test eligibility for
FTB for their child from a previous relationship. See Eligibility for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) entitlement for customers assessed as partnered and partner lives overseas

For customers assessed as partnered but receiving CCS only, the CCS
entitlement will be based on the combined family income (that is,
includes any income earned by the partner overseas), and the member with
the lowest Activity Test result. Partners living or working overseas
will have an automatic Activity Test result of 100 hours, meaning the
number of subsidised hours the customer will be entitled to receive will
be based on their level of activity. For more information, see Activity
Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

The Resources page contains a link to the Section 24 Decision Support
Tool (DST), links to Partner Details (Mod P/AUS174), forms and examples
of situations where Section 24 of the Social Security Act 1991 would or
would not apply.

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Member of a couple reviews - Section 24

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

The Assurance of Support (AoS) scheme

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

28 day rule for Centrelink International Services (CIS) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
