
Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates 106-07100140

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to assess and record details when the
customer receiving entitlements returns a Separation details (MOD S)
form or advises Services Australia online that they have separated.

Customer advises they have separated

Current customers can tell the agency they have separated from their
partner, using:

-   a Separation Details (MOD S) form, or
-   the Update relationship details online service (if they are
    eligible)

A person is a member of a couple if they are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory they live in

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

If a marriage, registered relationship or de facto relationship ceases
to exist, the partners of that relationship are no longer members of a
couple.

Living separately and apart

To be considered to be living separately and apart, it must be
established that:

-   they are living apart either permanently or indefinitely (physical
    separation), and
-   there has been an estrangement or breakdown in their relationship
    (emotional separation)

Living separately and apart does not require the customer to have
physically moved out of shared accommodation. It must be established
there is a genuine separation in the relationship and they have
established they are living separate lives.

Generally, living separately and apart should not be accepted if the
couple are living apart because of ill health. Explore all other options
before a determining that a couple are living separately and apart.

A customer's relationship may break down but they continue to live
together. Additional assessments may be required for these customers.
For information, see Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one
roof (SUOR) assessments.

Determining whether a MOD S needs to be issued

To decide if a MOD S needs to be issued, see Change in relationship
status from partnered to single.

Verifying a separation

MOD S form

When a customer separates, verify the separation. The MOD S contains a
section the customer must get a suitable referee to complete.

A referee must:

-   be 18 years of age or over
-   not be the customer's parent, step parent, sibling or child
-   not be the customer's correspondence nominee
-   not be the customer's most recent ex-partner

The referee should be familiar with the customer's circumstances. It is
preferable that a referee be a person of some standing in the community.
For example, minister of religion, doctor, police officer, counsellor,
social or welfare worker, solicitor, community leader.

Update relationship details online service

Eligible customers can use the Update relationship details online
service. The service requires customers to provide details of one
independent referee that knows about their separation.

See Change in relationship status from partnered to single for when to
verify separation after the customer is unlinked from their ex-partner.

Customers in multiple relationships

A multiple relationship is where a person has more than one member of a
couple relationship at the same time.

Multiple relationships are not recognised under social security law.
Assess all other parties to the relationship (outside the central
couple) for entitlements under Section 24 provisions.

If a customer in a multiple relationship separates from one partner,
take care to update the correct partner's details. Consider changing
partner links to another member of the multiple relationship if the
customer is linked to the partner they separated from.

The Resources page contains links to forms and letters.

Related links

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Completing the Separation details MOD S

Family and domestic violence

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered to Parenting Payment Single

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
