-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how AIC Scheme Smart Centre Processing staff
assess the entitlement end date for the AIC Scheme.

Entitlement end date

An AIC student is generally eligible to 31 December if they continue to
study to the end of the school year. Short-term boarders are eligible to
the date they cease to board.

If the student ceases study before the end of the school year they would
be eligible to be paid to the date they last attended class. Students
who discontinue on the last day of a term other than the final term, are
paid to the later of:

-   the end of the relevant instalment period, or
-   the last date of the school term

This may result in a debt, even if an applicant notifies within 14 days,
because most AIC payments are made in advance. Students are not eligible
for AIC from the date they stop boarding or living in a second home,
cease undertaking distance education or approved home schooling.

AIC debts are usually the responsibility of the applicant. Funds paid
incorrectly to a third party, such as an educational institution, may be
recovered in some circumstances. Check to confirm which party directly
received the payment.

Students may continue to be eligible for AIC as a deemed isolated
student under the continuity of schooling concession.

Eligibility during vacation periods

If the student has resumed study:

-   in the new term no later than the 14th day of the term (or if they
    were prevented from doing so due to unforeseen circumstances), they
    are eligible for the allowance applicable to that term from the
    beginning of the vacation period
-   after the 14th day of the term, they are only eligible for the
    allowance applicable to that term from the date they resumed study

Tertiary students

AIC is intended to assist students at primary, secondary or tertiary
level, who cannot attend an appropriate state school due to geographical
isolation or other reasons specified in AIC policy.

Therefore, AIC is only available for a tertiary student whose study
comes under the state and territory minimum education or training
requirements. This means a student who:

-   has chosen TAFE or vocational education and training level study
    instead of attending a secondary school; and
-   meets the geographical isolation rules in relation to the nearest
    appropriate state school

This means Services Australia is unable to approve AIC for a higher
education student, because they are no longer required to attend an
appropriate state school.

The Resources page contains the age and qualification requirements for
each state and territory including the end date for tertiary students.
It also contains AIC Term Instalment Periods and examples.

Related links

Cancellation and debt raising of Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme payments

Determining the Entitlement Start date for the Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessing a new claim for the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme (SY040)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
