
Identifying and assisting individuals who experienced institutional care as children 106-01030040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

National support services

The Alliance for Forgotten Australians - the Alliance includes groups
and selected individuals promoting the interests of Forgotten
Australians through advocacy and projects.

Care Leavers Australia Network - Support and advocacy for people who
grew up in orphanages, children’s homes, or foster care and their
families.

The Child Migrants Trust - A registered charity that provides
counselling and support, and helps to re-unite families of former child
migrants.

Find & Connect - A national network of support services to help
Forgotten Australians and former child migrants to access support and
counselling, obtain personal records, trace their history, and if
possible, reconnect with family.

Link-Up - Link-Up organisations provide a range of services to members
of the Stolen Generations, their families, and foster and adoptive
families. These include: support and counselling, assistance with
researching and accessing family and personal records, and assistance
with finding family members.

State support services

New South Wales and the Australian Capital Territory - Wattle Place -
Forgotten Australians

Northern Territory - Relationships Australia® Northern Territory

Queensland - Lotus Place

South Australia - Relationships Australia® South Australia

Tasmania - Relationships Australia® Tasmania

Victoria - Open Place

Western Australia - Relationships Australia® Western Australia

Further Information - Senate Inquires

Bringing them Home Report (1997) - report into the Stolen Generations,
the separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from
their families and community. Many Indigenous children were removed
because of their race, and as a consequence, lost connection with their
culture and land.

Lost Innocents: Righting the Record - Report on child migration - 2001
report into Child Migrants, children who were migrated to Australia in
the post-war period primarily from the United Kingdom, without their
families and often without the knowledge of their parents.

Forgotten Australians: A report on Australians who experienced
institutional or out-of-home care as children - 2004 report into
Australians who experienced institutional care as children, and who were
not covered by the previous 2 inquiries.

Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse -
The royal commission ran from 2013-2017 and inquired into and reported
upon responses by institutions to instances and allegations of child
sexual abuse in Australia.

External websites

Bringing them Home Report (1997)

Lost Innocents: Righting the Record Report on child migration

Forgotten Australians: A report on Australians who experienced
institutional or out-of-home care as children

Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse

National Redress Scheme

Services Australia website

Accessibility

Intranet links

Customer aggression guidelines

Institutional Redress Branch

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
