
Updating residence screens (CLK) 106-06020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on when and why residence is recorded
and provides links to procedures which explain how to record residence
details and coding the residence screens.

On this Page:

Residence and Qualification

All Australian social security payments and concession cards have
specific residence requirements. To qualify for a payment or concession
card, a customer must satisfy the residence rules that apply to the
payment or concession card they are claiming. See Australian residence
requirements for payments for links to payment specific residence
assessment procedures.

To qualify and/or claim most payments and concession cards a person must
be an Australian resident. To be an Australian resident, a person has to
have both the legal authority to remain in Australia (e.g. Australian
citizen or permanent visa holder) and be residing in Australia. In
addition, the countries the customer has been residing in since birth
need to be recorded to correctly assess if a customer is residentially
qualified and payable.

For certain payments and concession cards, it is also necessary to
establish if a customer's partner, children and/or care receiver satisfy
the relevant residence criteria.

Most payments and concession cards require a customer to be a current
resident of Australia, and to have been an Australian resident and
present in Australia for a specific period before they are qualified.
Unless claiming under an international agreement, a customer must also
be a resident of Australia to lodge a valid claim for a payment.

Some payments can be made to customers who are not Australian residents
such as family assistance payments and parental leave payments.
Therefore, all residence information must be accurately recorded to
allow the system to assess eligibility for all payment types.

Department of Home Affairs datalink residence information

Where a datalink can be established the Department of Home Affairs
provides information from 1 September 1994 onwards regarding a
customer's visa, movement information and grants of Australian
citizenship where available. Where information has been provided by the
immigration datalink, this residence information will take precedence
over any conflicting information provided by the customer.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

When to record residence

A customer's residence details are to be recorded or updated:

-   for new grants of all social security payments, parental leave
    payments, family assistance and concession cards
-   if the Portability Script - Departures and Returns asks for it to be
    coded
-   whenever a person who is paid Age Pension or Disability Support
    Pension (DSP) goes overseas (and is payable) for more than 26 weeks
-   if a customer has notified that they are leaving Australia to live
    overseas (permanent absence)
-   if a customer returns to live in Australia
-   if a customer's legal status changes
-   when approving payment outside Australia for an allowable reason or
    to extend a customer's maximum portability period (CIS only)

Why record residence

Residence information is used to determine:

-   a customer's residence qualification for all social security
    payments, paid parental leave payments, family assistance and
    concession cards
-   if the customer is subject to a Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting
    Period and, if so, when it will end
-   if a qualifying residence exemption applies to the customer
-   a customer's entitlement to a pension from a country other than
    Australia
-   if former resident provisions apply to a customer departing
    Australia
-   the proportional rate payable to a customer after 26 weeks absence
    from Australia or if an exemption from the proportional rate
    provisions applies
-   qualification for and rate of payment under an international
    agreement
-   if a customer can transfer between an agreement pension and an
    autonomous assessment.

Contents

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Recording legal residence status

Proof of Australian citizenship

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a Manual Follow up
activity when a multimatch occurs

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a Manual Follow up
activity when a no match occurs

Actioning immigration datalink activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
