
Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims 106-03020000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Paper claims for Age Pension, Aged Care, Disability Support Pension,
Pensioner Education Supplement and Assistance for Isolated Children may
be issued, and must be accepted in service centres.

This document outlines requirements for lodging a claim to receive a
payment, concession card or other service. It covers backdating
provisions, claim lodgement extensions and messages to give customers
about the claim process.

Requirement for a completed online, assisted or paper claim

To receive an income support payment or service, a customer must lodge a
completed claim using an [] online claim, an assisted customer claim or
a paper form.

The preferred method is online, but if the customer is deemed unable or
unsuitable to complete an online claim, staff should offer to complete
an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the customer.

If the customer declines an ACC, offer a paper claim if available.

[] A correspondence nominee can submit an online claim on behalf of
their principal for some Centrelink payments. Nominees who do not have
access to lodge online claims are to be offered an ACC when they apply
for a payment or concession card on behalf of their principal. If they
decline ACC they will need to complete and lodge a paper claim form if
available.

When applicable, advise the customer and/or correspondence nominee that
claim forms are available from:

-   the Services Australia website
-   any service centre, Smart Centre or an agent or representative of
    the agency

Claim forms should be completed and lodged as soon as possible. The
Resources page links to forms.

Date from which claim is assessed

The claim is assessed from the date the claim is accepted and lodged as
fully complete with all supporting documentation (except forthcoming
documents to be supplied by a third party).

The lodged date for a fully complete:

online claim, is the date the claim is submitted. When lodging an online
claim, customers are advised which documents are ‘required’ (must be
supplied at the same time) and which are ‘supplementary’ (must be
supplied within the specified timeframe from the date the claim was
submitted)

paper claim, is the date it is lodged and accepted at a service centre

faxed or mailed claim, is the date it is received

verbal claim, is the latter date of when:

-   the verbal claim was made, and/or
-   all supporting documentation was supplied

assisted customer claim, is the latter date of when:

-   the claim is lodged via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), and/or
-   all supporting documentation was supplied

Note: the lodged (assessed) date and the actual start date of the claim
may be different.

See Start Day, Viewing and processing online and assisted customer
claims, Aged care means assessment - Preliminary checks and Intent to
claim and vulnerable customers.

Online claims

[] Customers can create a Centrelink online account.

An online claim cannot be submitted until it is fully completed and all
supporting documentation is either uploaded as part of the claim or
provided at a service centre.

Customers commencing an online claim under Circumstance Change Monitor
(CCM) receive messaging, advising of the documents required before their
claim can be submitted. Customers are able to upload the required
documents on their Next Steps page in their online account and view the
Task list in their Express Plus Centrelink mobile app. In certain
circumstances, a claim submission exception could apply as it may not be
reasonable for a customer to complete all their Required tasks before
submitting their claim. For more information, see Circumstances Change
Monitor (CCM).

Note: in most cases, this does not include supporting documents supplied
by a third party. For example: medical evidence/certificates from a
doctor, medical reports required from treating health professionals and
Unreasonable to Live at Home forms. However, a medical certificate is
required to be lodged for job seeker claims and a medical report for
carer claims before the customer can submit their claim.

Claims available online

There are a number of payments, concession cards and other services that
can be claimed online.

Incomplete online claims

Incomplete online claims will expire if not submitted within 13 weeks of
starting. Expired claims display on the customer’s online account as
'non-completed' and cannot be accessed.

Customers who make an online claim for the same payment/concession card
after the initial 13 weeks has expired will be directed to lodge a new
claim.

Cancelling or withdrawing an online claim

Customers may voluntarily withdraw or cancel their claim within 14 days
of submitting an online claim.

Submitting an online claim

Once the customer has submitted their claim online, the information will
flow through to be indexed either via Customer First or through a new
claim activity in Workload Manager for processing in Process Direct.

These activities are allocated, and the new claim processing continues
as with a paper claim. The customer is not required to lodge a paper
claim but may be required to provide further documentation (identity
documentation, modules) in order for the claim to be submitted. For the
online claim process, no signature is required as an electronic
signature is generated when the customer submits the online claim.

Nominees

A correspondence nominee can submit an online claim on behalf of their
principal for some Centrelink payments and services.

Nominees who do not have access to lodge online claims are to be offered
an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) when they want to apply for a payment
or concession card on behalf of their principal. If they decline ACC,
then a paper-based claim form will need to be lodged.

Assisted customer claims (ACC) and verbal claims

Use ACC for customers deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online
claim.

ACC can also be completed for family assistance claims where the family
is in crisis and for remote Indigenous customers who have language or
literacy barriers affecting their capacity to use forms or online
claims.

Customers and/or correspondence nominees who contact a Smart Centre to
complete the ACC, may need to be referred to their local service centre
depending on the payment they are applying for.

For more information, see Viewing and processing online and assisted
customer claims.

Apart from ACC claims, the following payments and concession cards can
also be claimed verbally:

ABSTUDY, except:

-   Australian Apprentices applying for ABSTUDY Living or Incidentals
    Allowance, or
-   tertiary students claiming ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

Aged care - see Aged care means assessment

Online and ACC expired at 13 weeks

Customers will be required to commence a new claim where a previous
started claimed has expired after 13 weeks. In some instances, expired
claims can be assessed for the original date. For more information, see
Circumstance Change Monitor.

Paper-based claims

Paper-based claim forms lodged at service centres must be checked to
ensure each question has been answered, the claim form has been signed,
and that all required documents have been provided.

Where the customer and / or correspondence nominee has not provided all
documents, the Service Officer is to remind the customer and / or
correspondence nominee of what they need to provide and that any delays
in providing these documents will delay the processing of their claim.
The paper claim must still be accepted.

Paper-based claims may also be lodged via [] Upload documents service,
post and fax.

When the processing team receives the claim, they will thoroughly check
the claim and contact the customer and / or correspondence nominee to
request further information if needed.

New claim processing

Once a customer has lodged their claim form (except for Disability
Support Pension, Pensioner Education Supplement, JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
and Youth Allowance (YAL) job seeker) they may be contacted as soon as
possible by phone or mail to discuss or advise the progress of their
claim.

For more information, see Circumstance Change Monitor.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
intranet links to Office Locator and forms.

Contents

Backdating provisions for claim lodgement

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Start Day

Related links

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Applying to become an assurer

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Calculating the deemed date of claim manually

Calculating the start day general rule

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Claiming ABSTUDY

Claiming Age Pension

Claiming Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Claims received that are incomplete or incorrect

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Upload documents service

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Nominees

Requesting information (CLK)

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Voiceprints for phone self service

Withdrawal of claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
