
Assessing the Partner details (MOD P) 106-07100100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what information a Partner details (MOD P) form
covers and when one is required for a customer.

When a customer is considered partnered

A customer is considered to be partnered if the customer and the person
are:

-   married
-   in a registered relationship, or
-   in a de facto relationship

If there is doubt about the customer's relationship status (they are
possibly in an undisclosed relationship), a member of a couple
assessment may be required.

Two people do not need to be living together to be considered partnered.
For example, one person may fly-in and fly-out for work.

Customer advises a change of relationship status

When a single customer receiving Centrelink payments and services
becomes partnered, they must tell Services Australia of the change in
relationship status. Entitlement to payments and services is reassessed
for both the customer and their partner.

The customer and/or their partner may have to claim an alternative
payment, or they may no longer qualify for payments and services.

When a MOD P is needed

See Change in relationship status from single to partnered.

Completing the MOD P

-   All relevant questions on the module must be answered. Many
    questions only need a Yes or No response. Depending on the answers,
    some questions may be skipped
-   The module must be signed by the customer and their partner
-   Identity Confirmation may be required
-   In some cases, other forms may need to be completed before the
    module can be assessed. The Service Officer will need to issue these
    forms if required. For example, where the partner indicates on the
    MOD P they are involved in a business including if they are
    self-employed, they will need to attach a completed Business details
    (MOD F) form

Payment under Section 24

If a customer may be placed in financial hardship by being assessed as
partnered, consider payment under Section 24 provisions. See Treatment
of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new determinations for
more information including any hand-off processes required. .

The Resources page has a link to the MOD P.

Related links

Assessment of relationship status – processes, roles and
responsibilities

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Confirming a partnered relationship

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
