-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect on the payability of JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) and Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) if the
customer is unemployed due to being or having been engaged in industrial
action or a series of industrial actions.

Exclusion period

An exclusion period of 6 weeks may be imposed, if involvement in
industrial action is in breach of an order, direction or injunction
issued by a State industrial authority, the Fair Work Commission or the
Federal Court. The exclusion period would end 6 weeks after the day on
which the industrial action or series of industrial actions ceases.
Where the industrial action is not a breach of an order, they may
qualify for payment once industrial action or series of industrial
actions stop.

The exclusion period also applies to a person who is not involved in the
industrial action but who is a member of the trade union involved.
However if a customer loses their employment due to industrial action
but they are not in the union nor participated in the industrial action
they are not affected by the exclusion period.

The only exemptions are for full-time students.

A PPP customer who is already receiving parenting payment before the
commencement of the industrial action will continue to qualify during
any period of unemployment due to that industrial action.

Qualification for PP is not affected by industrial action undertaken by
the partner of a customer claiming or receiving PP.

This exclusion period also extends to customers granted Special Benefit
(SpB) on or after 1 January 2003 and who are subjected to the SpB
Nominated Visa Holders mutual obligation requirements. For other SpB
claimants SpB will not be granted while they are involved in industrial
action.

Employer initiated lock out

An employer may initiate a lock out following industrial action by
employees or in order to further negotiations of an Australian Workplace
Agreement (AWA). If the lock out is solely for the purposes of
furthering negotiations of an AWA or negotiations have broken down, it
does not meet the definitions of industrial action. Consequently, in
cases of lock out by employers there may be an entitlement to a JSP, YA,
or PP for affected workers, providing the lock out is not caused by them
having been engaged in industrial action.

A customer will be excluded from payment if they:

-   are on strike or have been locked out by their employer because of
    their involvement in industrial action, or
-   have been stood down because of the industrial action of other
    people who are members of the same trade union to which they also
    belong. This includes workers in other industries who are stood down
    as a consequence of the industrial action

An exclusion may not apply if:

-   they have not been taking industrial action and are not a member of
    a union taking industrial action, or
-   they have been locked out by an employer for a reason other than
    industrial action, or
-   the lock out or stand down was caused by other people taking
    industrial action and they are not members of the same trade union,
    or
-   they are the partner of a worker who has been locked out or stood
    down

Customers claiming JSP, YA or PP as a result of industrial action will
need to meet all of the usual eligibility requirements, including their
mutual obligation requirements and provide details of last employment
(usually by providing an Employment Separation Certificate).

Contacting employers regarding industrial action

Where a person claims JSP, YA or PP as a result of being locked out from
their workplace, it must be established if the lock out was in response
to industrial action by employees. In order to establish this, contact
needs to be made with both the employer and the union to get details of
the circumstances giving rise to the lock out. Due to the sensitive
nature of industrial situations, care must be taken when contacting the
employer as Services Australia's sole purpose in this context is to
establish entitlement to income support and not to intervene in the
industrial dispute. Contact should only be made after a claim has been
made.

The Resources page contains links to draft letters to send to either an
employer or union to gather information about industrial action and
further clarification on assessing payment entitlement during a UDIA
period.

Related links

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Processing JobSeeker (JSP) claims

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker)

Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
