
Foreign pensions 106-08000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what is meant by a foreign pension, how to
identify foreign pensions, the requirement for some customers to make a
claim for a foreign pension and the importance of correct coding.

On this Page:

What is a foreign pension?

The term 'foreign pension' refers to payments from a country other than
Australia, that are either made by, or regulated by governments at any
level, for example, national, regional or local. It is possible for a
customer to receive more than one foreign pension, for example, multiple
old age or retirement pensions or an old age and a survivor pension and
have other means-tested payments and private retirement income as well.

Most countries have a three 'tier' or 'pillar' model for social
security.

First tier/pillar:

The 'first tier' is usually compulsory social insurance schemes that
require employees and employers to pay contributions to a fund for cover
for old age or retirement, invalidity or disability and survivors of
contributors for example widow/widower, orphans or other family members.
The legislation is government regulated, but most countries appoint
pension funds that run the collection of contributions and payment of
pensions. Most are government bodies but may be private or occupational
based providers, like superannuation in Australia. These payments are
comparable to Australian pensions and some customers may be required to
make a claim.

Second tier/pillar:

The 'second tier' is generally private savings, investments and other
financial products and may include voluntary contributions to an
occupational fund, generally only by the customer. These payments are
generally not considered 'foreign pensions' event if they provide
ongoing payments. These 'superannuation-like' funds and 'income
stream-like' payments do not meet the legal definition for income
streams or superannuation under Australian law so are treated as managed
investments in the accumulation phase or ordinary foreign income for
ongoing payments or lump sums such as commutations or withdrawals.

Third tier/pillar:

The 'third tier' is usually non-contributory social welfare schemes
provided by government bodies at the national, regional, or local level.
These schemes provide for benefits and concessions for people with low
income; that is, based on a means test. These payments are a 'safety
net' and are generally, similar to Australian social security or
payments and concessions by State or local governments in Australia.

Other foreign pensions

Foreign pensions may also be made for service in the military (that is,
employed by army, navy, air force), caring for a child or disabled
person, injury or internment during war or even restitution for
persecution during wartime (see below).

Comparable foreign payments (CFP)

CFPs

A CFP is a payment from another country that is like an Australian
pension. Unlike the broader term 'foreign pension', a CFP is considered
'comparable' if payments are made on the basis of retirement/old age
(like Australian Age Pension), invalidity (like Australian Disability
Support Pension) or survivorship (like the former Australian Widow B
Pension or Bereavement Allowance).

CFPs are generally from those 'first tier/pillar' schemes based on
compulsory contributions in that country.

Making a claim

Social security law requires a person who is in receipt of a designated
Australian payment to claim any 'comparable foreign payment' (CFP) to
which they may be entitled.

The agency is responsible for assisting customers with the process of
making a claim, including any non-customers who voluntarily seek
assistance from staff. This also applies to assisting customers to
maintain their foreign pension, for example assisting with life
certificates.

See Foreign pension claims.

CFP arrears debts

Lump sum arrears of a CFP are treated differently to other lump sums
(see below).

Restitution payments

The term 'restitution' generally refers to payments that may be made by
other countries as compensation for people who were persecuted during
wartime or by particular government regimes. Regardless of the source,
in all cases be sensitive when dealing with customers who may be in
receipt of such payments.

In general, a payment made by any country for persecution by the
National Socialist (Nazi) regime during World War II is exempt by virtue
of subsection 8(8)(n) of the Social Security Act 1991. Some ordinary
foreign pensions for example for old-age or retirement, may include
components or amounts attributable to deemed insurance periods during
which the person was interned or in forced labour during Nazi
occupation, in which the whole payment is exempt.

Note: payments made from a Swiss fund for Holocaust survivors are
treated as exempt lump sums.

Pensions of Mercy from Chile for persecution under the Pinochet regime
are also generally exempt by virtue of clauses in the social security
Agreement with Chile.

Other restitution payments are not generally exempt for example,
payments from the Netherlands for internment by the Japanese during
World War II.

Note: under Section 10A(2) of the Social Security Act, restitution
payments are considered assessable foreign income for Commonwealth
Seniors Health Card (CSHC) customers and should be assessed as part of
the adjusted taxable income.

Some restitution payments may be identified by the name of the payment
or by the paying authority but most will be self-identified by the
customer. Customers must provide sufficient evidence such as a statement
from the paying authority.

The following payments are the most common forms of restitution payments
that are exempt income for social security income support payment
purposes. Information on known restitution payments from a range of
countries, including sample foreign documents, is available through the
International Programme homepage. See the Resources page for a link.

Germany and Austria

Most restitution payments for National Socialist (Nazi) persecution are
form Germany (including partner entitlements) and Austria and can
generally be identified by the name of payment or paying fund (see
below), the word VERFOLGUNG (Persecution), WIEDERGUTMACHUNG RENTE
(Restitution Pension) or ZUSTELL BEVOLLM. Payments may refer to
'compensation' paid under sections 500-508 of Austrian legislation or
the German BUNDESENTSCHCÄDIGUNGSGESETZ (BEG). Known payments include:

Compensation payments from the Foundation 'Remembrance, Responsibility
and the Future' - Erinnerung, Verantwortung und Zukunft

Payments under the Ghetto Labour Compensation Fund

Payments under the following laws:

-   Gesetz zur Zahlbarmachung von Renten aus Beschäftigungen in einem
    Ghetto (ZRBG) - Ghetto Pension Law
-   Fremdrentengesetz (FPL) - Foreign Pension Law
-   Kriegsopferversorgungsgesetz (KOVG) - Compensation for War Victims
    Act
-   Opferfürsorgegesetz (OFG) - Victim Care Act
-   Kriegsgefangenentschadigungsgesetz (KGEG) - Prisoner of War
    Compensation Act. Note: KGEG may be paid for reasons other than Nazi
    persecution

The Netherlands, Italy, Poland, Czech Republic and Slovenia

Restitution payments from the Netherlands are generally made under the:

-   Wet Uitkeringen Vervolgingsslachtoffers (Wuv) - Victims of
    Persecution Act
-   Wet Uitkeringen Burger-Oorlogsslachtoffers (Wubo) - Civilian War
    Victims Act
-   Dutch Maror Fund

Note: the Netherlands also pays compensation to former Japanese
prisoners and victims of war. As stated above, these are considered not
to be exempt restitution payments.

There are two known restitution payments from Italy paid by the Italian
Treasury Department payments (Ministero Del Tesoro):

-   Assegni vitalizi agli internati nei camop di sterminio K.Z
-   Assegni di benemerenza ai persequitati per motive politici e
    razziali. Note: this payment may be paid for reasons other than Nazi
    persecution

The known restitution payment for Nazi persecution from Poland is paid
in addition to regular Polish Old-age Pension:

-   Renta inwalidy obozowego (osadzonego w obozie zaglady) (OZIW)

The Czech Republic may pay a special allowance for Nazi persecution in
addition to the regular Czech Old-age Pension:

-   ZVLÁŠTNÍ PŘÍSPĚVEK K DŮCHODU 357/2005. Note: this payment may be
    paid for reasons other than Nazi persecution

Slovenia may pay compensation (odškodnina) for Nazi persecution under:

-   Zakona o popravi krivic (ZPKri-UPB2), or
-   Zakon o plačilu odškodnine žrtvam vojnega in povojnega nasilja
    (ZSPOZ-UPB2).
    Note: this payment may be paid for reasons other than Nazi
    persecution.

Chile

Unlike restitution for Nazi persecution, Pensions of Mercy from Chile
for persecution under the Pinochet regime are specifically exempt under
the Agreement with Chile. Payments are generally paid under Chilean Law
number:

-   19.123 (monthly payments)
-   19.234 (periodical payments)
-   19.992 (annual mercy pensions)

Arrears and lump sums

A foreign lump sum may be made for various reasons and a customer may be
granted both an ongoing pension and a lump sum at the same time. Lump
sums are assessed and coded differently depending on what they are for
however, all assessable lump sums from a source outside Australia must
be converted to Australian dollars using the exchange rate that was
applicable at the date of receipt and coded in Australian dollars for
the period required.

Foreign pension lump sums may be arrears of a comparable foreign payment
(CFP) that represents cumulative entitlement for a period in the past,
usually associated with a new grant. The treatment and coding of CFP
arrears are covered in Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears debts
but it is important to first code the ongoing pension.

Other lump sums may be:

-   a separate entitlement or ad hoc payments with their own
    qualification criteria, such as, bereavement or funeral grants
-   bonus payments on top of the foreign pension, such as, annual
    holiday or Christmas bonuses
-   payments in lieu of pension, such as, where a customer's rate of
    pension is too small or where the provisions of the legislation
    allow commutation of a pension to a lump sum, or
-   refund of contributions when a customer does not have enough
    insurance to qualify for a pension or other withdrawals

The treatment and coding of other foreign lump sums is covered in
Treatment of Lump Sums, however, where the payment of a lump sum
prevents any further entitlement to a foreign pension, the FPS status
must be updated from the relevant date to reflect the customer is not
entitled to a pension from that country (FIN-NOM). See Foreign Pension
System (FPS) statuses and reviews.

How to identify and assess foreign pensions

Identifying foreign pensions

It is important that any foreign payment is correctly identified, as
some foreign pensions may be assessed differently under social security
law (see below).

For information on how to identify foreign languages, see Guidelines for
using interpreters.

Information on known foreign pensions from a range of countries,
including sample foreign documents, is available through the
International Programme homepage.

Staff should first check whether a foreign document is known before
requesting translation but can check with International Services for
assistance.

If a payment is not covered and staff believe it should be assessed
differently, refer the case to the International Programme via the
homepage.

See the Resources page for a link to International Services and the
International Programme.

Assessing foreign pensions

The gross rate of a foreign pension, that is, before tax or other
deductions, is generally assessed as ordinary income under the income
test.

However, there are exceptions in social security law, for example,
reimbursement of expenses is not income and payments in respect of a
dependent child, restitution for National Socialist persecution and some
specific payments from the governments of New Zealand and the United
Kingdom are exempt.

Social security agreements may also modify the treatment of certain
payments and may mean the amount received is proportionalised before
being included in the income test, treated as a direct deduction instead
of income or even exempt from assessment.

Information is available on the assessment of known foreign pensions
from agreement countries and some non-agreement countries.

Blocked income

Australian case law has determined that the possibility of a person
being able to access income may be so remote that it cannot be taken to
be 'earned, derived or received' and so should not be assessed. This is
referred to as 'blocked income'.

Some countries only allow payments to be made to a bank account in that
country; this does not mean that the income is blocked.

However, if evidence suggests that a country has suspended payment
indefinitely or that a person is unable to travel to a country that
restricts payments due to a disability or because it is unsafe to do so,
a payment may be considered to be blocked.

Before making a decision, any cases that might meet the criteria must be
referred to the International Programme to check with the Department of
Social Services. See the link on the Resources page.

Coding foreign pensions

It is important that any foreign payment is correctly identified and
coded as foreign pensions may be assessed differently under social
security law, for example, direct deduction, 'proportionalised' or
exempt from the income test. See Foreign pension coding.

Customers receiving foreign pensions or who have other income and assets
from overseas will have the Australian dollar amount of the overseas
income revalued using foreign currency exchange rates.

Note: Staff must not create a Foreign Pension Details (FPD) record just
to record a foreign pension reference number. Foreign pension reference
numbers can be recorded on the Foreign Claim Detail (FGD) screen.

Example: Work and Income New Zealand (WINZ) may ask staff to update
customer records with a New Zealand (NZ) reference number (SWN) so they
can access the International Verification Facility (the portal).

Only record a SWN on FPD:

-   where an FPD record exists
-   to key an Assumed Rate, or
-   to process a NZ Service Decision

Otherwise, record the SWN in the Foreign Description field on the FGD
screen.

The Resources page contains links to the International Services homepage
for contact details and the International Program homepage for sample
forms, foreign documents and translations, the Foreign Pension
Calculator and the Foreign Pension Database.

Contents

Foreign pension claims

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Foreign pension coding

International Data Exchange Program and auto indexation of foreign
pensions

Eligibility and coding of foreign pensions from non-agreement countries

Related links

International Social Security Agreements

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Comparable foreign payment lump sum arrears debts

Foreign income and assets

Treatment of lump sums

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
