-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines services that Services Australia has to offer
customers who are blind or who have low vision. When customers contact
Services Australia seeking assistance, it is the responsibility of
Services Australia to provide support to the customers by directing them
to and delivering a package of services that meets their needs.

Eligibility and obligations

Services Australia must ensure that customers are aware of their
eligibility for payments or services, and obligations. This includes
informing them of the types of assistance and choices available to them,
and the types of referrals that can be made in order to meet their
individual requirements.

Tailored service offers

By presenting customers with an individually tailored service offer,
Services Australia is able to provide customers with a selection of
products and services that have been put together in response to the
customer's current life situation and delivered in a way that meets
their needs and expectations. The ability to deliver a tailored package
of services to our customers underpins our commitment to the Service
Delivery Model.

Examples of services available to customers who are blind

Some examples of the services available to customers who are blind or
who have low vision:

Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension (DSP) (Blind). To
qualify the customer must be permanently blind

Pensioner Concession Cards (PCCs). All PCCs issued to blind customers,
including replacement, new grant and annual renewal cards will have a
tactile indicator. This is a small hole drilled in the lower left hand
corner of the card

Vision Australia provides audio tapes and ASCII discs (used with
personal computers with voice synthesisers) for people with sight
impairments

Age Pension (Blind) and DSP (Blind) customers may be eligible for a
Medicare levy exemption or reduction

Age Pension (Blind) and DSP (Blind) customers are not affected by income
and assets tests unless they are claiming Rent Assistance (RA) or Family
Tax Benefit (FTB). If claiming these payments, Age Pension (Blind) and
DSP (Blind) advise of income and assets

If not claiming FTB, RA is assessed under the pensions income and assets
tests

FTB, and any RA that is paid with FTB, are assessed under the income
test for family assistance payments

Age Pension (Blind) and DSP (Blind) customers can choose to receive
their letters from Centrelink in one of the following formats:

-   read over the telephone
-   converted to a larger font
-   converted to Rich Text Format and sent on a computer disk
-   converted to Braille

At this stage the service is restricted to letters only, including the
Reporting and Income Statement (RIS), not forms or flyers.

Customers interested in this service should phone the Centrelink
Disability, Sickness and Carers line or the Seniors line during office
hours. The Resources page contains a link to 'Phone us' contact
information.

An administrative requirement of the process is that a customer must
agree to have the 'Accessible Letters Manager, P.O. Box 7833 Canberra BC
ACT 2610' recorded as their postal address. This arrangement is required
to enable relevant customer's letters to be identified. Once identified,
letters can be reformatted as requested by the customer. The Accessible
Letters Manager has no legal authority regarding the customer's payments
or eligibility; it is purely an administrative solution to allow
Centrelink to provide this service.

Mobility Allowance customers selected for a Review of Mobility Allowance
can request to have a fillable form issued to them. See Process page in
Mobility Allowance (MOB) Employment/Training Reviews for instructions on
issuing an electronic version (MA003Y) of the Review of Mobility
Allowance form.

The Resources page contains a link to Vision Australia's website and
links to audio products, the Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist
report (SA013) and 'Phone us' contact information.

Related links

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Age/Disability Support Pension on the basis of blindness: Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013)

Assessing permanent blindness

Medical conditions, codes and terminology

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

The Medicare levy exemption or reduction letter

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Web and alternative accessibility assistance for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
