
International Social Security Agreements 106-04000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines general information on Australia's international
social security agreements. Most agreements have rules that are specific
to that agreement only. For detailed information on each individual
agreement, including coding of foreign pensions from that country, refer
to the relevant agreement file.

Government intent

Social security agreements are international treaties made between
Australia and another country, relating to social security. Agreements
generally come about through the wish to coordinate the social security
systems of each country to close gaps in coverage for people who work in
and move between the countries.

Both countries seek to share responsibility for a customer's overall
retirement income and may pay a part pension based on how long the
customer has lived and/or worked in each country.

Note: the agreement with the United Kingdom was terminated with effect
from 1 March 2001.

What agreements do

Agreements generally allow customers to claim and continue to receive
certain payments when they move between the countries. Agreements
override the normal rules under the social security law and usually
affect lodgement, qualification, portability and the rate of payments
that are covered by the agreement.

While agreements generally allow access to payments that would not
otherwise be payable, many impose extra conditions that must be
satisfied, for example, Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers
usually need to be severely disabled before they can use an agreement.

Most agreements avoid the need for people who live in one country but
work temporarily in the other country to have to pay compulsory social
security contributions in both countries. This is referred to as double
coverage.

Agreements provide for administrative cooperation between the countries
and authorise the exchange of information required to assess
entitlements. A separate administrative arrangement is used to detail
agreed procedures including the processing of claims and exchanging
information.

The Resources page contains basic examples of totalisation for
Australian payments under agreements, links to International homepages,
agreements, sample forms, foreign documents and translations, and a
chart of which payments are covered by the various international
agreements. This page also provides links to the Services Australia
website, providing information on payments whilst overseas and
International Services.

Contents

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

Foreign pension medical assessments

Review and Appeals procedures for Agreement decisions

Austria Agreement and foreign pension information

Belgium Agreement and foreign pension information

Canada Agreement and foreign pension information

Chile Agreement and foreign pension information

Croatia Agreement and foreign pension information

Cyprus Agreement and foreign pension information

Czech Republic Agreement and foreign pension information

Denmark Agreement and foreign pension information

Estonia Agreement and foreign pension information

Finland Agreement and foreign pension information

Germany Agreement and foreign pension information

Greece Agreement and foreign pension information

Hungary Agreement and foreign pension information

India Agreement and foreign pension information

Ireland Agreement and foreign pension information

Italy Agreement and foreign pension information

Japan Agreement and foreign pension information

Latvia Agreement and foreign pension information

Malta Agreement and foreign pension information

The Netherlands Agreement and foreign pension information

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

North Macedonia Agreement and foreign pension information

Norway Agreement and foreign pension information

Poland Agreement and foreign pension information

Portugal Agreement and foreign pension information

Republic of Korea Agreement and foreign pension information

Slovak Republic Agreement and foreign pension information

Slovenia Agreement and foreign pension information

Spain Agreement and foreign pension information

Switzerland Agreement and foreign pension information

United Kingdom Agreement and foreign pension information

United States of America Agreement and foreign pension information

Related links

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

Foreign pension claims

Foreign pension coding

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
