
Adding a customer to the system 106-07030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps for adding a new record for a customer
to the system using Customer First and Process Direct.

On this Page:

Search before adding a customer

Only add a customer to the system after completing a thorough search for
an existing Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN)..

Single name

Some customers use only a single name. Record the single name as the
surname on the customer record. The first name will be blank. This is in
line with Australian standards.

When a customer indicates their child is legally known by only one name,
there is a system workaround for coding a single name. So that the
child’s name displays on letters, record the single name in both the
Family and First name fields on the Change Child (CCH) screen in the
child record.

Name is too long to fit in the field

Enter the person’s name as it appears on the approved Commencement of
Identity document: Enter the name in the appropriate field(s). These
include given/first name, middle name, surname/family/last name. Do this
up to the maximum 30 characters.

Apply a DOA DOC to the customer’s record advising their full name.

Scan supporting document(s) to the record for future reference.

For help recording names, see the Multicultural Guide.

Intertwined records

If staff index a claim to the incorrect customer record and upload any
data, the record is now intertwined. This happens when details of more
than one customer are held on one Customer Reference Number (CRN).

Refer these straight away to the Data Quality Unit using the Intertwined
Referral form. No further updates should be made.

Child records

If the customer has an existing child (CHI) CRN, convert the CHI record
to a person (PER) record.

Exception: when a child is part of an adoption or surrogacy arrangement.

The Resources page contains links to mySupport, Intertwined Referral
Form, Multiple CRN Referral Fast Note and the Data Quality Unit intranet
page.

Related links

Searching for a customer on the system

Process Direct

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

Linking a child to a customer's record

Centrelink customer requests a new Customer Reference Number (CRN)

Types of Centrelink records

Intertwined Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
