
Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency procedures if datalink is unavailable 106-06020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on using the Department of Home
Affairs datalink and the procedures for activating it manually.

On this page:

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink

A datalink exists between the Department of Home Affairs and Centrelink
to provide customer visa and movement information from 1 September 1994
onwards and grants of Australian citizenship where available.

To automatically assess and/or record residence information for any
Centrelink payment, the datalink needs to be activated.

When the datalink is unavailable, manual procedures are required. This
procedure can be used for both a new claim and for any assessment
activity which requires residence details to be recorded and/or
assessed.

When the datalink is used

The datalink is automatically activated to check immigration records
through new claims, partner and child linking activities and in
activities when residence or portability data is updated, such as the
lifting of a residence quarantine during a portability interview. The
datalink can also be manually activated on a customer or child record.
If an immigration record exists for a customer, their partner or any
children, the information from the datalink will be automatically
applied to their Centrelink record in one of these activities.

Matching with the Immigration Datalink

To link a customer with their Department of Home Affairs record, some or
all of the following information is used:

-   surname
-   first name
-   sex
-   date of birth
-   country of birth
-   travel documents
-   visa identification numbers

If this data is missing or incorrect, it reduces the likelihood of the
customer being automatically linked to their Department of Home Affairs
record.

Information available via the Immigration Datalink

The information received via the Immigration Datalink is:

-   Australian citizenship (in limited circumstances)
-   Visa subclass, grant dates and end dates
-   movement information
-   travel documents

When information is automatically applied by the Immigration Datalink, a
channel code next to the information will be recorded with IMM. When
immigration data has been recorded manually by Centrelink International
Services (CIS) staff, a channel code of IMC is recorded.

Note: currently when a customer has their visa ended, the Immigration
Datalink will only provide an end date for the most recent visa. This
means that earlier recorded visas may show as open on the customer
record, despite those visas not being current. For further details see
Recording legal residence status.

Disputing Immigration Datalink information

Where a customer wants to dispute information, or a Service Officer
thinks that the data received through the Immigration Datalink is
incomplete or incorrect, the matter must be referred to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) who will investigate the issue.

Under no circumstances is a Service Officer outside CIS to advise a
customer to contact the Department of Home Affairs directly. See
Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Immigration Limiting Date and Immigration Datalink versus customer data

The Immigration Limiting Date (ILD) is the date from which movement
information obtained via the datalink will be used in the customer's
assessment.

Any customer advised departure and arrival dates that are:

-   already recorded before the Department of Home Affairs match is made
    and are dated before the ILD are used in the assessment
-   recorded after the Department of Home Affairs match is made and are
    dated after the ILD are generally not used in the assessment. Only
    Department of Home Affairs departure and arrival data is used after
    the ILD unless the datalink is in 'contingency mode'

Datalink in 'contingency mode'

If the datalink is in 'contingency mode' (not available for some reason
or too slow), the relevant portability and residence information can be
manually recorded by the Service Officer. This Service Officer recorded
data will be used in the assessment until such time as the customer
record is out of 'contingency mode'. Once this happens and the datalink
becomes available, the immigration data will be applied to the
customer's record. As the immigration data will override any customer
provided information, it is possible a customer's payment may be
cancelled when the data from Department of Home Affairs becomes
available.

Even when the datalink is successful, the Service Officer will still
need to manually record some residence information. This will include
citizenship for most people and visa information from before 1 September
1994. As where the customer is residing is a discretionary decision, the
country of residence information will also need to be manually checked
and recorded.

Related links

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence details

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a manual follow up
activity when a multimatch occurs

Centrelink International Services (CIS) actioning a manual follow up
activity when no match occurs

Residence and Portability screens

Recording residence details for dependent children

Australian residence requirements for payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
