
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia can promote and use the
National Relay Service (NRS) to help when communicating with customers
who are deaf or have hearing loss.

National Relay Service (NRS)

The NRS is an Australian Government initiative, managed by the
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and
Communications. It enables people who are deaf or have a hearing or
speech disability to make phone calls in the same way as anyone else.

Services Australia (the agency) staff are encouraged to promote the NRS
to customers across Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support who may
benefit from its use when interacting with the agency.

Customers must register to use the NRS

From 20 April 2021, people must register to make and receive calls
through the NRS, except to emergency services. Information about how to
register is on the NRS website, or directly at NRS user registration.

See the National Relay Service for information on:

Access to the service

Relay officers

Relay call options:

-   NRS Chat (previously known as Internet Relay)
-   SMS Relay (for text users)
-   SMS Relay (Text and Listen) (for users who have trouble being
    understood on the phone)
-   Video Relay (for Auslan users)
-   NRS Captions (for users who speak their side of the conversation)
-   Voice Relay (previously known as Speak and Listen) (for users who
    have trouble being understood on the phone)
-   NRS App (you can make NRS Chat, NRS Captions, Voice Relay and Video
    Relay calls on the app)

TTY options:

-   Speak and Read (with the feature to listen to the caller)
-   Type and Read
-   Type and Listen

Customers using Teletypewriter (TTY) can call Services Australia through
a direct TTY Freecall service or by using the NRS. See the accessibility
link in the Resources page for available options.

Customer prefers an alternative Provider

Entities, other than the NRS, may also provide interpreting services for
people who are deaf or have hearing loss.

If a customer prefers to use their own interpreter, then they do so at
their own risk that errors or omissions may occur in the interpreted
information. See Interpreter Services for customers who are deaf or have
hearing loss.

Authenticating customers

The authentication process must be followed when interacting with
customers via NRS. Customers may be targeted and exploited for identity
and fraud related crimes.

When engaging with any customer via the NRS, agency staff must:

-   Authenticate the customer by following Proof of Record Ownership
    procedures, and
-   be satisfied the record belongs to the correct person before helping
    with the enquiry

If you cannot successfully authenticate the customer and confirm the NRS
registered phone number before assisting with the customer’s enquiry,
the call must be terminated.

The Resources page contains a links to the Services Australia website
and external websites, including the NRS website.

Related links

Interpreter Services for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Handle incoming and outbound phone calls for Medicare telephony

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Contact with Child Support customers

Authenticating a Child Support customer

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Guidelines for using interpreters

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
