
Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim 106-07130220

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the process of rejecting a claim for PP.

Income support payment eligibility

To be eligible for PP, a person must be both qualified and payable.

If a customer does not meet qualification and payability, the claim may
be rejected.

Claim withdrawal

Customers (or their nominee) can withdraw a claim:

-   through their Centrelink online account
-   verbally or
-   in writing

If a customer or nominee requests a claim to be withdrawn, the status of
the claim is to be updated to withdrawn.

Where the customer's claim has already been granted it cannot be
withdrawn. See Cancellation of Parenting Payment.

Manual and automatic rejections

Some rejections are coded manually and some are automatic because of
details coded within the claim. An automatic rejection is the preferred
option. This will make it easier if a customer phones Services
Australia, or asks for a review.

Rejection due to residence

A customer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may
have the claim rejected based on:

-   details the customer has provided, or
-   details received from the Department of Home Affairs including visa,
    citizenship and movement information

Note: Information received from the Department of Home Affairs will take
precedence over any conflicting details given by the customer.

Rejection due to assets

A customer with substantial assets could be in financial hardship,
because they may be unable to rearrange their finances to give
themselves an income through their assets. For more details, see Assets
hardship provisions for allowances

Recording unverified circumstances

If a customer advised of a change in their circumstances but does not
verify the change:

-   do not include the details in the rejected claim
-   include the details in the rejection document that customer advised
    but did not verify

For streamline rejections, any changes to circumstances that may impact
a customer’s current payments or benefits must be updated after the
streamline rejection is completed.

Customer notification

If a claim is rejected, an advice is sent to the customer outlining the
rejection reason(s) and including their rights of review and appeal.

Deceased customers

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a customer
would also be assessed.

Related links

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Withdrawal of claims

Review of decision

Residence assessment for customer claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of a new
claim

Eligibility for Parenting Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
