
Identifying a package of services for rural customers 106-03030010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the circumstances that need to be taken into
consideration to determine the most appropriate package of services for
rural customers.

On this Page:

Payments and services available to farmers

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) is a taxable income support payment that
provides eligible farmers and their partners who are experiencing
financial hardship with assistance and support to improve their
long-term financial position.

FHA customers have access to the same benefits and services as other
income support customers and may be eligible for add-ons depending on
their circumstances. FHA customers will be issued an automatic Health
Care Card (HCC).

If the customer is not eligible for FHA, consider other Centrelink
payments and services.

The Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme helps reduce the freight costs
imposed by Bass Strait. It helps shippers transport goods by sea between
Tasmania and the Australian mainland, and between the main island of
Tasmania and King Island and the Furneaux Group.

Assistance with children's education costs

Families may be eligible for extra assistance to help with the cost of
education for primary, secondary and under 16 year old tertiary students
under the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Assistance for self-employed customers

Other services available for self employed customers through external
providers may be identified and information on these should be offered
to the customer.

The Resources page contains a link to additional assistance and
resources available through non-Services Australia providers for rural
and primary producers and contact numbers.

Drought Concessional Loans Scheme

This scheme was administered by state government agencies, not Services
Australia. Customers contacting about the schemes should be referred to
the relevant state or territory authority. Applications for this scheme
closed on 30 June 2018.

Commonwealth farm business concessional loans

From 1 July 2018, farmers may apply to the Regional Investment
Corporation (RIC) for access to the Commonwealth’s farm business
concessional loans.

The Resources page contains links to additional assistance and resources
available through non-Services Australia providers including a link to
the Regional Investment Corporation (RIC) website. RIC provide various
concessional loans, more information about them and eligibility
requirements are available via the website provided.

The Resources page contains links to additional assistance and resources
available through non-Services Australia providers, including a link to
the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment website for
contact details and information about the Drought Concessional Loans
Scheme, Commonwealth farm business concessional loans, and links to the
Rural Counselling Service and Australian Taxation Office websites.

Related links

Australian Government Mobile Service Centres

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Identifying a package of services for self employed customers

Initial contact with customers claiming under the Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme

The Financial Information Service Officer (FIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
