
Interviewing a customer about relationship details 106-07120020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to prepare for and conduct a Member of a
Couple (MoC) interview for customers as part of a MoC assessment.

Member of a Couple assessments

A MoC assessment may be required to determine if a customer is
considered single or partnered.

A MoC assessment may be triggered from a range of reasons, including:

-   as part of a new claim process
-   a change of circumstances when a customer is sharing accommodation
    with another person aged 16 years or over who is not an immediate
    family member

See MoC and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments.

Family and domestic violence

There are specific procedures for a customer who is experiencing family
and domestic violence.

Under no circumstances is contact to be made with the other person.

The matter must be referred to a social worker to assess appropriate
support and assistance that may be needed.

See Family and domestic violence.

Preparation for a MoC interview

As part of the process of assessing and verifying if a customer is in a
MoC relationship, it may be necessary to conduct an interview with the
customer and/or the other person/ex-partner to gather further
information about the circumstances of the relationship, including
living arrangements.

Before undertaking a MoC interview, Service Officers must make sure they
have a understanding of all of the aspects relevant to completing a MoC
assessment. For more information, see MoC and Separated under one roof
(SUOR) assessments.

Before the interview, Service Officers should:

-   be aware and have an understanding of the relevant MoC legislation
-   identify if any family and domestic violence and safety concerns
    have been raised that must be considered
-   familiarise themselves with all available facts of the case
-   establish what information needs to be discussed, collected and/or
    verified for during the interview
-   make sure that all the customer's relevant forms and/or any
    additional supporting information is readily available

After the interview, Service Officers need to:

-   record a summary of all the information provided by the customer
    and/or other person/ex-partner during the interview
-   provide a verbal summary of the information given to the customer
    and/or the other person/ex-partner at the end of the interview. This
    will allow the customer and/or the other person/ex-partner an
    opportunity to address any misunderstandings or misinterpretations
    of the information they have provided
-   advise the customer and/or the other person/ex-partner they will be
    notified of the outcome of the MoC assessment

MoC interview

If there is a need for a MoC interview. When interviewing a customer
and/or the other person/ex-partner:

-   It is usually conducted using an outbound phone contact rather than
    a booked appointment
-   An interview gives the chance to provide more information, give
    their perspective on the relationship and any other supporting
    information they may have. All the information available is then
    considered to decide if they are treated as partnered for the
    purposes of payment under associated law/policy
-   Consider all relevant information and evidence in an objective
    manner. Personal opinions, biases and moral judgements are
    irrelevant and must not form any part of the interview or
    decision-making process
-   When deciding if it is suitable to interview the other person to
    obtain more information, use discretion to ensure the contact is
    appropriate. For example, if a customer shows they and/or their
    children are at risk of family and domestic violence and are
    concerned for their safety, it is not appropriate to contact the
    other person/ex-partner at all
-   When conducting the interview, there may be times when it is
    critical to use extra care and discretion. For example, Service
    Officers must be sensitive to cultural issues, ethnicity, religious
    beliefs and when the customer and/or the other person/ex-partner are
    from culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD) backgrounds

Take extra care when interviewing a member of a same-sex couple.
Customers and/or the other person/ex-partner may have fears about
‘outing’ or disclosure of their sexuality or same-sex relationship. They
may find discussing their relationship with the agency confronting due
to fears of stigmatisation and discrimination

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
