
Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing claims 106-07030050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when and how to re-index claims. It also explains
how to cancel a new claim activity when it is preventing updates to the
customer's record. The process can vary depending on the claim type, how
the claim is processed and how that claim was originally lodged.

Reasons for re-indexing claims

-   The claim was rejected, and all required documentation has been
    provided for a review of the original decision
-   The customer has made an inappropriate claim based on their
    circumstances and information provided. It is to be processed as a
    claim for a different service reason
-   To regenerate the original claim activity after it was cancelled so
    another activity could be processed (see Process page for what to do
    if a new activity is preventing other updates)
-   The NCL activity was created on the wrong record
-   The customer submitted multiple online claims. Additional claim
    activities must be re-indexed after the initial claim activity was
    finalised

Claims processed in Process Direct

Depending on the payment or concession type, there are different
procedures for re-indexing SAP online claims and paper claims processed
in Process Direct.

Claims not processed in Process Direct

Re-index SAP online claims via the Claims online assignment block in
Customer First. See Viewing and processing online and assisted customer
claims.

Manually re-index paper claims and claims lodged via the ABSTUDY
Claiming Tool. The process depends on the type of claim being
re-indexed.

The Resources page contains an example of an inappropriate claim.

Related links

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for
Austudy

Assessing and coding student and Australian Apprentice claims for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Incorrect claims

Inappropriate claims

Indexing a customer's claim on the system

Process Direct

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing ABSTUDY claims in Process Direct

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Processing claims for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Processing claims for Age Pension and Pension Bonus

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Selective Application of Data (SAD)

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
