
Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP) 106-05020080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Seasonal Work Preclusion
Period (SWPP) and the payments affected by SWPP.

Customers subject to the SWPP

The SWPP applies to customers if they or their partners have been
engaged in high income seasonal, intermittent or contract work in the 6
months prior to claiming an allowance. It ensures these workers use
their income from employment before accessing certain allowances during
the 'off-season'.

If the nature of a customer's employment is seasonal work, intermittent
or contract work, a SWPP may also apply following the cessation of
employment with a company or trust. This includes work as an employee,
as a self-employed contractor, as a sole trader proprietor or as a
member of a partnership which undertakes work for a company or trust.

Seasonal workers who receive a small retainer during the season plus a
large lump sum from the season's profits may still be required to serve
a SWPP. However, the lump sum is only included in the SWPP calculation
if it is paid before the person claims an allowance. If the lump sum is
paid after an allowance is granted, then it is treated under the usual
lump sum payment rules.

If a customer is affected by a waiting period for an income support
payment, they can test their eligibility for a Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC).

Duration of the SWPP

The duration of a SWPP is based on how long it would take an average
wage earner to earn the same amount as a person engaged in seasonal or
intermittent work. The SWPP will only apply to single people who have
earnings that are more than the Average Weekly Ordinary Time Earnings
(AWOTE) or to couples whose combined earnings are more than twice the
AWOTE. The SWPP only applies if a period of seasonal, intermittent or
contract work ended within 6 months of the claim for payment. Any work
that is of 12 months duration or more is not considered to be seasonal
or intermittent and is not taken into account when calculating a SWPP.

Payments subject to the SWPP

The SWPP applies to the following payments:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (including full-time students and Australian
    Apprentices (apprentice or trainee))
-   Special Benefit (SpB) customers subject to Nominated Visa Holders
    (NVH) mutual obligation requirements
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) (partnered and single)
-   Austudy
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) (except customers who are
    permanently blind)

The SWPP may be waived in certain cases of hardship, see Assessment of
hardship for Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP).

Allowable deductions

Seasonal, intermittent and contract work income comprises the gross
income from seasonal, intermittent or contract work. However, for the
purposes of SWPP, allowable deductions can be made if they are in
relation to the work and are allowed by the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO). See Assessing income from seasonal work.

14 day gap rule

Short gaps in employment are considered to be 1 continuous period of
work if there is a gap of less than 14 days between episodes of work
within the same industry. This is referred to as the '14 day gap rule'.

-   If the customer stops work for less than 14 days and resumes work in
    the same industry, then the work is treated as 1 continuous relevant
    period of work
-   If the customer stops work for less than 14 days and resumes work in
    a different industry, then the work is treated as 2 separate
    relevant periods of work
-   If the customer stops work for more than 14 days and resumes work in
    either the same or a different industry, then the work is treated as
    2 separate relevant periods of work

Exclusions and exemptions

A person may be exempt from the SWPP if they were an intermittent worker
(as opposed to a seasonal worker) and were in receipt of income support
payments for a continuous period exceeding 12 months on the day before
the person commenced the intermittent work.

A person may also be exempted from an SWPP if the person is undertaking:

-   a rehabilitation program (Disability Employment Services -
    Disability Management Service (DES - DMS)) as defined under Part 3
    of the Disability Services Act 1986) or
-   Community Development Program (CDP) related activities for a person
    who would otherwise have been referred to a rehabilitation program,
    if not for the person being placed in CDP

People undertaking an activity as part of CDP will be eligible for the
exemption based on their Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). The ESAt
is used to determine a job seeker's barriers to employment, work
capacity, and referral to an appropriate employment services program.
CDP participants may be exempt from the SWPP if their ESAt indicates
that they would have been referred to a rehabilitation program.

SWPP periods will not be affected by the customer having a working
credit balance and they will not be able to accrue or deplete working
credits during these periods.

Job seekers serving a SWPP are not required to satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements during this period. For the duration of a SWPP a
customer is exempt from entering into a Job Plan.

Recently widowed customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) within a bereavement period will have an Bereavement
Waiting Period exemption and will be auto exempted from the SWPP where:

-   the claim is submitted within 14 weeks of their partner's date of
    death, or
-   if pregnant at the time of their loss, the claim is submitted before
    the birth of the child or end of the pregnancy

Where an auto exemption is applied for the above reasons, an Exemption
Indicator of 'B' will be displayed against the SWPP on the NDC screen.

The Resources page contains an example of a Seasonal Work Preclusion
Period (SWPP) calculation and a link to the Seasonal, Intermittent and
Contract work details (SU496) form. It also has details on how the SWPP
was impacted by the coronavirus (COVID-19).

Related links

Assessment of hardship for Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Interaction between waiting and preclusion periods

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Assessing income from seasonal work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
