
Calculating the start day for a transferee 106-05010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for calculating the start day when a
customer claims a Social Security payment, within a certain period of
receiving another Social Security payment, or within a certain period of
their partner receiving a Social Security payment. The start date is the
first day a social security payment is payable to a person, and the day
from which the customer is paid.

General start date

Generally, if a person is qualified for a payment on the day they lodge
a completed claim then the start day is the date of that claim. In some
circumstances, a person's start day may be earlier than the day the
claim is lodged and different start day rules may apply.

Customers transferring between payments

For customers transferring from one income support payment to another,
the start day allows for continuity of payability between the payments,
provided there is continuous qualification.

Generally, there will be no gap in payment if a customer claims:

-   within 14 days of their transfer day, or
-   within 13 weeks of date of transfer if the customer suffered a
    medical condition that was the sole or principal cause of the delay
    in lodging the claim

Different rules apply when transferring to Age Pension.

Note: where the customer is transferring to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) there may be a gap in payments when
they are subject to RapidConnect requirements. See Calculating the start
day general rule for further information on RapidConnect customers and
start dates that may apply.

Partner receiving payment

Where a customer claims and immediately before claiming their partner is
receiving a payment:

-   the customer is deemed to be a transferee, and
-   their transfer is the day they became qualified for the new payment

Rate changes

For stimulus customers (including two-weekly reporters) who report
employment income they and/or their partner were paid, the date of
effect of a non-income related change in circumstance is the date the
change occurred if notification provisions have been met. For example, a
rate increase from partnered rate to single rate (transfer from
JobSeeker Payment to Parenting Payment (PP) single) would take effect on
the date of separation.

Unlike transfers between other payments, a change between PP partnered
and PP single is a rate change, not a transfer. The date of effect of
the rate change depends on when the customer notifies the change in
relationship status.

Exclusion periods

The start day of a claim will be delayed if the customer is required to
serve a waiting, preclusion, or non-payment period for a time in gaol or
a psychiatric institution (for committing an offence). All these waiting
and non-payment periods are referred to as exclusion periods.

The Resources page contains an example of how to calculate a customer's
start date when transferring from one payment to another.

Related links

Claim lodgement of Centrelink claims

Calculating the start day general rule

Calculating the start day soon after child birth

Calculating the start day for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students
and Australian Apprentices claims

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

RapidConnect

Transfer to Age Pension

Assessing and coding a transfer to Austudy or Youth Allowance (YA)
student claim from another payment

Transfers to Carer Payment (CP)

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Student to job seeker transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
