-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when a Real estate details (MOD R) is needed,
what information it obtains and how to code the details from a MOD R or
an online update or claim.

Real estate as an asset

The current market value of any real estate, excluding the principal
home, is considered as an asset including:

-   house, unit or flat (other than the principal home)
-   vacant land
-   self-contained flat or other dwelling on the same title as the
    principal home that is rented to someone other than a near relative
-   part of the principal home used primarily or solely for business
    purposes. This portion of the customer's home should be included as
    a business asset and coded as part of the customer's business
    assessment
-   land not allowed as curtilage. The term curtilage means the land
    surrounding the home. For all new claims from 1 January 2007, the
    assets test assessment for the principal home and curtilage has been
    restricted to the customer's house and the adjacent land on the same
    title document. This is known as the single title rule. The term
    curtilage means the land surrounding the home. There are 2 curtilage
    tests used to determine a customer's allowable house and curtilage
    concession, a 'private land use test' and an 'extended land use
    test'. A grandfathered savings provision for real estate will
    grandfather concessions for real estate for 2 groups of existing
    customers on payments before 1 January 2007 who would otherwise be
    disadvantaged by the application of the new one title rules. The
    saving provision will cease when the customer's payment is
    cancelled, for any reason, or if they leave the property after 1
    January 2007

Where the customer owns their land via a single title document, even
where there are multiple lots included, the whole of the land on that
title document may be exempted under the extended land use test. This
procedure does not cover house and curtilage assessments for property
types:

-   shop or factory
-   commercial premises
-   retail premises
-   shop and dwelling
-   home office/business

Information about valuation of real estate and other assets, is
contained in the procedure, Valuation of real estate and other assets.

Customers receiving income from real estate

Customer’s need to advise Services Australia if they receive any income
from the real estate. This may be from letting, leasing or rental of a
house, shop or land.

When assessing income from real estate, expenses related to that income
(such as interest payments, rates and maintenance costs) are deducted
from the gross income to calculate the current net income. The customer
is required to provide their latest tax return to determine the net
income they receive.

If a tax return is not available, the 'one third rule' is used as an
interim measure until either of the following are provided:

-   the income tax return for the person or business that owns the
    property (including the rental property schedule showing rental
    income and deductions), or
-   financial statements such as a profit and loss statement

If the customer did not lodge an income tax return, as their income was
too low, a profit and loss type statement must be provided.

Assessing real estate as an asset

Real estate is assessed as:

-   primary production assets or
-   a non-primary production asset

This allows negative net primary production assets to be offset against
other primary production assets under the primary production aggregation
rules.

Location of the real estate asset

The address details of a customer’s real estate asset must be recorded
in a manner that allows the property to be located by both customers and
external valuers. This includes both street location and title reference
numbers.

An address has minimum requirements for coding to ensure it can be
identified. The address can be:

-   Urban - areas suitable for or occupied by private homes, generally
    in a town or city and not used for primary production
-   Rural - areas suitable for or used for primary production
-   Complex - located within a complex site such as a retirement
    village, caravan park or large unit complex

Assessing overseas real estate

The asset value and net income of overseas real estate is coded on the
Foreign Income/Asset Detail (FID) screen. The asset value is coded in
the relevant foreign currency and the system converts it to Australian
dollars. The amount automatically adjusts each month with changes in the
exchange rate.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia website, online
forms and an example of how to assess rental income and house and
curtilage assessment.

Related links

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Assets and liabilities of a business

Assessing house and curtilage

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
