
Indexing a customer's claim on the system 106-07030020

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the process for indexing a customer's claim,
converting child to adult records, registering claims and creating
records. These may be required for activities such as new claims and
when registering customers.

Indexing a customer’s claim

The first steps in indexing are common across payment types and service
reasons. After completing general information about the customer, the
system provides screen flows based on the activity type to be completed.

For certain customers, the First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors
(FCCCS) workflow can be used when searching for a customer and indexing
their claim. If a customer is not claiming online staff can run the
FCCCS for the following payments/cards:

-   Age Pension (AGE)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Care Card (CSHC)
-   Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)
-   Foster Child Health Care Card (FST)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Selecting the right person or child Customer Reference Number (CRN) is
vital when processing any claim. If the customer only has a child CRN
this must be converted to a customer record and used. Use the Multiple
Match List (MML) screen to check for multiple records before proceeding
with claims. Customers who use only a single name, in line with
Australian Standards, should have this recorded as the surname on a
customer record, with the first name left blank.

If a claim has been indexed on the wrong customer record, do not attempt
to correct the record. The record is now intertwined and must be
referred to the DQU using the Intertwined Referral form available on the
HSI page.

If staff during the course of their duties inadvertently access the
information of a person in whom they have a personal interest, staff
must record the incident on the Inadvertent Access Register (previously
known as the Oops register). See Inadvertent access and authorised
access.

Never use a Registered Care Provider (RCP) CRN as a customer’s personal
CRN.

The Resources page contains links to forms and to mySupport.

Related links

Re-indexing claims

Linking a child to a customer's record

Adding a customer to the system

Searching for a customer on the system

Inadvertent access and authorised access

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

Intertwined Centrelink records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
