
Residence assessment for customers claiming Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) 106-06020150

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess whether a claimant for
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) satisfies the residence
requirements necessary to qualify for payment. The assessment includes
whether the customer is residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim
for payment as well as whether they are required to serve the Newly
Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

On this Page:

Residence requirements

To satisfy residence criteria for PES, the customer must meet all of the
following:

-   be an Australian resident and in Australia at the time the claim is
    lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) Newly Arrived
    Resident's Waiting Period

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Customers who are new Australian residents and are claiming PES are
required to have been in Australia as an Australian resident for the
duration of the NARWP before PES is payable. Alternatively, they may
have an exemption from the NARWP in certain circumstances.

A PES customer must lodge a claim while physically present in Australia
otherwise the claim is deemed not to have been made. A claim can be
lodged early (up to 13 weeks prior to qualifying) if the student is
leaving to study overseas as part of their approved course.

If a claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming PES are required to have been an Australian resident and
physically in Australia for the required duration of the NARWP, either
in 1 period, or in a number of periods before PES is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming PES may
have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily for 3
weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the absence extends the
NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

It is not a requirement that the period of residence required for the
NARWP occurred immediately before claiming.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided
the information, it will take precedence over any conflicting
information provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home
Affairs record is matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to
movement information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains links to staff contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
