-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how Service Officers identify
cruise travel and refer to Centrelink International Services (CIS). It
details how CIS staff investigate and code cruise movements.

Immigration Datalink

A datalink exists between the Department of Home Affairs and Centrelink.
This gives customer visa and movement information from 1 September 1994
onwards, and grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Updates through the Immigration Datalink are normally applied
automatically to Centrelink customer's records in near real time.
However, there are some situations where this is not the case and manual
intervention is needed.

Cruise movements

The Department of Home Affairs do not always record travel movements for
customers who travel outside Australia on a cruise. However, Centrelink
requires the details to be recorded on the customer's record as the
customer has left Australia and portability rules must be applied under
Social Security Law.

The Portability Script must be run when a customer calls to advise of
their overseas cruise travel. Cruise movements are sent to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) for manual coding of the:

-   departure date - the date the cruise leaves the last Australian port
-   return date - the arrival date back to the first Australian port

For naval personnel who fly out to their vessels, they will only have
their departure date recorded by the Department of Home Affairs. Their
movements need to be coded manually by CIS staff.

Do not refer requests to the Department of Home Affairs for cruise
movements to be added to a person’s Department of Home Affairs record. A
request can be sent if you are unsure whether the movement was a naval
vessel.

Do not tell customers that the Department of Home Affairs does not:

-   record cruise information, or
-   know if you go overseas on a cruise and this is why you need to tell
    us

The Department of Home Affairs is aware when a customer leaves Australia
on an overseas cruise as passengers must present their passports.

Round-trip cruise movements are not received through the Immigration
Datalink. This is why they are coded manually.

The Resources page contains examples of cruise coding and the dates to
use.

Related links

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
