
Assessment of relationship status – processes, roles and responsibilities 106-07120000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for the assessment of relationship
details for customers.

Relationship Status

A customer's relationship status allows Services Australia to assess the
current relationship of the customer and support policy requirements
relating to payment entitlements. Some income support payments have
different rates, depending on whether the customer is single or
partnered. Eligibility may also be affected by partner income and assets
tests.

Assessing the customer's relationship status will ensure the correct
entitlements are received. A customer's relationship status is recorded
and stored on the Marital Status (MS) screen. Information on the MS
screen is the primary source for partner linking information and details
the following:

relationship status type:

-   Partnered statuses: de facto (DEF), married (MAR), registered (REG)
-   Single statuses: separated (SEP), single (SIN), widowed (WID),
    divorced (DIV)

if the customer or their partner has permission to enquire (PPE) about
the person they are linked to

any relationship qualifier codes (Qualifier Code) relevant to their
relationship. For example, partner is currently in respite care

periods for which the relationship status/relationship qualifier code
applies

Note: there is no minimum time period required to have elapsed before a
relationship can be considered a de facto. Time period rules apply to
Youth Allowance, ABSTUDY and Disability Support Pension (under 21)
customers to be considered independent based on the length of their
relationship. See Resources for further information.

The Resources page contains a list of all possible MS screen codes for
the Marital Status field and Qualifier Code field (relationship
qualifier code).

Partner linking

A partner link is created for all relationship status circumstances
where a customer is partnered and the partner's Customer Reference
Number (CRN) is provided.

The partnered generic link does not include a description of the type of
relationship the customer is in, rather its existence only indicates
that the customer is partnered. The absence of a current partnered
generic link indicates that a customer is not partnered.

It is also used to record information common to a couple such as address
and accommodation details, to support the linking process and reduce
re-keying of information on both records. The following information is
required prior to commencing the linking process:

-   a customer's relationship status type
-   confirmation of the relationship by both the customer and the
    partner
-   permission for the customer to enquire about their partner's
    information and vice versa, and
-   the partner's name and date of birth

Note: confirmation of the relationship by both the customer and partner
is required to update and link their records. See Change in relationship
status from single to partnered. Where there is documented family and
domestic violence on the customer or partner's record, see Family and
domestic violence.

Relationship qualifier codes

Relationship qualifier codes can be used to treat customers differently
to their recorded relationship status. They are recorded on the MS
screen Qualifier Code field if applicable.

There are single and partnered relationship qualifier codes. Partnered
relationship qualifier codes can only be applied to a partnered
relationship status, while single codes to a single relationship status.
Where a relationship qualifier code is recorded for a partnered
relationship status then a matching relationship qualifier code is
applied to the partner.

When a relationship qualifier code is applied it can sometimes have the
opposite effect, that is, a single status customer can be treated as
partnered or vice versa. Some codes may not have any impact on the rate
of payment. The Resources page contains a list of relationship qualifier
codes that can be recorded for a customer and their partner.

Reviews

When a relationship qualifier code is applied to a customer's record,
regular reviews are conducted to ensure the circumstances of the
customer have not changed. If a warning is presented whilst finalising
the Relationship Qualifier activity on the Marital Status (MS) screen,
Service Officers must follow the advice and manually code the review. It
is equally important for Service Officers to action reviews
appropriately when they mature to avoid potential overpayments to the
customer and/or their partner/ex-partner.

Section 24 reviews must be conducted at least every 13 weeks or earlier
if warranted (that is, where there is a change of circumstances that
could change the application or type of relationship qualifier code).
For example, Section 24 Separated under one roof (SUOR reviews must be
conducted based on the SUOR review guide. Other reviews will be based on
the customer's circumstances, for example, temporary separations.

Roles and responsibilities

This information is to provide an overview of who is responsible for
actions required:

-   to ensure a customer has the correct code recorded on the MS screen
    for their relationship status (Marital Status field), and
-   the relationship qualifier code (Qualifier Code field) is
    applicable.

Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

-   If there is an indication a MoC relationship may exist, or
    Relationship Details (SS284/SS293) forms have been received, all
    staff must conduct checks at the first touch point to confirm if
    there is a need for a MoC or Separated under one Roof (SUOR)
    assessment
-   See Confirming the need for a MoC assessment

MoC and SUOR assessments

-   MoC assessments are completed by specialist MoC processing staff
-   Service Officers in the Compliance Programme Branch and the
    Intelligence and Investigations Branch can also undertake MoC
    assessments for Relationship status reviews and interventions
-   When conducting or completing follow-up coding for a MoC or SUOR
    assessment, see MoC and SUOR assessments

Retrospective MoC assessments

Undisclosed MoC relationships
If there is evidence of a previously undisclosed MoC relationship that
is recognised by either MoC processing staff or any another Service
Officer. The assessment must be escalated using the Report Suspected
Fraud and Corruption system, MoC processing staff must not undertake the
retrospective MoC assessment. An Intelligence Analysis Unit, will assess
the customer’s past entitlement

Disclosed MoC relationships
If there is a change in circumstances since the initial trigger of the
MoC assessment (form issued), MoC processing staff must still undertake
an assessment to decide if the customer was in a MoC relationship for a
past period. This is to make sure the correct entitlement has been paid.
For example, a customer self-declares they are now partnered to the
person for whom the MoC assessment was triggered.
Note: if a customer self-declares they are in a relationship that
started on a date in the past, there is no need to report suspected
fraud or conduct a MoC assessment. Staff must issue a MOD P. See Change
in relationship status from single to partnered

Disclosed relationships during Crisis Payment claims involving family
and domestic violence (FDV)
If a customer self-declares they are or were partnered during a claim
for CrP, even though they are single on their record and are paid the
single rate. CrP eligibility is not affected by relationship status, the
claim for CrP can be assessed before a MoC/SUOR assessment.
Whether the CrP is granted, a MoC/SUOR assessment is needed for the past
period if they:

-   are currently in a relationship not yet disclosed and recorded, or
-   were in an undisclosed relationship for more than 14 days before
    lodging the CrP claim. For further information, see New claim for
    Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and domestic
    violence

SUOR reviews

-   Initial SUOR reviews must be conducted at 13 weeks. Subsequent SUOR
    reviews may be conducted at 13 or 26 weeks depending on the
    customer's circumstances
-   Trained MoC processing staff conduct all SUOR reviews
-   See Member of a couple reviews - SUOR

Section 24 assessments

-   A customer may not request a Section 24 assessment, as they may not
    be aware of it. If the customer's circumstances indicate a Section
    24 assessment may be warranted. Service Officers must offer the
    customer to test their entitlement
-   When a customer is requesting an initial Section 24 assessment,
    including new claim processing, it is to be undertaken at first
    contact if possible. If the Service Officer does not have the skill
    set to undertake the Section 24 assessments, a referral may be
    required
-   If the Section 24 assessment is for a customer who lives overseas,
    the assessment is conducted by Centrelink International Services
    (CIS). If the customer lives in Australia but their partner lives
    overseas, the assessment is undertaken through normal channels (not
    by CIS)
-   See Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
    determinations

Section 24 reviews

-   Section 24 reviews must be conducted at regular intervals of 13
    weeks
-   Section 24 reviews must also be conducted when a customer advises a
    change of circumstances, including travelling or moving overseas or
    separating from their partner
-   These reviews are completed at first touch point if the Service
    Officer has been trained in Section 24 assessments
-   A referral option is available if a staff member has not been
    trained
-   See Member of a couple reviews - Section 24

Customers living overseas

-   Centrelink International Services (CIS) completes all MoC
    assessments (Section 24 (including reviews), MoC or SUOR (including
    reviews)) for customers who live overseas. A referral to CIS is
    needed for these customers
-   Customer advises they are now single. See Change in relationship
    status to single for a customer residing outside Australia
-   Customer advises they are now partnered. See Change in relationship
    status from single to partnered

Customer/partner imprisoned or in psychiatric confinement

-   Assessments of circumstances for these customers or their partners
    should be referred to the relevant State/local Prison Admission team
-   See Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Customer’s partner is in Immigration Detention

-   Being in an Immigration Detention Centre is not the same as in gaol.
    The customer is not eligible for the ‘Partner in Gaol’ rate. The
    Marital Status (MS) screen must not have the Partner in gaol
    (GAP)/In gaol (GAC) relationship qualifier code recorded on the
    customer’s and partner’s record
-   Check if there is a ‘special reason’ to consider Section 24, and if
    it can be applied to treat the customer as not a member of a couple.
    Refer to Section 24 assessments section above for who conducts those
    assessments

Customer or partner separated due to illness or respite care

-   Assessments of separated due to illness and separated due to respite
    care and entitlements to rent assistance, can be completed by any
    customer service staff member if required evidence is available

Customer or partner under the age of consent

-   Assessments can be completed by any customer service staff member,
    with any special processing skill tag requirements outlined by each
    primary payment/entitlement processes
-   Different processing is required for customers that are under the
    age of consent. See Customer or partner under the age of consent
    with dependent child in their care

Customer contacts to have their marital status updated (e.g. de facto to
married)

These can be made by any customer service staff member. If a customer
contacts to have their marital status updated from:

-   de facto to married, see Change in relationship status from single
    to partnered. Note: the Date of Event cannot be the same as the date
    they were recorded as de facto (DEF). A separate line is used to
    record MAR with a new Date of Event (date they were legally
    married), unless the customer was incorrectly recorded as de facto
    instead of married and the entry needs to be corrected
-   separated/divorced/widowed to single, see Change in relationship
    status from partnered to single

Customers in hardship

When a customer is experiencing genuine financial hardship or there is
family and/or domestic violence issues, a relevant Fast Note may be sent
to MoC processing staff requesting urgent processing. Service Officers
must first confirm a MoC assessment is actually required before
requesting urgent processing of a MoC assessment.

-   For urgent processing requests due to a financial hardship or safety
    concerns, refer to Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple
    (MoC) assessment
-   If a customer requires immediate or priority processing, refer to
    Immediate new claim and non-new claim priority processing

Reviews and appeals

Explanation of a decision

Whoever makes the determination on the customer's relationship status or
applicable relationship qualifier code usually will provide an
explanation of the decision to the customer. This can be done either via
a letter or in person. Relevant Operational Blueprint files contain
information on how to action unfavourable or favourable decisions. See
Request for an explanation or application for a formal review for
information on action to take if a customer contacts to advise they do
not understand or agree with a decision.

Customer or partner/ex-partner provides information after a
determination is made

If new information has been provided after a MoC assessment has been
finalised, see Reviews and appeals.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms, information and
relevant links related to changes in circumstances and referrals to MoC
processing staff, marital status codes and relationship qualifier codes.

Contents

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Confirming the need for a Member of a Couple (MoC) assessment

Interviewing a customer about relationship details

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

Assessment of circumstances for customers with partner in prison

Customer and partner who are under the age of consent with a dependent
child in their care

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer becomes partnered

Relationship Status for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

Related links

Member of a couple reviews - Section 24

Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Completing the Partner details (MOD P)

Completing the Separation details MOD S

Assessing the Partner details (MOD P)

Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
