
Foreign pension medical assessments 106-04040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process taken to finalise a medical
assessment in relation to a foreign pension for an agreement country. It
also details what forms and medical evidence is required by each
Agreement country.

On this page:

Medical assessments for foreign invalidity pensions

Services Australia is responsible for assisting customers to claim and
maintain foreign pensions. A customer may claim or receive a payment
from an agreement country on the basis of a medical condition. The most
common type is an invalidity pension which is covered by social security
systems in most countries.

Under agreed arrangements, the department will arrange for a medical
assessment to be done where a customer claims an invalidity pension from
an agreement country or the liaison agency in the agreement country
requests a medical review of a current pension recipient in Australia.

Existing medical information received from an external source that is
held by the department is always sent, for example, information from
treating doctors, x-rays or radiology results, pathology or psychiatrist
reports etc. However, as the medical qualification for payment in the
agreement country is generally different from that in Australia, reports
obtained for the agency's purposes, such as Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) reports, may be of no benefit to the other country. In most cases,
specific alternate forms to provide the necessary information for the
agreement country are agreed upon.

Responsibilities

Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU) are responsible for arranging
completion of the agreed forms required for each agreement country
including booking examinations and specialist assessments where
necessary. International Services (CIS) is responsible for coordinating
these assessments including all liaison with the agreement country,
requesting assessments from HPAU and, where necessary, arranging Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports and requesting any further medical
information required from the customer.

The Resources page includes details of which medical documents and forms
are required for each Agreement country as well as links to the
International Programme homepage for access to international medical
forms, approved letter text and the webform for referrals to Health
Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU).

Related links

Foreign pension claims

Agreement liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Assessment Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
