
Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP) 106-06020110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess whether a PP claimant
satisfies the residence requirements to qualify for payment. The
assessment includes whether the customer is residentially qualified to
lodge a legal claim for payment and whether they are required to serve
the 2 year (104 week) qualifying residence requirement and/or the 4 year
(208 week) Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

PP residence requirements

To satisfy residence criteria for PP, the customer must meet all of the
following requirements:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy or be exempt from serving the 2 year qualifying residence
    period, and
-   satisfy or be exempt from serving the 4 year NARWP

Waiting Periods

Two year qualifying residence period

PP is subject to a 2 year (104 week) qualifying residence period. Only
periods a person has been in Australia as an Australian resident can be
counted towards the qualifying residence period. The 2 years can be
calculated over multiple periods of Australian residence and does not
need to be served in one continuous period. There is no requirement for
it to be served in the customer's current period of Australian
residence, past periods may also count towards the waiting period. Some
exemptions may apply.

Four year NARWP

For customers whose first permanent residence visa was granted on or
after 1 January 2019, a 4 year (208 week) NARWP will also apply. This
waiting period is served at the same time as the 2 year qualifying
residence period. Some exemptions may apply.

Claimants will not have to serve the 4 year (208 week) waiting period if
they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835, or 837 but will
still need to serve a 2 year (104 week) qualifying residence period.

Therefore, customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and
are claiming PP are generally required to be in Australia as an
Australian resident for a period of 4 years before PP is payable.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Parenting Payments are required to have been an Australian
resident and physically in Australia for 4 years, either in 1 period, or
in a number of periods before PP is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming PP may
leave Australia temporarily for 3 weeks. The NARWP period does not
recommence, but the absence extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Generally it is not a requirement that the period of residence required
for the NARWP occurred immediately before claiming. However if a person
is claiming an exemption from the NARWP for the reason that they became
a Lone Principal Carer, they need to have become a lone parent after the
start of the current period of Australian residence. The Lone Parent
exemption only applies to Parenting Payment Single (PPS), JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) and Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Exemptions from waiting periods

The exemptions from the qualifying residence period are not necessarily
the same as the exemptions from the NARWP. This means that a customer
may be exempt from one waiting period but still be required to serve the
other:

-   If a customer is exempt from the 2 year qualifying residence period
    but not exempt from the 4 year NARWP, they will still have to serve
    the 4 year NARWP
-   Alternatively, if the customer is exempt from the 4 year NARWP but
    not exempt from the 2 year qualifying residence period, they will
    still need to serve the 2 year qualifying residence period

For example, Australian citizens have an automatic NARWP exemption, but
not an automatic qualifying residence exemption. So an Australian
citizen claiming PP would be exempt from serving the 4 year NARWP but
would still be required to serve the 2 year qualifying residence period
unless they have another type of exemption which exempts them from the 2
year qualifying residence period as well.

The Process page contains more information to help determine if the
customer has a 4 year NARWP or 2 year qualifying residence period, or is
exempt from one or both.

If a claim is rejecting due to residence requirements and the customer
lived on Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding
additional residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Qualifying PP child

A customer must also have at least one PP child to qualify for PP. A
child must also satisfy residence requirements in order to be a PP
child. A PP child is not subject to a qualifying residence period or
NARWP, only the customer must satisfy (or be exempt from) these
requirements.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. If the Department of Home Affairs has provided
the information, it will take precedence over any conflicting
information provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home
Affairs record is matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to
movement information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains contact details for Centrelink International
Services (CIS).

Related links

Australian residence requirements for payment

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
