
Raising Parental Income Test (PIT) debts 107-09120040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how and why debts relating to the Parental Income
Test (PIT) are raised.

Parental Income Test (PIT)

The PIT takes into account the total combined taxable income of the
dependent Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer's parents/guardians.
This is for the base tax year (financial year ending in the previous
calendar year). The 20% family taper rate applies a reduction approach
to all dependent recipients within the family pool.

Customers may also be entitled to assessments based on the financial
year following the base tax year, if they fit the criteria.

From 1 July 2010, the previous sibling concession does not apply.

Change in family circumstances

A change in family circumstances may result in a reassessment of the
customer's entitlement. These changes are notifiable events. The types
of changes that may occur are:

the parent's/guardian's reported taxable income for the base tax year
has been adjusted (for example, an amendment by the Australian Taxation
Office)

the parent's/guardian's combined taxable income for the current tax year
exceeds both:

-   125% of the combined taxable income from the base tax year, and
-   125% of the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA)

when this occurs, the customer will be assessed on the basis of this
higher parental income from:

-   the first pay period that includes 1 October in the current year for
    YA customers. If a new parental income assessment applies, it
    applies to the entire period of the first pay period including 1
    October
-   1 October in the current year for ABSTUDY customers

actual income figures have become available for the base tax year (or
the current tax year if used) where estimates of income were provided
earlier

the number of other dependent children in the family pool has increased
or decreased

Circumstances when the Parental Income Test (PIT) does not apply

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

a parent has lost or gained a partner or there is a change of parent

a reassessment may also occur if it is determined the customer provided
false or misleading information about their parental income

Notification period

If Services Australia is advised of a change of circumstance within the
notification period, the customer's payments will be reassessed and
adjusted (where necessary).

If the change is not advised within the notification period, a
reassessment may result in an excess payment or a recoverable debt.

ABSTUDY customers are required to notify a change in circumstance within
14 days. Regardless of when notification is received, the customer's
entitlements are reassessed from the date the change occurred.

Debts resulting from the parent reporting their income

If a debt is generated for a dependent customer, staff must finalise the
debt as 'no debt' in the following circumstances:

-   Customer's parent receives an income support payment (ISP)
-   Parent's EPED is after the customer's EPED
-   Parent reports their income as part of their payment obligations
-   Parent's payment reduces to zero for that fortnight as a result of
    the report
-   Customer therefore loses their exemption from the Parental Income
    Test, and
-   Debt generates on the customer's record as a result of a ripple
    activity from the parent's record
-   Customer responds within 21 days of the agency sending a notice of
    request to verify their parents actual income

These debts are not legally recoverable.

Actual income figures

Actual income figures (when an estimate was previously provided) must be
notified within 21 days of the request for verification. View the
request for verification issue date on the date indicated on the
Household Income and Assets (NHI) screen. This allows 7 days for the
Taxation Notice of Assessment (TNA) to be delivered, plus the 14 days
requirement for notifying the change.

If there is a reassessment based on actual income figures and the actual
income is higher than the estimated income, there is currently no
legislation allowing the excess payments to be recovered unless the
customer:

-   misrepresented their circumstances, or
-   fails to supply verification of parental income within 21 days from
    the date requested if the parents actually had confirmation from the
    Australian Taxation Office (ATO) at the date they said they expected
    to receive it. Do not raise a debt before 21 days has passed

YA paid on behalf of customer to parent

Section 45 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 provides
that instalments of YA:

-   for dependent persons under 18 years of age
-   be paid to a parent on behalf of the person

The person (not the parent) is the legal recipient of the YA. This means
that liability for any debt arising from a loss of entitlement belongs
to the person. This also applies where monies have been misdirected away
from the young person. This approach is consistent with the operation of
section 1223(1) of the Social Security Act 1991.

ABSTUDY paid on behalf of customer to parent

Chapter 71 of the ABSTUDY Policy Manual requires that instalments of
ABSTUDY Living Allowance:

-   for dependent secondary students, aged under 16 and up to 18 years
    of age
-   be paid to the parent/guardian

Under Chapter 3 of the ABSTUDY Policy Manual, the person responsible for
repaying any overpaid amount (known as the responsible debtor) is
usually the person who received the ABSTUDY payment (known as the
payee). The responsible debtor for these students is the
parent/guardian.

The Resources page contains an example of a legally recoverable debt for
YA purposes.

Related links

The Parental Means Test

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Assessing and coding parental income estimates for ABSTUDY, Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)

Circumstances when the Parental Income Test (PIT) does not apply

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Notification provisions (CLK)

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Using Debt Scripts in Customer Record

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
