
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens CCB reconciliation
/re-reconciliation or CCB lump sum claim recalculation results in debt.
This is an automatic procedure except for deceased customers. All
CCB/CCR references relate to financial years prior to 2018/2019.

A separate procedure applies for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments
arising from reconciliation.

Customers subject to the CCB reconciliation process

Customers who received CCB as child care fee reduction, or zero rate are
subject to reconciliation. Customers can claim CCB as a lump sum at the
end of the financial year.

Working out the CCB entitlement for a relevant financial year

At reconciliation, the customer's CCB entitlement for a relevant
financial year is worked out. It compares the fee reduction the customer
received based on their estimated income with their entitlement based on
actual income and child care usage.

Calculation of Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlement occurs during:

-   CCB reconciliation, or
-   lump sum claim assessment from 2006-07 onwards

Updating the information used to reconcile CCB

Updating CCB and CCR information will prompt the system to recalculate
the entitlements. This can result in a:

-   top-up
-   negative adjustment (debt), or
-   nil adjustment

For any overpayment, the system will raise the debt in the Debt
Management and Information System (DMIS). The system will include any
reconciliation and lump sum debts in the same financial year. The
customer will receive a letter with the debt details.

For further information, see Debt offsetting during family assistance
reassessment, reconciliation and processing.

Differences between FTB and CCS/CCB/CCR debts

There are differences between Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and CCB
reconciliation/lump sum claim debts:

-   raising of CCB, CCR and FTB debts occurs separately
-   CCB and CCR debts are recoverable from tax refunds if raised on or
    after 1 July 2006
-   recovery of CCB and CCR debts from ongoing fee reductions does not
    occur (FTB debts can be recovered from ongoing FTB payments)
-   if CCB reconciliation cannot occur due to non-lodgement, the system
    will raise the CCB payments as a debt. The system will reassess this
    if customer or partner lodges their income details any time
    afterwards
-   the agency can use Child Care Subsidy withholding to repay CCB/CCR
    debts. This is not applicable for FTB debts

Related links

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Re-reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Recalculation of a Child Care Benefit (CCB) lump sum claim

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Refunding debt repayments

Storing scanned documents

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
