
Calculating Centrelink enh1ments and gathering information when investigating debts 107-03000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the calculation of entitlements
when investigating automatic and manual debts.

Government intent

The role of Services Australia is to make sure that customers receive
their correct entitlement. Gather all the evidence and information to
investigate a debt.

Investigate the debt

There must be evidence to substantiate that a debt exists. Evidence is
not limited to documentation scanned to the customer's record. Evidence
includes, but not limited to:

online updates, for example reporting paid income

verbal information provided by the customer and documented by a Service
Officer

information transferred to the customer record by:

-   an Employment Services Provider
-   education institutions, and
-   other electronic data transfers

Note: the customer does not have to provide physical evidence of these
changes, unless stated on the Operational Blueprint. Updates documented
by a Service Officer go through the usual Quality Online (QOL) checking
processes. Staff should consider them accurate, unless there is evidence
on the record to suggest an error has occurred.

Examine the available evidence to determine if an overpayment has
occurred under the relevant legislation.

Three results can arise from an initial investigation:

-   no recoverable debt
-   recoverable debt raised, or
-   recoverable debt raised and waived

Calculate the debt

The debt is usually the amount paid less the amount entitled within the
debt period.

Work out the:

-   period of the debt
-   the rate during the period
-   dates when the change/s in events happened
-   actual amounts paid during the period
-   amount the customer was entitled to
-   any withholding adjustments and adjusting tax details

Check the accuracy of the system generated estimated amount

Confirm the debt amount is correct. The most common reasons for debts
are:

-   a loss of qualification
-   a change to entitlement due to the income or asset tests

The debt raiser must:

-   establish what the customer was actually paid, and
-   calculate what the customer was entitled to be paid using
    information which has been verified

The difference between the two is the debt.

There are tools available to help staff in calculating debts.

Consider the application of a 10% debt recovery fee for working age
payment debts.

Order in which income affects payments

Income affects payments in the following order:

-   Basic rate (plus any add-ons, including Youth Disability Supplement,
    other than those below)
-   Pension Supplement basic amount
-   Pension Supplement between basic and minimum amounts ('remaining
    portion')
-   Rent Assistance
-   Energy Supplement
-   Pension Supplement minimum amount
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance

Note:

-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA) is not reduced by income
-   If the Pension Supplement minimum amount is payable, the full Energy
    Supplement is payable

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs).

Calculate entitlement

Investigate if the customer is legally entitled to any underpayments
before 'offsetting' the debt.

Calculate a customer's entitlement where there is a continuing
entitlement at a reduced rate. For example, if a Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) customer becomes partnered and remains qualified for a
payment, like Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP):

-   take the partner's income and assets into account, and
-   determine the customer's entitlement to transfer to PPP during the
    relevant period

Alternatively, a debt may be raised for all PPS paid in a period where a
person:

became partnered

has been given notice of the requirement to update their circumstances

the partner's income information is not available, and

they either:

-   fail to inform Services Australia of information relevant to the
    change in relationship status, or
-   misrepresent themselves while reporting and continues to receive
    parenting payment at the single rate

This is because the agency:

-   does not have enough information to determine entitlement to PPP,
    and
-   has enough information that the customer is not entitled to PPS from
    the date they became partnered

The Resources page contains a link to DOC standards and external
websites, information on record management, a list of Online Advices
(OLA) suitable for requesting information from customers or third
parties and third party information sources.

Related links

Acceptable evidence for verifying income when investigating debts

Using the correct date of effect when raising debts

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Debt identification

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks, ACTDOCs
and DOA DOCs)

Raising and attribution of Service Update debts

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

Storing documents

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
