
Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) debts 107-21060436

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for determining when to raise a
Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) payment debt.

Coronavirus Supplement (CVS)

On 27 April 2020, the Government introduced the CVS to provide support
to Australians impacted by the Coronavirus Pandemic. The CVS ceased on
31 March 2021. See Coronavirus Supplement.

CVS debts

Eligibility for the CVS is dependent upon payability for the eligible
supplement ISP including any eligible add-on payments, during the
customers ISP entitlement period.

CVS debts occur when the customer:

-   has a change in circumstances other than a benefit transfer
    backdated, and
-   the person was no longer in receipt of a qualifying income support
    payment

Where a customer transfers from a CVS eligible income support payment
(ISP) to a CVS non-eligible ISP, the customer will receive net arrears,
and any residual excess CVS received is not recoverable. For more
information, see Coronavirus Supplement.

When investigating a CVS debt, if the corresponding income support
payment debt is Finalised No Debt the corresponding Coronavirus
Supplement debt for the same period, should also be Finalised No Debt.

Raise the corresponding income support payment debt prior to the
Coronavirus Supplement being raised.

If the ADEX identifies a CVS debt, however the customer retained some
eligibility for income support payment for the customer entitlement
period, determine if the customer was eligible to receive that CVS
payment.

A debt may occur when CVS is incorrectly paid to an applicant/guardian
for a dependent ABSTUDY customer where a change in care has occurred.
For more information, see Coronavirus Supplement.

Customer transferring to a non-eligible CVS payment

Customers transferring from a CVS eligible payment to a non-eligible CVS
payment after the ICT implementation on 8 August 2020, will get net
arrears. They will get a net arrears if the negative adjustment for
their CVS eligible payment including CVS is lower than the amount
payable for the non-eligible CVS payment.

See Coronavirus Supplement for further information.

The Resources page contains examples, frequently asked answers and
intranet links.

Related links

Statement of Debt

Changing account details on debts raised in the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS)

Explaining and actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS)

Sending Account Payable letters

The order in which income affects payment components when calculating
debts

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results
(AR) screen

Adjusting amounts on a Centrelink payment summary

Coronavirus Supplement

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Debt investigation

Debt identification

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
