
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information on SMS correspondence sent to
customers during Centrelink debt recovery processes.

Principles of SMS use in debt recovery

During Centrelink debt recovery processes, there are 3 types of SMS
messages sent to customers.

-   Confirmation messages – confirming to a customer that an action has
    been completed
-   Service offer messages – help customers be aware of services that
    are available to help them manage repayments
-   Nudge messages – remind customers what actions they should be taking
    and why

As most of these messages encourage customers to take action to repay
the money they owe, customers with certain vulnerabilities will not
receive the messages. See the Resources page for eligibility criteria.

Viewing SMS messages sent to a customer

Services Australia uses several systems to issue SMS messages including
desktop messaging, DMIS and SAP. Some messages are affected by multiple
systems. Depending on the SMS and archiving rules, you can view SMS
messages on:

-   Outbound Correspondence
-   Correspondence History
-   History Summary (HS) screen

For further information on viewing correspondence, see Viewing or
reissuing a letter or electronic message.

Eligibility for multiple debt recovery SMS messages

Debt Recovery nudge messages are typically restricted to one per day.
When a customer is eligible for more than one of the following DMIS SMS
messages on the same day, the following hierarchy is applied to
determine which message is sent:

1.  Immediate SMS Debt Refresh – Pause applied
2.  Declined payment SMS
3.  Overdue payment SMS
4.  Recovery Restarted SMS
5.  Debt Overdue SMS
6.  Recovery will Restart SMS
7.  Withholdings will Restart SMS
8.  Withholdings will Restart SMS (Auto Setup)
9.  Debt due Soon SMS

Based on the above hierarchy, a Recovery Restarted SMS message would
send instead of Debt Overdue, if both were eligible on the same day.

There must be one full day between any two DMIS SMS messages. The
eligibility rules for each SMS message may also include other
restrictions around timing, such as whether a similar message was sent
in the last 7 days.

See the Resources page for more eligibility rules.

The Resources page contains both general and specific eligibility rules
when sending an SMS.

Related links

Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by
disaster events

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Actioning broken voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
