
Six Year Limitation Write off 107-05130030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a debt is eligible for write off under the 6
year limitation rule.

On this Page:

No time limit on debt recovery action

From 1 January 2017, statute barring no longer applies to a debt after 6
years of no recovery action.

This means that debt recovery actions can occur at any time unless: the
debt has been raised before 1 January 2011.

Debt affected by the 6 year limitation rule

Statute barring affects debts raised under:

-   the  Social Security Act 1991  
-   A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
-   Student Assistance Act 1973, and  
-   Paid Parental Leave Act 2010  

PGPA debts are not subject to statute barring. See Recovery of Public
Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA) overpayments.

Criteria

For debts to meet this rule, there must not be any debt recovery action
within a 6 year period, such as:

-   there had not been any payments made toward the debt
-   any Services Australia (the Agency) activities relating to the
    recovery of the debt, or
-   the customer had not acknowledged the debt within a 6 year period

Do not apply the write off if any recovery action occurred within the 6
year period.

The start date of the limitation is when the Agency can reasonably start
recovering the debt. In some cases, the date recorded for raising the
debt may not be the same.

Limitation period extensions

These actions would extend the limitation period for another 6 years:

-   a recovery action, that is any payment, made against any debt
-   the debtor acknowledges that they owe the debt
-   reviewing the file for the purposes of recovering the debt (such as,
    checking the debtor to assess if they are a client of interest (COI)
    for garnishee notices)
-   other Centrelink activity related to recovery of the debt (such as
    trying to locate the debtor)

Voluntary payments

The Agency cannot take action to pursue a statute barred debt, but can
accept voluntary payments from the debtor.

Only consider this if there is a good chance of a repayment to the
Agency.

Manual follow-up activities

From the start date of the limitation period, the system will create
manual follow up activities for:

-   2 years and 6 months
-   5 years and 6 months

This is to prevent debts from becoming statute barred. The debt is
recoverable if the 6 year period ends after 1 January 2017.

Related links

Waiving Centrelink debts

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
