-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff in Compliance and Debt Operations only.

This documents outlines information on processing Manual Follow-up (MFU)
tax activities for Advance recoveries.

Advance payment

When an advance payment is granted, the amount of the advance payment is
added to the basic /taxable component of customer's payment for the year
the advance is paid in. This amount will be reported on a customer's
payment summary.

An advance payment will be recovered from any available component of the
customer's payment. For example, if the customer's rate of payment
reduces to only the rent assistance component, then the advance payment
will be recovered from this.

The system will reduce the amount paid on the amended payment summary
when the advance payment is recovered through deductions from the
customer's ongoing payments, or if an advance payment debt is raised for
the outstanding balance if the customer's payments are cancelled.

Where an advance is granted in one financial year but recovered in the
subsequent year, the advance recovery will reduce the income in the
second year.

For example, customer is granted the advance payment in May 2020 which
is in the 2019/20 financial year but most of the recovery is done in the
2020/21 financial year (after 1 July 2020).

When the recovery occurs from any non-taxable component, this will cause
a negative amount to display on the payment summary. This amount will
need to be added back to the basic payment component on the payment
summary. If the customer is on a taxable payment, this amount will need
to reduce the gross taxable income.

Check the advance payment in the Advance Payment workflow/Manage
Advances tool to determine which Social Security Entitlement payment the
advance was paid from and repayment was made from (in case the customer
has changed payments during the life of the advance).

Advance payments (ADV) debts generating MFU tax activities for a
different financial year

An Advance Payment (ADV) debt may generate a MFU tax activity that
displays a negative amount on the payment summary for a different
financial year. This error is being investigated. See the Process page
for a temporary workaround until the issue has been resolved.

Actioning MFU tax activities

If a MFU tax activity displays on the customer record the payment
summary will not issue.

Correct any negative amount(s) on the MFU tax activity, and issue a
payment summary.

Staff need to have access to the Tax Adjustment Details (TXAJ) screen to
adjust a customer's payment summary. Compliance and Debt Operations
(CADO) will process Advance recovery corrections. See the Resources page
for how to request this access.

The Resources page contains the process to request access to the Tax
Adjustment Details (TXAJ) screen and a link to mySupport.

Related links

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for debt processing

Processing Manual Follow-up (MFU) tax activities for benefit transfers

Quality On Line (QOL)

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payment for non-pension customers

Advances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
