-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Debt staff responsible for
placing garnishees about how to recover debts with a garnishee notice.

Considerations before placing garnishee

Before taking garnishee action, staff must try to negotiate a payment
arrangement.

Garnishee action can proceed if the customer does not respond to contact
attempts, however the customer must have:

-   failed to enter into a reasonable arrangement to pay their debt, or
-   had an arrangement they did not keep, or
-   failed to disclose their true capacity to repay their debt and
    failed to enter a reasonable repayment arrangement

Where a customer refuses to enter into an arrangement, garnishee action
can proceed without any further contact with customer. If the customer
retracts their refusal, negotiations can resume as normal if a garnishee
has not already issued.

Note: tax refunds can be applied to debts even if a garnishee or payment
arrangement is in place. Tax garnishees to recover debts contains
further details.

When a garnishee is not appropriate

Debts raised under the below acts are not to be recovered by garnishee:

-   Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA)
    (under $10,000)
-   Financial Management Administration (FMA) Act

Note: Recovery of PGPA debts over $10,000 can be pursued under Common
Law by the Litigation Team.

The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

The Agency cannot garnish Bank accounts held solely for the purposes of
self-managing NDIS funds. Participants in the scheme do not need to tell
the Agency about this bank account.

Child Support

The Agency cannot garnish Child Support payments. A garnishee would be
contrary to the Child Support Scheme’s purpose, of transferring payments
for the benefit of children.

National Redress Payment

A payment made under the National Redress Scheme is not considered
income for the purposes of the:

-   Social Security Act 1991
-   Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986
-   income tax assessment

Redress payments may be considered as:

-   savings
-   a financial resource, or
-   an asset

The agency can consider a redress payment under the assets test to
determine a social security payment.

National Redress Scheme payments are eternally protected from garnishee
by Section 49(2) of the National Redress Act. Services Australia has no
statutory right to garnishee these payments.

Investigating a garnishee

The customer’s employment details must be known before applying a wage
garnishee. Employment details may be found using:

Employment Income Summary (EANS) screen

Recovery DOCs if the customer has supplied the details

Data matches, including:

-   Single Touch Payroll, and
-   Tax Declaration Forms

Advise the customer of any data matches before taking administrative
action or checking the information with a third party. See  Single Touch
Payroll debt recovery data match or Tax File Number Declaration Form
(TDF) Debtor matching reviews.

For a bank garnishee, the customer’s bank account details must be known.
Customers with debts under $2,500 must have an identified capacity to
repay before sending requests for information (Q608) notices to
financial institutions. APS 5 approval is needed before implementing any
bank garnishee.

APS 5/6 Debt staff will decide and document if garnishee action can
start when:

-   an arrangement is already in place, and
-   the arrangement is not reasonable or not working

Customer offers payment after garnishee notice issued

After issuing a garnishee there is no legal basis for ceasing the
garnishee action. The garnishee must end if a third party is no longer
required to comply with the notice for a period. A new garnishee notice
must issue to restart garnishee action.

If a customer offers a new arrangement, the garnishee should not be
withdrawn unless there are exceptional circumstances. Usually, the only
time a garnishee would be removed for a voluntary arrangement would be
payment in full. In this case, the garnishee must not be withdrawn until
the payment is received.

Staff should review a customer's record at the time a new arrangement is
offered. There have been instances where a customer makes a new
arrangement to avoid other recovery action. For example, a customer
makes a repayment arrangement to avoid a tax garnishee, then does not
make any payments. Staff can refuse to accept a cash instalment
arrangement if this is the case.

Voluntary garnishee

If a customer requests a voluntary garnishee, discuss the option of
arranging cash repayments, including the option for a direct debit.
Voluntary garnishee for debts less than $200 should not be offered or
accepted. This action would cause extra work for employers for amounts
deemed not effective to pursue by garnishee.

If the customer still requests a voluntary garnishee, ask them to
discuss it with their employer or third party.

Debt staff must never advise/suggest/encourage a customer to take out a
reverse mortgage to repay a Centrelink debt - even if the customer
volunteers a reverse mortgage during recovery negotiations.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs)

The Resources page contains:

-   details on recovery action warnings
-   a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk

Contents

Garnishee customer does not agree with decision

Other types of garnishees to recover debts

Recovery for non complying garnishee debtors

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Garnishee of continuing income to recover debts

Actioning non-compliant and broken garnishee recovery payments

Varying or ceasing a garnishee notice to recover debts

Related links

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Recovery of Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997 (FMA)
overpayments

Compensation garnishees to recover debts

Single Touch Payroll Debt Recovery data match

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
