
Recovering other government department (OGD) debts from Centrelink payments 107-05090050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines recovery of debts on behalf of other government
departments (OGD).

Debt recovery on behalf of other government departments (OGD)

Recovery of OGD debts is by withholdings. The only exception is cash
payments for New Zealand Ministry of Social Development (MSD) debts.

The agency that sends the debt to Services Australia needs to answer
questions about:

-   how the debt occurred
-   the debt amount

The customer negotiates the rate of withholdings with Services
Australia.

The debt authority type for New Zealand debts is International Recovery
(INT). Other OGD processing still applies, such as:

-   excluding referrals to an External Collection Agent (ECA)
-   reminder letters
-   automatic waiver and write offs

International Services (CIS) manage recovery of New Zealand debts,
including customer inquiries and liaising with MSD. Staff can process
arrangements with customers repaying New Zealand debt by cash. Customers
can request a payment card if needed. All currency are in Australian
dollars.

Services Australia's responsibility ends when an arrangement ceases.
Recovery continues on debts raised under the Farm Household Support Act.
These debts have standard methods applied under the Social Security Act
1991 to recover them.

Non-standard withholdings on an OGD or INT debt will continue at that
rate on a new debt unless changed.

Debt Management Team protocols and Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Debt Management Branch is the point of contact for DVA staff. For
contact details for the appropriate Debt Recovery Team, see Office
Locator. A link to the Office Locator is available in Resources.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) debts have a Unique Identifier
Number (UIN). The UIN is in the XRN field (under the CRN field) or on
the Reference Numbers (NU) screen. The Addtnl Reference No field must
have the UIN recorded. The UIN contains only numbers.

If there is no UIN, request a CRN/UIN link, by sending an email to
DFISA.helpdesk. The CRN/UIN link sends debt repayment details to the DVA
as they occur. The system creates an MFU If the link fails.

Customers are exempt from interest charge (IC) when receiving a pension
or allowance under the Veterans Entitlements Act 1986. The DVA advises
Services Australia of grants of a DVA payment to a debtor. The date of
effect used to cease accrual of IC is the Veterans entitlement date.

The Resources page contains links to the International Services (CIS)
homepage and Office Locator to search for Debt Recovery Teams.

Related links

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
