-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when an excess or incorrect payment received by a
customer should be finalised 'no debt' (FND). This is because it is not
a debt or it is an excess payment that is not legally recoverable.

Debt creation provisions

A debt is only legally recoverable if it meets one of the creation
provisions from:

-   the Social Security Act 1991, or
-   the Family Assistance (Administration) Act 1999, or
-   another Act administered by Services Australia

The debt creation provisions work together with:

-   the notification rules, and
-   wording of the legislation in the qualification and payment
    provisions

Due to the way the notification rules work, there are cases where there
is:

-   no basis for raising a debt. For example, the agency cannot expect
    customers to advise of an event that might affect their payment, if
    they have not been told they need to. No legally recoverable debt
    may exist, even though an excess payment has occurred
-   a legally recoverable debt. For example, a customer reports a change
    on their reporting day. This results in a rate reduction. The
    payment releases before the change is actioned. An excess payment
    occurs, and a legally recoverable debt exists
-   no legally recoverable debt. For example, the legislation may say to
    pay the customer at a certain rate. A parental income estimate was
    lower than the actual income. The customer gets more than their
    entitlement. There is no legally recoverable debt because the
    payment was calculated correctly at the time

Finalise these cases 'no debt' (FND).

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) and waiving a debt

Determining a debt as FND is different from waiving a debt:

-   an FND determination means that there was no debt, or that the
    excess payment is not legally recoverable
-   waiving a debt means that although there is a legally recoverable
    debt, Services Australia will not recover that debt

FND and the effect on Interest Charge

In instances where the debt status is Determined (DET) and interest has
been charged, the system will not include any interest where a
determination has been made to finalised the debt as 'no debt' (FND).

See Transfers and refunds.

When excess and incorrect payments are not a recoverable debt

A customer may receive an excess or incorrect payment but because of
legislation or policy, it cannot be raised as a recoverable debt. This
includes, excess payments of:

-   Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS)
-   Incentive Allowance
-   Special Benefit (SpB) payments made to minors, where there is no
    correspondence nominee
-   Crisis Payments (CrP) that are not due to the customer falsely
    claiming or that are not paid under an Assurance of Support (AoS)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) where payment is made based upon a parental
    income estimate
-   ABSTUDY where payments are cancelled due to system restrictions

Waiver provisions

An overpayment may be due to a system or administrative error. In these
cases, deciding if a legal debt exists is separate to considering waiver
provisions.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains a list of valid reason codes, including
those for finalising 'no debt' (FND) and a link to Staff Feedback Tool
information

Related links

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Transfers and refunds

Debt investigation

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Adjusting tax details for Bereavement Payments

Restoration of ABSTUDY payments

Online Document Recording (ODR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
