
Waiver of debts resulting from the assessment of lump sum arrears of a reversionary income stream 107-18092721

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document is about when to waive a debt incurred during a
bereavement period from a lump sum arrears reversionary income stream
payment.

Waiver provisions

This is one of several waiver provisions. Test all waiver provisions
relevant to the customer's circumstances. This can be before or after
recovery has commenced. See Non recovery, waiving Centrelink debts.

The legislative instrument Social Security (Waiver of Debts -
Bereavement Period) Specification 2017, effective from 9 May 2018,
allows waiver of a debt where:

-   the assessment of lump sum arrears from a reversionary income
    stream, and
-   it was incurred during the bereavement period for the surviving
    spouse

Do not waive any debt incurred after the 14 week bereavement period. The
legislative instrument is not retrospective. Any debts incurred before 9
May 2018, cannot be waived under class of debt waiver provisions.

Reversionary beneficiary

If a reversionary beneficiary acquires the income stream on the death of
the primary beneficiary, the event date is the date the customer
(reversionary) became eligible to the income stream payment. This can
include:

-   lump sum arrears plus
-   regular ongoing payments

Some income stream providers report this as the commencement date for
the spouse (reversionary).

Lump sum arrears are payable:

-   from day after date of death of primary beneficiary to
-   the date regular payments commence

Assess lump sum arrears as income from an income stream. The event date
will be the day after the date of death of the primary beneficiary
(deceased spouse). Assessing the lump sum in this way applies even
though other income and assets are assessed at the end of the
bereavement review in cases where the customer does not advise the
changes prior to the review.

Debt waiver criteria

The debt is a Social Security Act debt (or relevant part of such a debt)
where the person receives a lump sum payment in arrears that:

-   occurs within a bereavement period or part of that period, and
-   reverted to the person on the death of a primary beneficiary when
    the person and primary beneficiary were a member of a couple, and
-   does not cover a period prior to 9 May 2018, and
-   the debt did not result in any part from the customer knowingly
    providing a false statement or representation to comply with the Act

Application of a recovery fee

A decision to waive a debt or part of a debt that includes the 10%
recovery fee:

-   must have the fee removed, and
-   where appropriate recalculated if only part of the debt is waived

See Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee.

Waiver of fully recovered debt

A finalised fully recovered (FRC) debt requiring a waiver must have the
repayment history adjusted by the Debt Management Branch (DMB) before
the waiver can be coded.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrelink Services,
Delegations and Authorisations Intranet page for the latest delegation
instruments and contact details for the Debt Management Branch.

Related links

Waiving Centrelink debts

Finalised ''no debt'' (FND) or ''zeroing'' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

Actioning an underdetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
