
Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments 107-05100050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Interest Charge (IC) to encourage customers
or organisations to repay their outstanding Centrelink debts in a timely
fashion.

On this Page:

Purpose of the IC

The IC is an incentive for customers or organisations (debtors) to repay
their debt. They must have an outstanding debt and not be making
repayments. IC only applies to debtors:

-   with an outstanding debt
-   with the financial capacity to repay debts
-   who do not enter into or make the agreed payments under an
    acceptable repayment arrangement

Who the IC is applied to

IC can apply to:

-   people who are no longer receiving Centrelink payments
-   third party debtors
-   organisations
-   employers

Note: debtors who are current zero rate (CZR) are eligible for an IC.

IC exemptions

The following people are exempt from the IC:

-   a customer receiving a social security payment
-   a customer receiving instalments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   a customer receiving a veterans' pension or allowance
-   a customer receiving ABSTUDY instalments that includes living
    allowance
-   a customer receiving instalments under the Assistance for Isolated
    Children (AIC) Scheme

Note: exemptions are not available for customers with debts who only
receive child care assistance and/or payments under the Paid Parental
Leave Act 2010.

People on a nil rate of payment are not automatically exempt from IC.
For example, families who defer their FTB payments.

Services Australia can determine not to apply an IC in special
circumstances.

Debts the IC can be applied to

Apply the IC to debts recoverable under the following Acts:

-   A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
-   Paid Parental Leave Act 2010
-   Social Security Act 1991
-   Student Assistance Act 1973

Determined (DET) and Determined with a Collection Agent (DMC) are
eligible for IC. The system applies an IC to the total amount of the DET
or DMC debts.

Components used to calculate the IC include supplements and allowances
paid with the basic rate.

Debts for payments made under different legislation but recoverable
under the above Acts, may be subject to IC. For example, Farm Household
Allowance debts.

Note: the IC does apply to the Recovery Fee.

Debtors no longer receiving a payment who have an outstanding debt

No acceptable recovery arrangement

If the first repayment is not made on the debt due date (day 28), the
system will calculate an IC from day 29.

IC will calculate from day 15 if the debtor does not enter into an
arrangement within 14 days after,

-   a temporary write off ceases
-   a pause of debt ceases, or
-   a withholding arrangement ceases

Acceptable repayment arrangement, but fails to make the first agreed
payment

If a debtor enters into an arrangement with the first agreed payment due
before the debt due date and the payment is not made, the system will
calculate IC from the day after the due date.

Acceptable repayment arrangement, but misses an agreed payment

IC will be applied if a debtor has been making the agreed repayments,
then misses a payment. Interest is charged daily from the day after the
last repayment was due. Interest will cease when:

-   the total debt amount and any calculated interest is paid in full
-   the debtor makes up the missed payment and continues to make agreed
    payments
-   Services Australia agrees to skip the missed payment and the debtor
    continues to make payments
-   the debtor enters into a new recovery arrangement and makes their
    first agreed payment
-   the debtor has a reasonable excuse exemption applied, or
-   the debtor has at least 1 debt temporarily written off or has a
    pause on debt recovery in place

Note: the Debt Management Information System (DMIS) will re-calculate
interest payable where the debt status changes. No manual action
required. DMIS will adjust all records via overnight processing.

Debtors referred to an External Collection Agent (ECA)

External Collection Agents (ECA) inform Services Australia when a debtor
has or has not entered into an acceptable arrangement. Interest is
charged when the ECA advises the debtor or organisation has not entered
into an acceptable arrangement.

Interest is charged for each day the debtor does not have an acceptable
arrangement with the ECA.

The system will use the ECA indicator in the following instances. Where
the customer:

-   is in an acceptable recovery arrangement and no IC is to apply, set
    the indicator to ON
-   is not in an acceptable recovery arrangement and an IC is to apply,
    set the indicator to OFF. Interest applies from the date the
    indicator is set to OFF

What happens to the IC if the debt amount changes?

Interest charged on debts where the debt amount changes will have the IC
auto-adjusted by the system.

Debt amount decreases

When a debt amount has reduced due to a debt amendment, the system will
recalculate the interest from the original debt due date. This includes
any periods where IC has been applied using the new reduced debt
balance.

Debt amount increases

When a debt amount increases due to a debt amendment, the system will
continue to calculate interest on the previous (lower) amount for 28
days. From the 29th day, the IC is calculated on the new amount.

Exclusions to an IC

The IC does not apply to any penalty, fees or charges, including:

-   administration charges
-   judgement interest
-   interest subsidy
-   late payment charges

The debtor is not liable to pay an IC if they:

-   are receiving a social security payment or student assistance
    payment
-   are receiving fortnightly instalments of family assistance payment
    (other than Child Care Subsidy)
-   are receiving a pension or allowance under the Veterans Entitlements
    Act 1986
-   are receiving instalments under the ABSTUDY scheme (also known as
    the Aboriginal Study Assistance Scheme) that includes an amount
    identified as Living Allowance
-   are receiving instalments under the Assistance for Isolated Children
    (AIC) Scheme
-   are excluded based on circumstances determined in a legislative
    instrument
-   have at least 1 debt under review and recovery of their debt has
    been paused
-   are deceased
-   have at least 1 debt temporarily written off, or
-   have a debt that is quarantined

Apply a manual exemption (exclusion) where the customer:

did not receive their Initial Interest Charge letter and can provide
evidence that they moved to another address before the letter was
issued, or

has a reasonable excuse for failing to:

-   enter into an arrangement, or
-   make a payment

Note: an exemption should not be applied if the Account Payable or
Initial Interest Charge letter were issued online.

Interest Charge exclusion periods can be backdated. See Viewing and
updating Interest Charge (IC) via Financial Customer Care in Customer
First

Reasonable excuse exemptions to an IC

The IC will not apply where a debtor:

-   is living in a postcode identified as impacted by a disaster and
    exempt from debt recovery action
-   has received an Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
    (AGDRP) or Ex Gratia payment in the past 6 months
-   has received a Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) payment or Ex
    Gratia Income Support Payment in the past 6 months
-   has received an Australian Victims of Terrorism Overseas Payment
    (AVTOP) in the past 6 months
-   was sent an Initial Interest Charge letter, and the letter was
    returned to sender

The period of the exemption will apply until:

-   the date disaster impacted postcodes are returned to business as
    usual debt recovery (automatic)
-   6 months after the debtor has received an AGDRP, DRA and AVTOP
    payment (automatic)
-   28 days after an Interest Charge warning letter is issued to their
    new address. This is where the letter was noted as not previously
    received (manual)

Special Circumstances waiver

Interest Charge forms part of the debt owed. This means that waiver
provisions relating to debts also apply to the Interest Charge component
of the debt. See Special and unusual circumstances waivers.

Initial Interest Charge Notice (IICN)

Debtors may be subject to IC if they have:

-   a payment status of cancelled (CAN) or rejected (REJ), and
-   are not receiving a fortnightly payment

If a debtor's payments are cancelled or rejected, they will be sent an
IICN where not previously sent.

The IICN advises the debtor:

-   they have 28 days to enter into an acceptable payment arrangement,
    and
-   make the agreed payments under that arrangement

A debtor is subject to an IC and is issued the IICN if all of the
following applies:

-   they have an outstanding debt
-   they are not currently repaying their debt under an acceptable
    payment arrangement
-   they are not excluded from IC
-   they do not have a reasonable excuse exemption from IC; and
-   they are not receiving a fortnightly Centrelink payment

The notice will specify:

-   the date the notice was issued
-   general information about the IC, including how interest will be
    calculated
-   a summary of their IC eligible debt/s, including the outstanding
    amount, debt reason and period
-   the debtor must pay the debt in full or enter into a payment
    arrangement, and make a repayment, within 28 days of the notice
    issue date to avoid IC
-   details on how to make a payment or set up a payment arrangement
    online
-   the payment options available to repay the debt (payment slip)
-   the phone number debtors can call if they are unable to set up an
    arrangement online or if they need to discuss their circumstances
-   The IICN is issued to debtors who had a debt raised before the
    implementation date of 14 April 2018. They will become subject to an
    IC. Debtors who have a debt raised after this date will have
    received the Interest Charge warning within the Account Payable
    letter.

Interest Charge Applied Notice (ICAN)

An ICAN is issued to inform the debtor when the IC has been applied to
their debt.

This notice is sent to debtors who have received an IC warning and have
not repaid their debt or made a payment. The ICAN will specify:

-   the date the notice was issued
-   general information about the IC
-   a summary of their IC debt/s, including the outstanding amount, debt
    reason and period
-   the debtor must either pay the debt in full or enter into a payment
    arrangement, as well as honour the repayment arrangement, to prevent
    further interest being charged
-   details on how to make a payment or set up a payment arrangement
    online
-   the payment options available to repay the debt (payment slip)
-   the phone number debtors can call if they are unable to set up an
    arrangement online or if they need to discuss their circumstances

Child Care Benefit (CCB), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) and Paid Parental Leave (PPL) customers

Debtors who are only receiving CCB, DAP, and/or PPL may be subject to an
IC.

Services Australia cannot recover debts by withholdings from these
payments. These debtors must pay the debt in full or enter into an
arrangement, and honour the arrangement, to avoid an IC.

The Resources page contains a link to the Reserve Bank of Australia
(RBA) statistical tables that include interest rates. It contains a link
to the current General interest charge (GIC) rates from the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO). It also contains a link to the ICT Security
Portal (ISP).

Related links

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debt raising, debt offsetting and recovery

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation debts where estimated or actual
income was used

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) debts for the
2000-2001 income year

Viewing and updating Interest Charge (IC) via Financial Customer Care in
Customer First

Manual Follow-ups (MFU) for family assistance reconciliation recovery

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Delegations of managing debt

Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering
debts

Financial circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Tax garnishees to recover debts

Other types of garnishees to recover debts

Unique recovery actions

Automatic referrals of Centrelink debts to an External Collection Agent
(ECA)

External Collection Agents (ECA)

Recovery of debts via the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Recovering other government department (OGD) debts from Centrelink
payments

Small debt waivers

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Quarantine of Centrelink debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
