
Administrative error waivers 107-05120010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when to waive a debt or the relevant part of a
debt because of administrative error.

Waiving a debt and finalised 'no debt' (FND)

Waiving a debt is different from determining that a debt should be FND:

-   waiving a debt means that although there is a legally recoverable
    debt, Services Australia will not recover that debt
-   an FND determination means that there was no debt, or that the
    excess payment is not legally recoverable

Considering a waiver

This is one debt waiver provision to consider. Test all waiver
provisions that apply to the customer's circumstances.

A decision to waive or not waive a debt can be made:

-   before or after determining the debt
-   before, during or after debt recovery

A debt may be waived partially or in full. A debt can occur at any time
during a payment period. Only part of the debt may be subject to waiver.
For the purpose of waiving some of a debt, administrative error must be
the only cause of that part of the debt.

A debt waiver also applies to the recovery fee and interest charge
applied to the debt.

Waiver due to administrative error

For a waiver to apply, all of the following must apply:

-   the debt was due solely to administrative error
-   the customer received the money in good faith, and
-   the debt is not raised until 6 weeks after the first payment that
    caused the debt

Good faith

Receiving a payment in good faith means the customer did not know or had
no reason to know the payment or the rate was incorrect.

The decision of whether the customer received the payment in good faith
must be based on the customer's state of mind at relevant times, based
on the best evidence available. It is essential that staff consider all
circumstances of a case.

The Process page explains all criteria to consider.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains links to forms and examples.

Related links

Waiving Centrelink debts

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

General 14 day notification provisions

Debt ownership

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
