
Deciding whether a debt was due to fraud for a bankrupt customer 107-05070030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Debt Management Officers (DMO) only.

This document outlines how to determine whether a debt is due to fraud.

On this Page:

Acts covered

This resource refers to all debts raised under the:

-   A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
-   Social Security Act 1991
-   Paid Parental Leave Act 2010
-   Student Assistance Act 1973, and
-   Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA)
    Acts. The PGPA replaced the Financial Management and Accountability
    1997 (FMA) Act from 1 July 2014

Escalation required

Bankruptcy processing DMOs who encounter complex cases should discuss
the best action to take with the Bankruptcy APS5 officer. If needed, the
APS5 will refer to the relevant helpdesk, policy team and/or Legal
Services for guidance.

Debts incurred by means of fraud remain with a customer even if they are
bankrupt. In these cases, a customer is liable to repay the debt in full
after discharge from bankruptcy. The act and intention must be clear
before deciding if a debt was due to fraud.

For fraud to be present, both of the following must exist:

-   a guilty act, and
-   a guilty intention (an act committed with reckless indifference can
    also be fraud)

Civil or criminal test

Bankruptcy is a civil matter. This means the 2 elements only need to
meet the civil test (on the balance of probabilities). This differs from
the criminal test (beyond reasonable doubt).

In a civil test, the person must have acted in a:

-   deliberate, dishonest way, or
-   reckless manner, without any regard for whether their answers were
    true or false

This test of fraud is subjective (what the person knew and set out to do
when claiming the payment). It is not objective (what would a reasonable
person imply was the motivation when claiming a payment).

When Services Australia determines fraud, the material known must
provide a reasonable basis for the decision.

A recovery fee does not necessarily indicate fraud.

Examples of fraud

Examples of fraud may include where the customer has:

-   a prior prosecution for Centrelink debts incurred through fraud
-   made a deliberate false claim
-   multiple identities
-   never advised employment and/or wages

It is not a case of fraud just because a customer has:

-   a partner who failed to declare income, or
-   debts from advance payments

Note: always consider debts due to under declaring income.

For debts incurred prior to bankruptcy, officers decide as delegates to
write off the debt. Before their decision, they should satisfy
themselves of the relevant facts in which the debt arose.

Details on the customer record should make the reasons for the debt and
the person's intention clear. There is no need to obtain the customer's
file. A code or section of an Act used to raise the debt at the time is
not sufficient. This is because it does not indicate whether a debt
meets the definition of fraud. Assess each case individually.

DMOs can seek help from the person or team who raised the debt. This
should only be to obtain facts relevant to the decision. For example,
facts about how the debt arose. The DMO is still the decision maker in
these cases.

Family assistance debts

For most debts, there is not enough evidence of intent to support a case
of fraud. For example Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or FTB
non-lodger debts. For more information, see the Process page.

Reparation and Judgement Orders

Treatment of a debt changes depending on the dates the bankruptcy and
reparation and/or judgement order occurred.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk page.
It also includes examples to help determine fraud cases.

Related links

What to do when a customer is bankrupt

Is a refund of repayments payable to a bankrupt customer?

Effect of bankruptcy on Family Assistance overpayments

What to do with Bankruptcy Act Part IX Debt Arrangements and Bankruptcy
Act Part X Personal Insolvency Agreements (PIAs)

Temporary write off of debts

Permanent write off of debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
