
Reviewing a withholding arrangement for recovering a debt 107-05030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure is under review. Read Operational Message Debt pause for
customers impacted by the COVID-19 lockdowns.

For Debt Staff only.

This document outlines how to review a non-standard withholding
arrangement.

Non-standard arrangements

A customer may ask for reduced withholdings if they are in financial
hardship.

Staff:

-   should help the customer at the first point of contact
-   consider their income and asset details as recorded on the system
-   ask what they can afford
-   apply the above to negotiate a reduced rate

Accept the customer's offer if it meets or exceeds the:

-   family assistance minimum acceptable withholding level (for family
    assistance debts)
-   minimum acceptable withholding level (for all other debts)

Refer payment offers that do not meet the acceptable withholding level
to the Compliance and Debt Operations.

Note: do not disclose the minimum acceptable amounts or periods to
customers.

Withholding 'arrangement end date' reviews

Automatic review of a non-standard arrangement:

-   occurs 21 days before the arrangement end date
-   is based on the customer's circumstances recorded on the system
-   helps to identify customers with a capacity to repay their debt at a
    higher rate. These customers are sent a letter

The arrangement end date is automatically extended by the system for 3
months for customers where:

-   there is no capacity to repay a higher rate - based on income/assets
    at the automatic review
-   they are income managed
-   they get their income support payment on a weekly basis
-   repayment is by third party withholdings
-   it is a group payment
-   payment is made to a payment nominee
-   the customer is or has been in receipt of a disaster recovery
    payment in the last 6 weeks
-   the customer is or has been in receipt of a crisis payment in last 6
    weeks

A Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity will generate three months after a
non-standard withholding rate is coded where

-   the total Customer Reference Number (CRN) balance outstanding is
    equal to or greater than $1,500, and
-   the non-standard withholdings rate is less than $15 per fortnight

After the initial three month review generates, a decision can be made
to extend subsequent non-standard withholding rate reviews from 3 months
to a period not exceeding 12 months.

This depends on the likelihood of a change in the customer's
circumstances. If the withholding amount is within the current
acceptable withholding rates, extend the review date for a further 12
months.

Help the customer at the first point of contact. This could be through:

-   Service Centre
-   Smart Centre, or
-   Compliance and Debt Operations

The withholdings will automatically revert to the standard rate if the
customer does not contact.

Customers who do not have an arrangement end date

The following customers are still eligible to have non-standard
withholdings but are excluded from the arrangement end date review
process.

-   Customers with withholdings from family assistance payments made
    under the New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act
    1999
-   Standard withholding rate for family assistance reconciliation debts
-   A fixed withholding rate for a 'foreign pension data exchange debt'
-   Other government department debts (including New Zealand debts) they
    are repaying
-   Withholdings from Paid Parental Leave

Related links

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Non-standard recovery for debts arising from Foreign Pension Data
Exchange

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Reviewing cash arrangements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
