-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when to permanently write off a debt.

General write off information

For general write off information, see Writing off Centrelink debts,
which includes:

-   things to consider before writing off a debt, and
-   write off definition

Instances where permanent write offs may be appropriate

A permanent write off indicates that even though there is a legal debt,
the debt is irrecoverable at law.

Only apply permanent write off in the following circumstances:

there is insufficient proof of the debt for it to be recovered through
legal proceedings

the debtor is discharged from bankruptcy, and:

-   the debt was incurred before the customer became bankrupt, and
-   was not incurred by means of fraud

the debtor has died leaving no estate or insufficient funds in the
estate to repay the debt, or

recovery action cannot take place because the debt meets the criteria
for 6 year limitation write off

In certain circumstances, Services Australia can reverse a permanent
write off. For example, restarting recovery of a debt if further funds
come from the estate.

Note: this instruction also applies to Income Management Debts.

Some permanently written off family assistance reconciliation debts may
still be subject to recovery by offsetting from family assistance lump
sum payments and/or tax refunds.

Writing off debts in Process Direct

The debt recovery script does not apply to debts managed within Process
Direct. See Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains a table of reason codes and additional
information for permanent write off of a debt and a link to the Level 2
Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Waiving Centrelink debts

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Six Year Limitation Write off

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
