
Investigating a Refund of debt repayments 107-22013100

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines information about investigating a refund of debt
repayments to customers.

Refunding debt repayments

Refund a debt repayment to the customer if the:

-   debt is over recovered and the debt staff member has confirmed the
    amount is not transferable to another debt
-   customer requests a refund of their debt repayment and they are
    experiencing hardship due exceptional and unforeseen circumstances
-   repayment was not correctly applied to the debt, due to an
    administrative error
-   agency identifies a business need and issues a directive to refund a
    repayment

Refund reasons

Over Recovered

If the customer has an over recovered debt, the process will depend on
whether:

-   there are other determined debts
-   there are other pending debts (that is, pending FTB reconciliation)
-   a debt adjustment caused the debt to over recover
-   the debt staff member has the authority to refund the repayment
    source which caused the debt to over recover

Hardship

Sometimes customers have an outstanding debt but are experiencing
hardship. If a customer requests a refund of a repayment, the process
will depend on whether the:

-   customer's hardship is due to exceptional and unforeseen
    circumstances, and
-   the debt staff member has the authority to refund the repayment
    source

This is a re-assessment of the customer's circumstances, not a review of
the decision.

Administrative Error or Business Need

The agency may identify an administrative error or business need
requiring a refund. For example, withholdings are not cancelled when a
write off is coded. Circumstances can vary, before refunding, seek
approval and direction from leadership (APS5 level and above).

Repayments in error

Customer contacts

When a customer contacts to advise they have made a repayment in error,
advise the customer to contact their financial institution to have the
payment reversed. This ensures:

-   the actual payer receives the funds, and
-   the funds are not incorrectly refunded to the customer

The agency cannot reject requests from financial institutions to reverse
certain payments. If the agency has already refunded the money this will
result in debt.

Family Assistance offsetting

Take care with Work Items relating to family assistance offsetting,
including the following repayment sources:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation top-ups and lump sum claim
    entitlements (including FTB supplements)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment arrears
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) entitlements delivered at reconciliation
-   Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation top-ups and lump sum claim
    entitlements
-   Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlements delivered at reconciliation
-   Tax refunds (excluding tax refunds received through garnishee
    action)

Transfer the customer to Families and Parenting if they request a
hardship refund of an offset amount.

Payments to third parties

Do not pay refunds owed to the customer to a third party's bank account,
even if requested by the customer.

If the customer has a current payment nominee, a refund is payable to
that payment nominee's bank account.

If third party withholdings over recovers the customer's debt, a refund
is payable to the same third party using a Notice to prepare a Refund
Account (SF030) form.

Payments to the estate of a deceased customer

A refund is payable to an Estate of a deceased customer using a Notice
to prepare a Refund Account (SF030) form. Exercise sensitivity if
calling an executor or next of kin to confirm payment destination
details.

The Resources page contains contact information for the Debt Programme
and Compensation Recovery (DPCR) and Compliance Programme Branch and
mySupport, examples of Direct debit systems claim request and Direct
debit confirmation letter, links to forms and GL codes.

Related links

Refunding debt repayments

Transfers and refunds

Transferring debt repayments

Adjusting and adding debt repayments

Debt repayments not on the customers' record

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Manual Follow-ups (MFU) for family assistance reconciliation recovery

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) Debts in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
