
Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) processing 107-17060102

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to issue a DAC for a person
with outstanding Centrelink debt.

DAC

The agency issues a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) to prevent a
person with a Centrelink debt from leaving Australia. Where a DPO is in
force, a person can apply to have of a DAC issued.

A DAC allows a person to depart Australia for a defined period, despite
a DPO being in force. A DAC places strict limits on when a person may
depart and return to Australia.

A person with a DAC may be asked by the Australian Federal Police (AFP)
to present it when attempting to depart Australia. Failure to present
the certificate may result in a fine.

A person with a Centrelink issued DAC will be prevented from leaving
Australia if they have:

-   a DPO issued by the Child Support Programme
-   a DPO issued by another government agency or a department, or
-   an outstanding police warrant

Issue a DAC

Consider issuing a DAC when the person makes an application and:

-   they are likely to depart and return to Australia within a specified
    period
-   it is likely that their DPO will be revoked within an appropriate
    time period
-   they have provided appropriate security for their return to
    Australia, or
-   they are unable to provide appropriate security for their return to
    Australia, and the issuing of the DAC is either on humanitarian
    grounds or in Australia's interests

Do not issue a DAC in other situations.

Departure period

A DAC places strict limits on when a person may depart and return
Australia.

The departure date in the DAC must not be more that 7 days in the
future. The person then has 7 days, from the departure date specified in
the DAC to leave Australia.

The person must return by the date specified in the DAC.

Security and return date

When a person requests a DAC they may be required to provide security.
This is to ensure they return to Australia by the specified date. If a
person provides the required security, the DAC must be issued.

If the person does not return to Australia by the agreed date, the
security may be forfeited. The agency cannot apply the security to the
person's outstanding debts.

Note: the preferred option is for the person to use the funds offered as
security to reduce the balance of the debt. This will usually justify
revoking the DPO. The only method of security payment is via a direct
deposit.

Roles and responsibilities

Delegate (EL1 and above)

-   Issue a DAC without security

Delegate (SES Band 2 and above only)

-   Issue a DAC with security, the delegate will also specify the amount
    of the security required

Substitute DAC return date

A person may apply to have the return date specified in their DAC
substituted for a later date. For example, the person could be overseas
and due to unforeseen circumstance cannot return by the agreed return
date.

If a person requests a later return date, the delegate can reject the
application if the reason is inappropriate. The delegate can also
request the person to provide security or additional security before
changing the DAC return date.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and contact details.

Related links

Departure Prohibition Order (DPO)

Issue, vary or revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO)

Review or appeal a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure
Authorisation Certificate (DAC) decision

Activation or retention of a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or
Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
