
Writing off Centrelink debts 107-05130000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on writing off debts.

On this Page:

Write offs definition

A write off of a debt occurs when:

-   a debt is legally recoverable, and
-   Services Australia determines not to pursue the recovery of the debt

A write off can be:

-   Temporary, or
-   Permanent

A write off does not extinguish a debt, further recovery may be pursued
at a later date. Family assistance offsetting may still apply to some
written off debts. See the Resource page for further information.

For details of write-off reason codes, see the Resource page in
Temporary write off of Centrelink Debts and Permanent write off of
Centrelink debts.

As recovery is still expected in the future, the branches performance
report does include the value of the written off debt.

Six Year Limitation Write off

As of 1 January 2017, the former 6 year statute of limitations no longer
applies.

For statue-barred debts raised before 1 January 2011, see Six year
limitation write off.

Writing off debts in Process Direct

The debt recovery script does not apply to debts managed within Process
Direct. See Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

Effects of write offs on debts raised using the informal process

Some customers may have their debt due date extended where:

An informal account payable letter has been sent, and

The debt is temporarily written off before the formal account payable is
sent for one of the following reasons:

-   BRP - Bankruptcy Pending
-   BRT - Bankruptcy Awaiting Estate
-   DIS - Disaster temporary write-off
-   ORA - Outcome of review/Appeal
-   OSA - Overseas Appeal
-   PRI - In Prison
-   STH - Short Term Hardship

And the temporary write off is due to end after the due date on the
informal account payable letter

When this happens, the due date will change to 28 days after the end of
the write off period. The formal account payable letter (with 28 day due
date) will be triggered automatically when the temporary write off ends.
This includes where a write off is ended early.

See Resources for an example.

For information on the informal and formal debt raising process see
Sending Account Payable letters.

Effects of write offs on Interest Charge

A written off debt will not accumulate an interest charge, the debt will
have the status of DWO (Determined- Written Off).

Interest will cease from the date of write off.

Effects of write offs on quarantined debt

Applying write-offs to debts that are quarantined is possible, however
staff should keep in mind:

-   applying a permanent write-off will end a quarantine period and
    replace the status
-   applying a temporary write-off will not impact the Quarantine status
-   temporary write-offs may be end dated while a debt is quarantined
-   excluding an Outcome of Review or Appeal (ORA), all other temporary
    write-offs remain in place until their end date
-   the status of temporarily written-off debts will be Quarantine (QTN)
-   quarantine rules will take precedence over the business as usual
    temporary write-off rules

A debt status will become Determined - Pending Recovery Action (DWO)
when it exits quarantine if:

-   a temporary write-off is present
-   it has not reached its end date, and
-   it has an outstanding balance

See Quarantine of Centrelink debts.

Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA) debts

Cost effectiveness of recovery can be a reason for a decision to write
off a PGPA debt.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains a table that lists which write off code will
not impact offsetting.

Contents

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Six Year Limitation Write off

Related links

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts

Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Recovering debts pending review of decisions

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Waiving Centrelink debts

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
