
Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts 107-05020070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to apply discounting arrangements
when recovering debts.

Discount eligibility

A discount arrangement is an agreement for the customer to pay an
acceptable portion of the debt. A waiver applies to the remaining
balance as 'settlement' for full payment.

A discounted amount assesses the repayment rate and length of time it
will take to clear the debt. The present value is the amount Services
Australia will accept to 'settle' a debt now, rather than maintaining an
ongoing arrangement.

A discount applies to customers who do not have the capacity to pay the
debt in full but can offer to pay an acceptable portion. The customer is
eligible for a discount as an acceptable portion of the debt is better
than a long ongoing arrangement. A discount can apply to any debt
amount.

If a customer does have the capacity to pay their debt in full, they are
not eligible for a discount. The customer must pay in full when they
have the capacity.

If an ongoing payment arrangement will recover the debt/s within 12
months, do not accept a discount arrangement as the customer will not
meet the discount arrangement eligibility.

Do not offer customers a discount. The customer must ask for a discount.

Interest Charge

To ensure that the discount arrangement is calculated based on the
correct debt balance, staff must update the Interest Charge for the debt
before proceeding with the Present Value Calculator and applying the
discount.

Customer First

Workspace > Debt List (located under Financial Customer Care) > Update
Interest

Process Direct

Launch Debt Management icon > Debt Case ID > Update Interest

Present Value Calculator

Staff must use the Present Value Calculator (PVC) to calculate a
discount. The calculator will determine the 'present value' of the debt
by taking into account:

-   the debt amount
-   the repayment rate, and
-   the time it will take the customer to pay the debt under an ongoing
    arrangement

The discounted amount must not reduce the debt balance below the present
value of the debt.

The Resources page has a link to the PVC.

Applying a discount

It is important to code a discount when accepting a part settlement
(discount) for an outstanding debt. A discount waiver cannot apply after
the customer has already made the agreed discounted payment. Coding the
discount:

-   sends a confirmation of Discount Letter to the customer
-   waives the discounted amount the day after the payment due date if
    the customer has paid the agreed discounted amount

If the customer pays the discounted amount in instalments, the system
may not recognise this as the full payment. In these cases, code a
manual waiver.

Family assistance re-reconciliation and discounts

If re-reconciliation occurs after a discount arrangement has been
entered into and the debt amount:

-   decreases, the debt will become over recovered and normal over
    recovered processing will apply
-   increases, a manual follow up will be produced. Debt Staff will
    contact the customer and negotiate a new arrangement. If the
    customer cannot be contacted, the original discount still applies.
    Recovery of the difference between the old and the new debt amount
    continues as normal

External Collection Agent discounts

External Collection Agents (ECAs) follow the same discount process as
Debt Staff. If a customer would like to discuss a discount on a debt
with an ECA, transfer the customer to the ECA.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains intranet links, the Discount confirmation
letter and an example of a discount calculation.

Related links

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Reviewing cash arrangements

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
