
Recalled payments not received by Services Australia 107-04010130

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when a recalled payment is
missing or if there is a payment discrepancy.

On this Page:

Recalled payment is missing or there is a payment discrepancy

The Request for Refund letter sent to the financial institution provides
two options to return the funds:

-   Direct Credit into:
    BSB: 092002
    Account No: 21951-6 (the Centrelink RBA GDES returns account)
    refer to Treasury Helpdesk
-   Bank cheque - processed by the Debt Management Branch (DMB) Finance
    Team

Treasury's role

Treasury reconcile the Government Direct Entry Service (GDES) bank
account on a daily basis. This includes returning the payment/s to the
customer record. Returned payment appear on the Payment Summary (PS)
screen as RTN (Returned).

If the payment is not received, it may be because the payment:

-   has not been returned to Services Australia at all, or
-   was sent by the financial institution without enough details to
    match it to the correct customer record, for example: CRN, payment
    reference

Payment returns to the partner agency normally occur when the CRN is
incomplete or missing. The agency sends a trace request to the Reserve
Bank of Australia (RBA) for further details. Payments which have been
returned appear on a spreadsheet of 'outstanding' payments.

There is a daily sweep of the GDES returns bank account. This ensures
the account has a zero balance at close of business.

Treasury can allocate the funds to the correct customer record in most
cases once RBA provide the:

-   date
-   amount, and/or
-   revised CRN of the missing payment

It is more difficult to locate payments sent with an incorrect (someone
else's) CRN. Investigating these cases is not the role of Treasury.

It is not possible for Treasury to search every payment, on any given
day. There are about 600 to 1000 returns processed to the RBA GDES bank
account daily. This volume of transactions (with minimal details
provided) is too large for Treasury to review. Searching for a specific
return is difficult because payment amounts are often common.

Payments are separated into payment types and environments. As exact
date and payment reference makes searching much easier. For example, a
full payment reference looks like this JR1S1357111222333C - (available
on the customer's record)

-   JR: Benefit type
-   S: Environment
-   1357: Payment number
-   CRN: 111222333C

Note: the first three components above make up the payment reference
number. This is on the right hand side of the screen when selecting (S)
the payment in the customer's record.

Debt Management Branch Finance Team's role

Refer enquiries about payments returned by cheque to the Debt Management
Branch (DMB) Finance Team for follow up.

Confirm the cheque has been banked before referring to the DMB Finance
Team.

DMB Finance Team do not hold cheques for more than 7 days, with most
being banked within 24 hours. Cheques can take longer to reach DMB
Finance Team if not sent to Locked Bag 33. Allow 2 weeks from posting of
the cheque before sending 'missing cheque' enquiries to the DMB Finance
Team. DMB Finance Team respond to any enquiry within two working days.

Contacting financial institutions

Contacting the Commonwealth Bank

Staff can fax letters to the Commonwealth Bank processing services
Sydney to:

-   request returns of direct credit or Real Time Gross Settlement
    (RTGS) payments made to a Commonwealth Bank account
-   recall requests from a deceased customer's Commonwealth Bank account
-   recall requests for direct credit or RTGS payments made to incorrect
    Commonwealth Bank accounts (that is, incorrect customer)

Call the Commonwealth Bank to follow up any requests for refund or
return. The bank staff member will contact their Processing Services for
details to answer these enquiries.

Contacting other financial institutions

Not all financial institutions have centralised teams processing the
Request for Refund/ Deceased Estates. Do not contact the financial
institution by phone.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

CCS request for refunds are completed manually. See Replacing direct
credit New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)
payments at a customer's request.

The Resources page contains links to the Treasure Team intranet page,
Office Locator and the Q999 proforma letter.

Related Links

Requesting refunds from third parties

Requesting the return of a direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment made to an incorrect recipient

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
