
Refunding debt repayments 107-05140030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff undertaking debt recovery only.

This document outlines information about refunding debt repayments to
customers.

Refunding debt repayments

Refund a debt repayment to the customer if the:

-   debt is over recovered and debt staff have confirmed the amount is
    not transferable to another debt
-   customer requests a refund of their debt repayment and they are
    experiencing hardship due to exceptional and unforeseen
    circumstances
-   repayment was not correctly applied to the debt, due to an
    administrative error
-   agency identifies a business need and issues a directive to refund a
    repayment

Note: A refund of FTB instalment arrears, reconciliation or lump sum
amounts used to offset a debt must be approved by the National Families
and Child Care Level 2 Policy Helpdesk. See Table 2 Step 7 in Offsetting
of FTB reconciliation top-ups, supplements and lump sum claim amounts

For more information, see, Investigating debt repayments.

Minimum and maximum dollar limits

Minimum dollar limits apply when issuing a refund. If the customer:

-   contacts, over recovered amounts are payable if they are over $1
-   does not contact within 28 days, amounts below $10 will
    auto-transfer to the agency's Trust Fund. This only occurs if the
    repayment was receipted via ESSentials (received from external
    agencies)

System arrears limits apply when issuing a refund. Payments issued that
exceed the relevant maximum dollar limit are rejected by the system, and
require reissuing via instalments.

Stopping a refund in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

If a refund is incorrectly paid, it is possible to submit a Stop
Customer Payment request to ICT via mySupport. This request must be
submitted on the same day that the refund was paid. It is not a
guarantee and should be rarely used. Consult an APS5 or above for
guidance and approval.

Stopping a Payment to a customer in DMIS

Users will need to access Customer First to send a request to stop a
payment. See DMIS table 3.

Manual process and stopping a refund in Process Direct

From October 2020, over recovered CCS debts will be automatically
refunded to the customer. The Process page has information about:

-   stopping an auto refund
-   processing a manual refund

Recovering a refund incorrectly paid

On occasion, amounts are incorrectly refunded to the customer or a third
party and it is too late to stop the payment.

If an amount is incorrectly refunded to the customer's bank account, the
related debt will increase. Recovery of this amount can continue as
normal and no further action in required.

If an amount is refunded to a third party in error, and the funds are
not returned to Services Australia, a debt may result for the third
party. See Requesting refunds from third parties.

The Resources page contains links to the Notice to prepare a Refund
Account (SF030) form, Payment systems and Exception activities.

Related links

Transfers and refunds

Transferring debt repayments

Adjusting and adding debt repayments

Debt Programme and Compensation Recovery and Compliance Programme Branch
Contacts

Debt repayments not on the customer's record

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Manual Follow-ups (MFU) for Family Assistance reconciliation recovery

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Using the Payment Adjustment (PYAJ) screen

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Investigating a Refund of debt repayments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
