
Sending Account Payable letters 107-04010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details to help prepare and issue Account Payable
letters.

Informal and Formal Account Payable letters

During a declared disaster event, for example COVID-19, the Debt
Management and Information System (DMIS) will automatically apply a
flexible due date to new debts raised with a DIS write off. The decision
regarding the letter to be sent (formal or informal account payable –
see below) is determined by the system.

Informal Account Payable:

also known as a debt decision notice

a formal decision letter, which is a reviewable decision

issued to a customer more than 28 days before the intended due date

the due date is automatically calculated

identified on the Key Dates (OPKD) screen

cannot be issued outside of a debt raising pause period

must meet the following criteria at the time it is raised:

-   the customer resides in a post code that has an active debt raising
    pause, or
-   the debt is not excluded from debt raising pause processing and the
    customer resides in a post code with an active debt raising pause,
    or
-   user has elected to not exclude the debt from debt raising pause
    processing

the flexible due date may change if certain temporary write-offs are
applied prior to the formal account payable letter being sent. See
Writing off Centrelink debts

Formal Account Payable:

meets all legislative requirements for further recovery actions

automatically generated 29 days before the flexible due date, if a debt
pause is not in place

an authorised user may add debt attribute DMNFOR to an undetermined debt
before processing the debt. This enables:

-   informal Account Payable processing to be bypassed, and
-   BAU Formal Account Payable processing to apply

an authorised user may add debt attribute NODMNAWO to the Debtor
Attributes (OPDAT) screen. This enables:

-   BAU recovery processing to be applied to the customer, overriding
    the pause on debt recovery for a customer in a designated disaster
    area as recorded in the RDF table

Account Payable letters - general information

Account Payable letters:

-   are sent to a customer or their estate
-   generate automatically, or
-   manually, when updating the Account Payable (OPAOD) screen
-   use the auto text option in the OPAOD screen, unless the options
    provided are not relevant, and
-   print centrally after close of business each day

There are rules for entering free text on the Account Payable letters.
See the Resources page for more details.

Sending a manual Account Payable letter

Staff must send a manual Account Payable letter when:

-   a deceased customer's debt is recoverable under the Public
    Governance, Performance and Accountability (PGPA) Act 2013
-   a customer has a Carer Payment or Carer Allowance debt and a Carer
    Supplement debt
-   the automatic Account Payable letter has been suppressed

Deceased customers

Make sure 4 weeks has passed since the customer's death before
contacting the executor, either verbally or in writing. Send all debt
notifications to the executor in a single notice that outlines the total
debt balance.

Only disclose information to:

-   the executor named in the will
-   the public trustee
-   a court, or
-   the administrator of the estate

Nominee arrangements and Powers of Attorney cease at the time of death.
They are not an authority to get information about the deceased person.

The will of the deceased person normally identifies executors. If a
person dies without a will, the people below can apply to the Probate
Office of the Supreme Court for letters of administration:

-   spouse
-   partner, or
-   next of kin

Where the executor is known, reasonable effort must be made to contact
them, before issuing a Q080 to explain the debts. See Requesting refunds
and raising debts for deceased customer.

Staff in the Compliance Assurance and Debt Operations Division who
process Registrar-General's Office (RGO) Interventions should:

-   include all outstanding debt details in the Q080 advice for
    executors, and
-   use the approved text provided for these cases

Customer living overseas

Send all debt notifications to the customers' overseas address. Suppress
the auto advices and send an initial Account including statement of
recoverable amount (Q417).

Contents of the Formal Account Payable letter

The Account Payable letter must tell the customer:

-   the issue date (the date of the notice)
-   the reason for the debt, including a brief explanation of the reason
-   the period of the debt
-   the outstanding amount of the debt at the date of the notice.
    Include the 10% Recovery Fee if applicable. This will show the 10%
    Recovery Fee as a separate amount, clearly outlining the Recovery
    Fee has been applied
-   the day on which the outstanding amount is due and payable. This is
    28 days after the date of issue
-   that an interest charge (IC) may apply to the debt in some
    circumstances. See Interest Charge (IC) warning
-   that an IC may apply if the person fails to comply with a payment
    arrangement or it is terminated
-   the contact details for enquiries or requesting a review about the
    debt
-   data matching information, and
-   the consequences should they not pay the debt

The Account Payable also includes a list of payment options for
customers. Including:

-   automatic deductions (that is, direct debit) from a financial
    institution account
-   [] paying online via Centrelink Online account and the Express Plus
    Centrelink mobile app
-   in person at any Australia Post office or postal outlet using a
    barcode
-   using the telephone or Internet (via Australia Post's POSTbillpay
    facility)

The below Acts do not require that a person be specified as the contact:

-   Section 1229 of the Social Security Act 1991, and
-   Section 77 of the Family Assistance Act 1999

However, the letter must have contact details. If a business decision
has determined an approved Services Australia branding is to be used,
this is also acceptable.

Note: the below debts must show the specific debt amount for each
component:

-   Carer Payment/Carer Allowance, and
-   Carer Supplement

For problems with debt letters, contact the appropriate Level 2 Policy
Helpdesk. See the Resources page for a link.

Interest Charge (IC) warning

All automatic formal Account Payable letters include the IC warning.

Include the IC text in the manual Account Payable letter if the customer
is eligible. When raising a new debt for a deceased customer, send a
Q080 advice to executors using the approved text which includes 'We have
determined that interest charge will not be payable in relation to this
debt.'

See Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving
payments.

Contact by telephone

Sometimes it is necessary to call the customer to explain the debt,
before the Account Payable letter is sent. Some examples are:

-   the debt is large and/or where it is not reasonable to assume the
    customer is aware of the debt
-   the customer is vulnerable
-   the debt arose as a result of a death

Consider if the customer needs Social Worker support. The References
page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions (AAI).

The Resources page contains default text for the Account Payable (OPAOD)
screen, free text rules and examples. There are links to examples of
Account Payable letters, Account Payable forms, the Level 2 Policy
helpdesk page, and information about mySupport referrals.

Related links

Safeguarding customer privacy when raising and recovering debts

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) debts for the
2000-2001 income year

Debts arising from Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) stay orders

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Requests for information after someone has died

Managing Recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Payments of arrears after reassessment

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Social work service referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
