
Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results (AR) screen 107-02020030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about negative adjustments resulting
from a reassessment of a customer's entitlement. This includes
explaining, actioning and documenting adjustments. When a Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) entitlement is reassessed, the adjustment (either negative
or positive) cannot be amended.

Service Officer role in explaining a negative adjustment

If a negative adjustment results from a reassessment of the customer
record, it is the responsibility of the Service Officer undertaking the
reassessment to advise the customer of the result.

The Service Officer, having just recorded the change/s leading to the
negative adjustment, is best placed to provide the customer with an
explanation. For assistance in identifying and explaining a negative
adjustment, see the Process page.

Identifying negative adjustments that auto raise on completion of the
activity

A negative adjustment resulting from earnings coded for a past period,
where the duration is one fortnight or less, will automatically raise on
completion of the earnings activity. This occurs regardless of whether
the earnings coding is staff assisted or the customer has provided the
update using online services. These debts can be identified by the:

-   duration of the debt, that is, debt period is from 1-14 days,
    maximum, and
-   debt reason code is IEA – Income Earnings Automatic. The reason code
    is located on the Debt List (OPDL) screen under 'Reason'

Explaining a one fortnight duration earned income (IEA) auto raised debt

This type of debt occurs where the customer has initially under declared
or failed to report their employment income. When income is corrected or
reported, a recalculation of the customer's entitlement identifies a
debt for one entitlement period only. These debts are automatically
raised by the system.

Negative adjustment

Reassessment of a customer's entitlement may lead to:

-   underpayment (positive adjustment), or
-   overpayment (negative adjustment)

An investigation of a negative adjustment can result in:

-   no recoverable debt
-   a recoverable debt raised
-   a recoverable debt raised and partially waived
-   a recoverable debt fully waived

Debts less than $50 are waived automatically. However, the following
debts are excluded and must be investigated:

-   Family Assistance
-   ABSTUDY
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) debts

Identification of debt

Consider:

-   What action generated the debt?
-   Is the debt legally recoverable?

Before making a decision on further action, Service Officers must:

-   check the system to establish payment history
-   determine whether the customer has complied with the notification
    provisions
-   determine whether relevant protocols were followed

Raising a debt

Debts are raised automatically upon finalisation of an earnings or
payment stimulus activity or workflow where the:

-   debt relates to an income support payment that is recoverable under
    the Social Security Act
-   debt period is not greater than 14 days (one fortnight) in duration
-   debt does not include a Student Start Up Scholarship, Relocation
    Scholarship or Carer Supplement Payment, and
-   customer does not have a deceased estate pending, bankruptcy or
    imprisonment debt write off in place

Advise the customer of the debt during the conversation when updating
the earnings. Explain their review and appeal rights. Record details on
a DOC.

Determine if the debt is correct. Consider:

-   the legislative basis for the debt
-   whether there is sufficient evidence to prove a debt exists
-   the cost effectiveness of recovery

Related links

Debt identification

Debt investigation

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Debt raising

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Small debt waivers

Payment of arrears after reassessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
