
Waiving Centrelink debts 107-05120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on when to waive a debt or interest.

Waiving a debt

A debt must be legally recoverable for waivers consideration to take
place. Consider a waiver if:

-   a customer (or their nominee) asks for one, or
-   other factors show that waiver may apply

Test all relevant waiver provisions.

Waive a debt partially or in full. A full or partial debt waiver can
occur at any time during a payment period.

Waiving a debt affects any recovery fee and interest charges applied to
the debt.

Recovery fee

A decision made to waive a debt or part of a debt includes the 10%
recovery fee (if applied).

Where appropriate:

-   remove the fee, or
-   recalculate the fee if only waiving part of the debt

See Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee.

Interest Charge

Apply the same waiver reasons and provisions that currently exist for
debts.

The system will:

-   waive the Interest Charge (IC) component
-   refund the customer where an IC is later waived or adjusted
-   recalculate the interest payable when a debt is waived
-   adjust the record via overnight processing

Under current legislation, IC is a debt. Manage recovery and
over-recovery in the same way as existing over-recovered debts.

For more information, see Transfers and refunds.

Social Worker referral

It may be appropriate to refer a customer to social work services.

Social workers support vulnerable 'at risk' customers. They may have
complex needs and barriers to economic and social participation.
Managing multiple debts can be overwhelming for customers. There is a
greater risk of non-compliance.

When servicing customers who have experienced psychological trauma,
consider the various impacts of the condition on their ability to
comply, including their capacity to attend appointments.

Customers may attend appointments with a support person of their choice.
For example, a relative, friend or an advocate from a disability, mental
health or community organisation.

For more information, see Social workers role in Payments and Integrity.

Contents

Administrative error waivers

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

Reversal of waivers

Small debt waivers

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Waiver of debts resulting from the assessment of lump sum arrears of a
reversionary income stream

Manually waiving family assistance reconciliation debts where there is
no Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity

Related links

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts

Bankruptcy for Centrelink debts

Writing off Centrelink debts

Recovering other government department (OGD) debts from Centrelink
payments

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Non-standard recovery for debts arising from Foreign Pension Data
Exchange

Social work services

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
