-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on raising and recovering debts for
advances.

Recovery of advance payments

Customers can receive advances of their payment under the provisions of
the:

-   Social Security Act 1991 (SSA)
-   the ABSTUDY Policy Manual
-   the Family Assistance (Administration) Act 1999

The advances are recovered through deductions from the customer's
ongoing payments. A debt is raised for the balance owing where it is not
appropriate to recover the money this way.

This procedure does not apply to advance payments for the Home Equity
Access Scheme. See Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans.

Recovery of advance payments when entitlement changes

If a customer transfers from one Social Security Entitlement to another
(for example, from JobSeeker Payment (JSP) to Age Pension), the advance
payment balance transfers to the new payment. Recovery will continue, as
both are Social Security Entitlement payments.

Advance debts are usually raised automatically 21 days after the date of
the event where the customer:

-   transfers from one type of payment to another, which is not a Social
    Security Entitlement payment. The outstanding advance balance
    becomes a debt. For example, customer transfers from Parenting
    Payment (PP) to Farm Household Allowance (FHA). As FHA is not a
    Social Security Entitlement, the amount owing on the PP advance
    balance becomes a debt
-   transfers from one Social Security Entitlement payment to another,
    however the new payment is not granted within 21 days of
    cancellation of the original payment
-   is no longer entitled to any payments
-   has an FTB advance and their rate of FTB Part A does not recover the
    advance quickly enough

Manually raising advance payment debts

Raise a manual advance debt where the customer:

-   transfers to an Income Support Payment and the correct ABSTUDY
    cancellation procedure is not followed
-   has an FTB advance and their rate of FTB Part A does not allow
    recovery of the advance quickly enough

Raising these debts manually is at the discretion of the Service
Officer. A number of factors must be considered before manually raising
an advance debt.

Deceased customers

Recording a customer's death will automatically raise a debt for any
advance payment still outstanding. The system does not issue an
automatic advice. The debt raiser must send a manual advice to the
deceased customer's estate.

The Resources page contains the formula for calculating a Mobility
Allowance (MOB) Advance payment debt.

Related links

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Advance payment for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advances

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
