
Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer 107-04010110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to request a refund of excess payments paid
to a customer, who has passed away and when a debt should be raised.

Disclosure of information

Only disclose information to:

-   the executor named in the will
-   the Public Trustee
-   a court, or
-   administrator of the estate

Nominee arrangements and Powers of Attorney will cease at the time of
the customer's death. Do not give a former nominee or Power of Attorney
information about the deceased person.

The will of the deceased person will normally identify executors. If a
person dies without a will, certain people can apply to the Probate
Office of the Supreme Court for letters of administration:

-   the customer's spouse
-   the customer's partner, or
-   their next of kin

Recovering payments

Do not make contact with the executor by telephone or in writing until 4
weeks have passed since the date of the customer's death. Try to include
all debt related notifications in one single notice to the executor.

A payment may have been made:

-   by direct credit to a customer's preferred financial institution
-   by cheque, or
-   to a group organisation

Determine the most appropriate action for payments made to the customer
after their death. See the Process page.

Note: if a number of payments are recalled on the same day, the system
will issue a consolidated request to the financial institution. The
legislation states the financial institution must comply with a request
for refund even when the account is in more than one name. Deductions
may occur before the financial institution can process the refund. This
may impact on the refund amount.

Deductions may include:

-   payments to a third party organisation (TPO) via Centrepay
-   group payments to organisations
-   urgent payment deductions
-   advance repayments
-   debt repayments (including withholdings from other Centrelink
    payments)
-   child support payments
-   tax deductions
-   participation failure deductions

If Services Australia does not receive the full amount back from the
financial institution, raise the remaining outstanding amount as a debt
against the estate.

To cancel cheques, see the Cash Management and Reporting Services team
homepage. See Resources page for the link.

Raising debts

Do not contact the executor within 4 weeks of the customer's date of
death.

If the customer has other outstanding debts and a payment paid after
death, send a Q080 (Advice of Account) to the executor with the total
amount.

Include any interest in the total amount. The system will exclude
interest from the date of death, once the death action is complete.

Contact from executor or third party

An executor or third party may contact to:

-   advise of a customer's death, or
-   request information relating to the deceased customer

Do not provide a third party with information, including whether or not
the deceased person was a customer, unless:

-   the death and executor details have been confirmed, and
-   they have provided sufficient evidence of their authority

See Confirmation of the death of an adult or child and Requests for
information after someone has died.

Staff must exercise sensitivity when discussing a deceased customer's
debt with an executor or third party.

If the:

-   deceased customer identified as Indigenous, see Cultural
    considerations when someone dies and Indigenous naming conventions
-   executor or third party is in emotional distress and needs support,
    consider a referral to a Social Worker

Withdrawal of funds made after death

When funds are paid to a customer after their death, and are withdrawn
from the account before the payment/s can be recalled, raise all debts
against the estate.

The Administrator/Executor of the estate is responsible for pursuing a
case against:

-   unauthorised withdrawals from the bank account
-   joint account holder or Executor withdrawals
-   any person convicted, or facing conviction, under criminal law

Cashless Debit Card participants

If the deceased customer had payments into a Cashless Debit Card (CDC),
see Ending Cashless Debit Card (CDC) participation.

Excessive recalls

If the review requires more than 26 recall activities, issue a Q463
letter to the financial institution.

The appropriate Compliance and Debt Operations Finance Team must record
the cheque information on the customer's file. This makes sure the
returned funds are correctly processed.

The Resources page contains:

-   procedural information for the Commonwealth Bank
-   a link to the Cash Management and Reporting Services Team homepage
    for information on cancelling cheques
-   a link to contact details for the Income Management Payments and
    Contact Team (IMPACT)
-   an example text for a Q999 letter to request a refund of Assistance
    for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments.

Payments made to previous nominees or an incorrect third party

Nominee arrangements cease on the date of death of the customer.
Payments made to former payment nominees after a customer’s date of
death should be actioned as an incorrect payment to a third party.

For incorrect payments made to a third party, see Requesting refunds
from third parties.

Related links

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment or Partner Bereavement Payment delivery

28 day rule for bereavement

General debt management information

Debt raising

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Sending Account Payable letters

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments returned from financial institution

Reissuing a group payment paid to an organisation in error

Requesting the return of a direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payment made to an incorrect recipient

Refunding debt repayments

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Death of one member of a pensioner couple

Death of a single pensioner

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
