
Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of income 107-05100040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about the application of a 10%
Recovery Fee. This applies for debts of working age payments.

Recovery Fee

Customers in receipt of a working age payment, who incur a debt due to
income from personal exertion, may have a Recovery Fee applied if they:

-   refused or failed to provide information about their income from
    personal exertion, or
-   knowingly provided false or misleading information about their
    income from personal exertion, when required to do so under Social
    Security Guide, see the References page

Debts with the following reason codes can have the Recovery Fee applied:

-   IES - Own earnings undeclared/coded
-   ISI - Own earnings wrongly declared/coded
-   UCE - Undeclared cash earnings (customer's portion only)
-   ISA - Own earnings incorrectly declared (OCI) (auto)
-   ICA - Income combined (OCI) (auto) (customer's portion only)

The Recovery Fee:

-   must be separate from the decision to raise the debt
-   must be considered at the time the debt is raised
-   is part of the debt and recovered under the same provisions
-   cannot be applied after the debt has been raised
-   cannot be applied without contacting the customer
-   appears separately on the Account Payable

Different rules apply for debts identified from an online compliance
intervention.

The Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) will automatically
calculate the amount of the fee.

Evidence for Recovery Fee

Do not apply a Recovery Fee if the customer:

-   has reasonable evidence supporting why they under-declared income
    from personal exertion
-   has a reasonable excuse for failing or refusing to provide
    information, or
-   can show their incorrect declaration of income was not made
    knowingly or recklessly

A customer may have already provided enough evidence to decide the fee
should not apply. If this is the case, no further contact is needed.

Waivers and reviews

Waiver may be more appropriate than recovery. The Recovery fee only
applies to debts to be recovered, including debts temporarily written
off.

Normal review and appeal processes apply to the application of the
Recovery fee. The Recovery fee may be set aside even if the debt
decision is affirmed. If a debt is set aside after a review, the
Recovery fee is set aside as well.

The application of the fee does not affect the payment summary or tax
adjustments.

Contact requirements

Where a potential debt is identified for non-declaration or
under-declaration of income, a letter is sent. The letter asks for
confirmation of their employment income online within 28 days. The
Recovery Fee:

-   is applied if a debt arises
-   is not applied if the customer provides a reasonable excuse for
    refusing or failing to provide the information

The Recovery fee is not applied, until the person has been contacted.

Partners and joint income

The Recovery Fee will not apply to partner income even if the partner
income is incorrectly declared or not declared.

If members of a couple have partner (joint) income above the income free
area, the fee will be calculated for the part of the debt that occurred
because the person incorrectly declared their income from their own
personal exertion.

Recovery Fee for online compliance interventions

The application of the Recovery Fee for the online compliance
intervention process is determined by the customer's engagement in the
intervention process. See Process page, Table 2.

Services Australia will notify the customer in writing of the decision
to apply the 10% Recovery Fee in the Account Payable Notice. If
applicable, the online compliance intervention Outcome letter is sent.

See Resources page for:

-   examples of when the Recovery Fee should and should not be applied
-   Recovery Fee codes to be used
-   a list of all affected payments
-   Recovery Fee codes used in the DOC created by the Debt Action Script
-   examples of when a Recovery Fee should and should not be applied for
    online compliance interventions
-   the table of codes not available to the public

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAIs).

Related links

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Waiving Centrelink debts

Small debt waivers

Suspension of payments (CLK)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Sending Account Payable letters

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
