
Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts 107-05020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure is under review. Read Operational Message Debt pause for
customers impacted by the COVID-19 lockdowns.

This document outlines assistance on how to negotiate a withholdings
arrangement to recover debts.

Non Debt Staff

Use the Debt Repayment guided procedure at the first point of customer
contact for all debt repayment enquiries for current customers.

Do not ask the customer for financial information. Debt staff will
discuss this with the customer when it is needed.

Withholdings

Withholdings are deductions taken from a customer's payment to repay a
debt. See Withholdings for details about:

-   Standard and non-standard withholdings
-   Withholdings arrangement end date reviews
-   Third party withholdings
-   Withholdings letters
-   Family assistance non-reconciliation withholding
-   Parental Leave Pay withholdings
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

Cash payments

Do not stop withholdings if a customer starts making cash payments. This
makes sure payments will continue if the cash payments stop.

Current Zero Rate (CZR) customers

Withholdings do not apply to CZR customers. Use cash recovery guidelines
to negotiate repayments.

Withholdings from arrears

Pension bonus payments and arrears can be withheld to recover a debt.
This is possible when the debt to be repaid:

-   was raised at least 28 days in the past, and
-   is due and payable

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) arrears can be withheld to offset a PPL or
income support overpayment. See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debt raising,
debt offsetting and recovery.

Determining when non-standard withholdings will commence

If non-standard withholding arrangement coding is completed after the
customer's Entitlement Period End Day code on the Entitlement Delivery
(RAD) screen, the new withholding arrangement will not take effect until
the following payment. 'S'elect the next payment from the Payment
Summary (PS) screen. This will show. if the new withholding arrangement
will apply to the next payment.

If 'THIS IS THE NEXT PAYMENT AND CANNOT BE ALTERED' is displayed on the
Payment Delivery (PD) screen, the new withholding arrangement will take
effect on the following payment.

Refund of withholdings

If a customer has requested a withholdings refund, refer the customer to
Compliance and Debt Operations (CDO).

If the customer requests a refund after debt offsetting has occurred
from FTB reconciliation top-up, supplement lump sum claim amounts, and
instalment arrears, see Debt offsetting during family assistance
reconciliation and lump sum claim processing.

Customers who do not have an arrangement end date

The following customers are still eligible to have non-standard
withholdings but are excluded from the arrangement end date review
process.

-   Customers with withholdings from family assistance payments made
    under the New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act
    1999
-   Standard withholding rate for family assistance reconciliation debts
-   A fixed withholding rate for a 'foreign pension data exchange debt'
-   Other government department debts (including New Zealand debts) they
    are repaying
-   Withholdings from Paid Parental Leave

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority Instructions
(AAI).

The Resources page contains a links on the Services Australia website
and Intranet. It also has the Withholdings Table which shows which types
of debts can be recovered by withholdings from the various payment
types.

Related links

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Standard withholdings for debt recovery

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Money you owe option online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
