
General Centrelink debt recovery information 107-05010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to answer general debt recovery enquiries
from customers and other staff.

Debt repayment enquiries

Resolve customer calls at the first point of contact without the need
for an ACTDOC or Callback DOC.

Use the Debt Repayment guided procedure for all debt repayment enquiries
to ensure correct process is followed.

Debt recovery staff must use the Debt Recovery script when actioning a
debt.

Note: help current customers at the first point of contact. Only refer
to Compliance and Debt Operations when:

-   the customer's offer does not meet the acceptable withholding level,
    or
-   the guided procedure prompts the call

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia 'Phone us'
information page.

Change in address notification

Customers must advise of any change in address within 14 days. This
applies while there is a debt, whether they are receiving a payment or
not.

Failure to provide address or financial information (if requested) is an
offence with a potential penalty. The References page contains:

-   links to the relevant legislative Acts for the collection of address
    information, and
-   the penalties for non-compliance

Reason for debt

Advise the customer how the debt occurred when there is contact about a
debt calculation or the recovery fee. The details are on the customer's
record on the:

-   Debt List (OPDL) screen, and
-   Account Payable (OPAOD) screen

Debts raised due to a known system error may be temporarily written off.
This is only if the details of the system problem or issue is in
Operational Messaging within the Operational Blueprint.

Payment of debt

Payment of a debt is due 28 days after the issue of the account payable
letter. Payment options display at the bottom of the debt advice and
include.

-   direct debit
-   BPAY®
-   Post Billpay
-   Money You Owe options online (this option should be promoted by all
    staff to support customers to be able to self-manage their debt
    repayment)

The customer can use the biller code information listed below.

Services Australia ABN is 29 468 422 437

BPAY® Biller Codes for repayment:

-   For general Centrelink debts - 21915
-   For employers repaying a Paid Parental Leave debt - 303867
-   For compensation payers or insurers repaying a Centrelink
    compensation charge - 184432

Australia Post's Post Billpay code is 0802

The agency can apply other recovery action unless the customer enters
into an approved payment arrangement.

The Debt Management Finance Team is responsible for customers and third
parties making payments by cheque.

Non-current and zero rate CZR customers

Refer all repayment enquiries for non-current and CZR customers to the:

-   Money You Owe option online to set up a repayment arrangement, or
-   Compliance and Debt Operations (CDO)

Customers can ask for an explanation of the debt or dispute the amount
of interest charge applied.

Current customers - standard withholdings

Withholdings automatically apply to current customers if they have not:

-   repaid their debt in full by the due date, or
-   contacted Services Australia to arrange another withholding amount

Standard withholdings apply the day after the debt becomes due (due
date + 1 day). The customer record will display as 'no active
arrangements' until this date.

The standard withholding rate depends on the customer’s payment type,
payment amount, debt type and taxable income. View the withholding
amounts for future payments from the Payment Summary (PS) screen. See
Standard withholdings for debt recovery.

Deductions from payments hierarchy and debt repayment hierarchy

The Process page has the order of deductions from a customer's payment.
These include withholdings, cash, tax garnishee.

The Resources page contains links to contact details and Office Locator.
There are Services Australia website links on owing money and how to
deal with debt. There is also a link to the Symantec PGP user guide.

Contents

Recovering debts pending review of decisions

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Recovering debts from a deceased customer's estate

Civil procedures to recover Centrelink debts

Financial circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Negotiation of debt repayments with customers

Tax File Number Declaration Form (TDF) Debtor matching reviews

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering
debts

Quarantine of Centrelink debts

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Single Touch Payroll debt recovery data match

Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by
disaster events

Related links

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Recovering debts pending review of decisions

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Requests lodged under the Freedom of Information Act 1982

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Advances

Sending Account Payable letters

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
