
Review or appeal a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) decision 107-17060106

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the review and appeals process for a Departure
Prohibition Order (DPO) or Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC)
issued to a person with outstanding Centrelink debt.

On this Page:

Departure Prohibition Orders (DPO)

A Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) is issued to prevent a customer with
a Centrelink debt from leaving Australia. Review and appeals for DPO
decisions have different rules and legislation to other types of
decisions made in the agency.

Decisions related to a DPO are not subject to the normal internal review
process. The decision must be explained to the customer. If the person
disagrees with the decision following the explanation, advise the
person:

The decision to make a DPO can only be appealed to the Federal Court of
Australia or Federal Circuit Court of Australia. A single judge will
hear the case. The court can only consider if the DPO has been properly
made. It can:

-   set aside the DPO, or
-   dismiss the appeal

A decisions to revoke or vary a DPO can only be the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC)

A DAC allows a person with a DPO to depart and return to Australia
within a specified period. Security may be required before issuing a
DAC.

All Decisions relating to a DAC and the corresponding security may be
appealed to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Reconsidering a decision

A DPO can be revoked if the criteria has been met.

A decision to reject a DAC application can be reviewed by a DPO Officer
if new evidence supporting the travel request has been provided.

The Resources page contains links to the Federal Court of Australia and
Federal Circuit Court of Australia websites and contact details for the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) and Debt Management Departure
Prohibition Order (DPO) Team.

Related links

Departure Prohibition Orders (DPO) for Centrelink customers

Issue, vary or revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO)

Revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO)

Activation or retention of a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) or
Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC)

Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC) processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
