-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines raising and recovering debts for overpayments of
Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

Refunds from third parties

Services Australia (the agency) may also request refunds from third
parties who have incorrectly received an amount of PPL.

Secondary claimants

The agency may deduct money from a secondary claimant's PPL claim for a
child born or adopted before 1 July 2023, to repay a debt owed by the
primary claimant. This must be for the same child and the secondary
claimant must consent in writing.

Employer responsibility

If an employer was paying PPL to a customer, they are responsible for
advising where the excess funds are. This ensures the agency raises the
debt against the person who received the money. The employer will do
this by completing a Q318. This employer can only supply this
information in writing.

Processing teams

Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Teams (PPLEPT):

-   identify and issue the Q318 letters to employers
-   apportion amounts between employer and employee debts

Debt Staff:

-   raise employee debts
-   recover debts via current procedures

Employer debts

PPL employers/organisations can make payments by electronic funds
transfer. The facility is only to be utilised for PPL employers as a
last resort. For more information, see Garnishee of continuing income to
recover debts.

Offsetting process

The system will offset PPL arrears if a reassessment or PPL grant
activity results in both the payment of PPL arrears and an overpayment.
The offset will occur so the agency does not issue a payment and raise a
debt on the same day.

Offsetting will apply to overpayment of:

-   PPL, or
-   Income Support Payment (ISP), where the overpayment occurred due to
    customer receiving PPL for the same period

If PPL arrears offsetting can apply to an ISP debt, do not waive the ISP
debt under the small debt waiver provision.

Partial or full PPL offset amounts can be refunded if there are
exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances which may cause the customer
to suffer severe financial hardship.

Interest Charge (IC) effects on PPL

IC applies to:

-   PPL debts with the status of Determined (DET) and Determined with a
    Collection Agent (DMC)
-   former Centrelink customers, no longer receiving Centrelink
    payments, or
-   employers who are not in an acceptable payment arrangement

Apply IC following successful contact or confirmation the customer has
engaged with the Agency regarding their debt.

Customers who only receive PPL are a current Centrelink customer. IC
applies unless there is an exclusion. See Interest Charge (IC) for
Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments.

PPL withholding

The standard withholding amount for PPL is 100%.A PPL withholding
arrangement is broken if the customer does not receive PPL over 28 days.
If the customer receives PPL more than 28 days after their last PPL, the
withholding will not restart. The customer must make a new arrangement.

See Standard withholdings for debt recovery.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Helpdesk Online Policy
Query Referral.

Related links

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) debts between employers and employees

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Standard withholdings for debt recovery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
