-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a number of procedures for raising Centrelink
debts that are common to all payment types.

Raising Centrelink debts

Staff should:

-   raise a recoverable debt as quickly as possible
-   inform the customer of the debt as soon as it happens
-   process debts correctly to avoid Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities

Access requirements to action debt activities

Debt staff have the required system access to perform debt related
functions, such as running the Debt Script.

Non-debt staff required to perform a debt related action need the
appropriate security access. See the Resources page for details.

After hours debt calls to customers

Outbound customer contact may occur outside of Monday to Friday 8:00am
to 5:00pm. Permitted outbound contact hours are Monday to Friday 8:00am
to 8:00pm local time where the customer lives.

If a customer asks why they are being contacted after hours, staff
should explain that they have tried to find the best time to discuss the
debt with the customer.

Debt staff are to record all customer contacts on a DOC.

Customer service delivery staff

If a customer asks about an after hours call:

-   read the Customer Overview screen
-   confirm if the contact was legitimate

Process Direct

See Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct.

Customer record updates not generating debt shells

If a user makes an update that should be generating a debt shell, but
the system does not create one, see Create a new debt record manually on
the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS).

The Resources page contains information about tax adjustment and common
tax adjustment errors.

Contents

Statement of Debt

Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) debts

Raising and attribution of Service Update debts

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Requesting refunds from third parties

Changing account details on debts raised in the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS)

Explaining and actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and
Information System (DMIS)

Sending Account Payable letters

The order in which income affects payment components when calculating
debts

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

Actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results (AR) screen

Adjusting amounts on a payment summary

Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) debts

Debt Raising and Recovery for customers in locations affected by
disaster events

Debt raising support for customers

Related links

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Debt investigation

Debt identification

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Raising ISP debts for customers granted PPL and DAP

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
