
Using the correct date of effect when raising debts 107-03010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about using the correct date of
effect (DOE) when identifying and raising debts under Social Security
Law, Family Assistance Law and the Student Assistance Act.

Potential debts

A potential debt exists when a determination:

-   reduces
-   cancels, or
-   suspends a payment

A debt exists where:

-   the date of effect (DOE) of a determination is earlier than the
    date-paid-to, and
-   the payment made was more than the new rate

Unfavourable decisions

Consider the date of effect when making a decision following an event or
change in a customer's circumstances.

Record the reason for a determination taking effect from a date before
the date of decision. A significant decision must be based on relevant
facts, evidence and supporting legislation. Record the decision as per
the Online Document Recording (ODR) standards.

Social Security Act customers

These customers fall into two categories:

-   Statement reporters - Payments are not issued if the customer fails
    to report on their required reporting day. They must report any
    changes before or on their reporting date (EPED)
-   Notification reporters - Must report changes in their circumstances
    within a certain time period, usually 14 days. A notification
    reporter's payments are made regularly and the customer does not
    have to report to receive their payment

The notification period commences on the day after the event. The end
date is deferred to the next working day if the end date is a weekend or
public holiday. Customers have 28 days to report:

-   when overseas
-   bereavement events

Check the customer's notification period by reading the last customer
advice before the event that created the debt.

Under the Student Assistance Act 1973, ABSTUDY customers must advise of
a change in circumstances within 14 days of the event.

The date of effect (DOE) of an unfavourable determination depends on:

-   whether the customer is a notification reporter or a statement
    reporter
-   the date of event (DOV) of the change in circumstances
-   the date of receipt (DOR) of the change
-   the date the change is actioned, and
-   whether Working Credit rules apply

See the References page for Detailed summary of DOE rules.

Incarcerated customer debts

The Date of Event (DOV) for incarcerated customers is the date the
customer's social security payment is no longer payable. That is, the
day after the incarceration of the customer.

NOHL rule 99 applies because of manual coding on the Benefit Action (BA)
screen. To determine the correct debt period consider notification
provisions before raising the debt.

Automatic cancellation provisions apply where the gaol:

-   is not acting on behalf of the customer, and
-   notifies Services Australia of the incarceration before the customer
    complies with their own notification requirements

This means the social security payment ceases to be payable from the
DOV.

See Notification Handler (NOHL) for more information about the
notification and DOE variations for unfavourable decisions.

The Resources page contains an example of an incorrect debt raised for a
notification reporter.

Related links

Notification provisions (CLK)

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Pension income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Using the Review of Assessment (ROA) screen

Reporting requirements for pensioners of Age Pension age who have
employment income

Storing documents

Notification Handler (NOHL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
