
Negotiation of debt repayments with customers 107-05010100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the stages for negotiating debt repayments with
customers and the key points to consider.

On this Page:

Points to consider

-   The phone is the primary contact method
-   Negotiate the debt as soon as possible after it is raised
-   Negotiate to achieve the best repayment method
-   The preference is payment in full by the due date
-   Only send content letter after genuine attempts at contact by phone
    have failed
-   Send a letter to confirm negotiations

The system will offset debts using tax refunds or lump sum family
assistance payments if the debt is:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB), or
-   Child Care debt

FTB top-ups, lump sum payments or FTB Instalment arrears may also be
used to offset Social Security, Student Assistance or Paid Parental
Leave debts. This can occur even if there is a current repayment
arrangement in place. For more information, see Debt offsetting during
family assistance reassessment, reconciliation and claim processing.

Note: DMOs must not encourage or suggest the customer take out a loan to
pay the debt.

Follow quality customer service standards.

Change of address notification

DMOs should advise customers they have a legal obligation to notify
within 14 days of any change of address. This is while a debt is still
owing regardless of whether they are current on a payment or not.
Failure to provide an address or financial information (if requested) is
an offence with a penalty.

The References page contains a link to the relevant section of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999.

Debt repayment via Self Service

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release Icons\32w\icon-phone.png] Customers can
set up a payment arrangement within the Money You Owe option online. We
will accept arrangements where the debt is:

-   less than $5,000 and paid within 12 months
-   between $5,000 and $10,000 and paid within 24 months
-   $10,000 or more and paid within 12 months

Related links

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Outbound customer contact and gathering information when recovering
debts

Financial circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Third party withholdings for debt recovery

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Discounting arrangements for recovery of debts

Withholdings

Reviewing cash arrangements

Reviewing a withholding arrangement for recovering a debt

Updating payment arrangement schedule

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
