-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when new and partially recovered small debts are
waived.

Cost effective debt recovery

Provisions to waive small debts under $200 are contained within the:

-   Social Security Act 1991
-   Family Assistance (Administration) Act 1999, and
-   Paid Parental Leave Act 2010

These provisions allow delegated staff to waive small debts where it is
not cost effective to pursue recovery.

Debts raised under the Student Assistance Act 1973 are limited to a
waiver amount of $50. This applies to the following debt types:

-   ABSTUDY
-   ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme
-   Financial Supplement Loan (FSL) for ABSTUDY or ABSTUDY PES students

Raise debts over $50 unless other waiver provisions are applicable.

When determining if it is cost effective to pursue recovery of the debt,
staff should consider the:

-   likelihood of recovering the debt, either via withholdings or an
    existing payment arrangement
-   value of all outstanding debts on the record
-   cost of staff calculating, raising and explaining the debt, and
-   cost of sending account payable letters and subsequent contact
    attempts to recover the debt

Advance payments

A customer cannot receive an Advance payment while owing a debt to the
Commonwealth. If a customer requests an advance and a small amount is
still outstanding staff do not waive the balance:

-   the debt cannot be legally waived
-   the customer can pay the remainder of the debt to allow approval of
    the new advance

Automatic small debt waivers

The system may automatically waive small debts for certain payment
types. Debts that require further investigation or actions will require
manual action. For example, see Cancellation of Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) and ABSTUDY PES. Generally for the system to waive a
small debt, the debt will need to meet the following criteria:

-   a reassessment produces a 'negative adjustment' on the Assessment
    Results (AR) screen
-   the debt is not for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), and
-   the amount is under $50

The system may also waive a small debt if:

-   a customer's payment is cancelled and they have received an advance.
    The amount outstanding is under $50. The amount will be auto waived
    (any amount $50 and over will be automatically raised)
-   after FTB reconciliation occurs, any debt confirmed to be under $50
    is automatically waived. Manually action small FTB amounts if they
    are generated outside of the reconciliation process (see below)

A debt recalculation may include a period for a previously waived debt
(for example, because it was under $50). See Reversal of waivers

Waivers, like any other decision, can be reviewed and changed.

When waiving a debt under $50, either automatically or manually, no
Recovery Fee is applied.

Note: there is no requirement to record the legislative reason for a
waiver on a DOC when the waiver is automatic. This is contained in
Section 6A of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999.

Manual small debt waivers

A debt under $50 may be manually added (via the Add Debt (OPAD) screen).
The Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) will automatically go
to the Add Waiver (OPWAA) screen. Waive the debt with a reason code of
‘LTF’ (less than fifty).

Record the details on a DOC as per minimum DOC standards for debt
waivers.

Interest Charge automatic small debt waivers

If a customer pays the balance of all outstanding debts (including any
interest payable), the residual interest calculated for the final period
will waive automatically if it is under $200.

For example, when a debtor has paid their debt in full, and the final
residual interest is:

-   under $200, the system will automatically waive it
-   over $200, the system will create a Manual Follow-up (MFU) for Debt
    Recovery staff. The customer is contacted to recover the residual
    amount outstanding

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) small debt waivers

If a 'negative adjustment' of under $50 is created for FTB, the screen
flow will go from the Assessment Results (AR) screen to the Assessment
Consequences (ASC) screen.

Once on the ASC screen, staff can decide to:

-   manually waive the amount, or
-   refer it for further action/investigation

FTB debts of under $50 can only be waived if it is a qualification debt.

Debt shells for small amounts not qualification related should be
'finalised, no debt' with a reason code of 'FAM'. The amount is included
in reconciliation.

Recovery Fee and small debt waivers

Do not apply a recovery fee when waiving a working age payment debt
under $50. This is for debts with a debt reason of:

-   IES (own earnings undeclared/coded)
-   ISI (own earnings wrongly declared/coded), or
-   UCE (undeclared cash earnings (customer portion only)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) small debt waivers

The debt waiver reason code 'LTW' (less/likely under $200) is only for
PPL. The waiver may be applicable when it is not cost effective to
recover the remaining amount, where the debt is:

-   $50 or more, and
-   under $200

Only Debt staff can use this waiver reason. Do not use this during
general debt raising as a waiver reason.

Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA) debts

There is no legislative basis to waive PGPA debts.

The PGPA replaced the Financial Management and Accountability Act 1997
(FMA) from 1 July 2014.

Income Management customer debts less than $50

Treat these debts the same as other customer debts under $50 as per the:

-   Social Security Act
-   Family Assistance Act
-   Paid Parental Leave Act, or
-   Student Assistance Act

Social workers' role in Payments and Integrity

Referral to Services Australia social workers within Payments and
Integrity may be appropriate. They provide support to customers who are:

-   vulnerable 'at risk'
-   have complex needs, or
-   have barriers to economic and social participation

The additional problem of managing multiple debts from Services
Australia and other institutions can be overwhelming. This can result in
a greater risk of non-compliance. See Social workers role in Payments
and Integrity.

The References page contains links to Accountable Authority instructions
(AAIs).

The Resources page contains a link to the Instrument of Financial
Delegation and a table of examples of circumstance changes that may
create a debt for FTB customers. .

Related links

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Waiving Centrelink debts

Administrative error waivers

Raising Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Reversal of waivers

Recovery Fee applied to debts resulting from incorrect declaration of
income

Effect of waiving a debt on the recovery fee

Permanent write off of Centrelink debts

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving payments

Explaining and actioning negative adjustments on the Assessment Results
(AR) screen

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Online Document Recording (ODR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
