
Actioning broken voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements 107-05040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to action a broken voluntary
deduction (direct debit) recovery arrangement.

Follow up activities

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) payments appear on the OPRH screen on
the day it was due to be deducted from the customer's financial
institution (FI) account. The payment will reverse if the direct debit
is dishonoured by the customer’s FI. It will show as a negative payment
on OPRH approximately 3 days later. This will trigger:

-   the status of the arrangement to change from current (CUR) to broken
    (BKN)
-   a DMN/RCV Broken arrangement activity to generate
-   a Direct Debit Declined Letter is issued
-   the activity will assign via Customer First Workload Manager (CFWLM)

Individual circumstances

Review a customer's record when actioning a broken arrangement. Make
reasonable effort to contact the customer to find why they were not able
to maintain the payments.

Consider other payment methods when there is evidence of a poor
repayment history. If the customer cannot maintain direct debit
payments, BPAY can be a better option.

When to cease a broken direct debit arrangement

Finalise the broken recovery arrangement: if there are no determined
debts on the file that need follow up action. For example, debts that
have been referred to an External Collection Agent or after reasonable
effort to contact the customer has been made.

Refusing new arrangements

Review a customer's record when talking about a new arrangement. Refuse
the arrangement where customers:

-   manipulate the system to avoid paying their debt
-   make new arrangements to avoid other recovery action. For example,
    making a repayment arrangement to avoid a tax garnishee

Check repeated broken arrangements made at the same time each year. An
arrangement may be appropriate once Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has
processed the customer's tax return.

Cancelling or deferring a direct debit payment

Direct debits remain in place until cancelled. If a customer wishes to
cancel or defer a direct debit payment, they must:

-   notify Debt Management Branch
-   give at least 5 business days before the next deduction

Do not code a new arrangement if a customer advises there were
insufficient funds in their account for the deduction unless:

-   the dishonoured payment is recorded, and
-   the direct debit is BKN

This prevents the dishonoured payment breaking the new arrangement.

Direct debits and public holidays

If a direct debit falls on a non-business day, the payment will occur on
the next business day.

Be mindful of weekly arrangements over extended public holiday periods.
Financial institution (FI) dishonoured payments may not be received
before the next scheduled payment is due. For example a direct debit due
Good Friday would not occur until Tuesday as Monday is a public holiday.
The FI would not process the dishonoured payment until Wednesday.
Services Australia will not receive advice until after the next
scheduled payment has been requested.

The first dishonoured payment will change the arrangement status to BKN
and create a DMN/MFU follow up activity. However if the second payment
is honoured by the FI the arrangement will return to a CURrent status.
The DMN/RCV broken activity can be CANcelled as the arrangement is now
CUR.

Interest Charge

Interest Charges apply when a customer misses a payment under an agreed
payment arrangement. Interest is charged each day from the day after the
last expected repayment was due and will cease when:

-   the total debt amount and any calculated interest is paid in full
-   the customer makes up the missed payment and continues to make
    agreed payments
-   the agency agrees to skip the missed payment and the customer
    continues to make agreed payments
-   the customer enters into a new acceptable recovery arrangement and
    makes their first agreed payment
-   the customer has a reasonable excuse exemption applied, or
-   the customer has at least one debt temporarily written off or has a
    pause on debt recovery in place

See Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink debtors no longer receiving
payments.

Related links

Financial Circumstance assessment for debt recovery

Arranging cash repayments to recover debts

Voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements to recover debts

Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Interest Charge (IC) for Centrelink Debtors no longer receiving payments

Actioning broken voluntary deduction (direct debit) arrangements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
