-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether payments of periodic
compensation are to be treated as direct deduction or ordinary income
for a compensation recipient.

Direct deduction

Periodic compensation is generally a dollar for dollar reduction against
the daily rate of a Compensation Affected Payment (CAP) payable. The
reduction is applied to the compensation recipient’s rate after the
ordinary income and asset test has been applied.

Treat periodic compensation as a direct deduction for the recipient if
on the date of incident:

-   the compensation recipient is not qualified for and receiving a
    compensation affected payment (CAP)
-   the compensation recipients payment was suspended or paid at a nil
    rate on the incident date

Direct Deduction means that the periodic compensation is assessed as a
dollar for dollar rate reduction against the customer’s payment.

Payments assessed as direct deduction will not affect the compensation
recipient’s partner's eligibility until the compensation recipient’s
entitlement is reduced to nil. Any remaining compensation will affect
the partner of the compensation recipient’s their own ordinary income.

Ordinary income

If the compensation recipient was qualified and receiving a CAP at the
time of their incident the periodic compensation is treated as ordinary
income.

Where it is not possible to determine the compensation recipient’s
qualification for a CAP for reasons other than the effect of the
compensation provisions, any periodic compensation paid in respect of
the compensable event should be assessed under the ordinary income test.

Compensation assessed as Ordinary income will affect entitlement under
the normal ordinary income provisions appropriate for the
customers/partners payment type.

Compensation assessed as Ordinary income will affect a partner's
entitlement under the normal ordinary income provisions.

Qualified and in receipt of a CAP

The compensation provisions make a distinction between ‘receiving’ and
‘qualified for’ when determining the correct way to assess compensation.

Customers who were NIL rate at the time of the incident are considered
to be qualified for a CAP but not in receipt of it. As a result their
compensation should be assessed using the direct deduction test.

Backdated CAP claims

If a customer’s claim is back dated to the date of injury under section
23(2) of the Act the person is understood to be in receipt of that
payment from the date of grant.

Coding or changing system defaults

Only staff in the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) can set up arrears
and new ongoing periodic payment details. Once completed, all other
staff can update periodic compensation payments on an existing record.
Staff outside the CRT will need to request CMS02 access through
mySupport to update compensation periodic payments.

Related links

Pensions income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets tests

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Income streams

Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Coding and raising debts for periodic compensation payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
