
Education Entry Payment (EdEP) 108-08050000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines qualification for the EdEP and how it is paid.
EdEP is a lump sum taxable payment of $208 to help with the costs of
returning to study.

EdEP eligibility

EdEP is payable to customers getting various income support payments who
undertake approved study.

Eligibility for the EdEP differs between payments.

Customers paid any of the following payments may qualify for an EdEP:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment partnered (PPP)
-   Parenting Payment single (PPS)
-   Special Benefit (SpB), if the customer is a single parent and not
    residentially qualified for PP

Austudy, Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY customers are not qualified
for EdEP. However, if a customer was on an income support payment (which
may not be their current payment) for at least 12 months before getting
a student payment, they may be eligible for EdEP.

EdEP may still be paid during an employment income nil rate period.

Note: Widow Allowance and Partner Allowance attracted EdEP until 1
January 2022 when both payments ceased.

Approved study

Only courses approved for ABSTUDY, Austudy, Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES) or Youth Allowance (YA) (student) can attract an EdEP
payment. This applies to customers getting all income support payments.

For more details on approved courses, see:

-   Approved courses of study for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner Education
    Supplement (PES) and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

-   Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
    Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

-    Study may be part-time or full-time depending on the needs of a
    customer's qualifying income support payment. EdEP is not payable if
    a customer is not undertaking qualifying study, including where they
    have a participation exemption.

JSP and PPP customers

JSP and PPP customers may qualify for EdEP if they meet all of the
following criteria:

They start or intend to start an approved course, or are a continuing
student

Before starting the course of education they:

-   were in receipt of their current payment - JSP or PPP
-   were in receipt of an income support payment (which may not be their
    current payment) continuously for 12 months or more

JSP customers:

-   no longer qualify for JSP due to starting the course and get a
    student payment, or
-   have the course approved and included in their Job Plan

PPP customers are doing a full-time or part-time course

They have not received EdEP in the last 12 months

Customers may also be eligible for EdEP if:

-   they have received an income support payment for the last 12 months,
    or
-   have transferred to a student payment to start an approved course of
    study.

JSP customers who transfer to a student payment to start an approved
course of study and who are eligible for EdEP do not need to supply POE.
Instead, the claim for Austudy, YA or ABSTUDY can be accepted as a claim
for EdEP.

For PPP customers, EdEP can be paid

-   before the customer starts the course, or
-   while they are participating in the course

Customers who received an EdEP before 20 March 2020 because they were on
JobSeeker Payment (formerly Newstart Allowance) or Wife Pension remain
eligible for EdEP while studying the same course.

DSP, PPS, CP and SpB customers

These customers qualify for an EdEP if they:

-   qualify for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) paid under the
    Social Security Act (ABSTUDY PES is not a qualification for EdEP),
    and
-   have not received EdEP in the current calendar year. They can only
    get one EdEP per calendar year and only in the year they qualify for
    PES.
    For example, a customer requesting payment of EdEP in December for a
    course starting in January when they have started their course

The customer can request payment of EdEP after starting a course and may
be eligible if they:

-   have not received EdEP in that calendar year
-   qualify for PES at the time they request payment, and
-   meet all other eligibility criteria

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers

DVA customers may qualify for EdEP payable by DVA if they are:

-   getting a Partner Service Pension or Income Support Supplement
-   also getting PES under the Social Security Act, and
-   not of Age Pension age or getting a financial supplement under the
    Student Financial Supplement Scheme (FSL)

Customers should contact DVA for more details on claiming EdEP.

PPP customers in receipt of PES transferring to JSP

PPP customers who start a course, get PES and then transfer to JSP, are
still eligible for PES while continuing the same course.

EdEP sometimes needs to be paid manually. If a customer starts another
course while on their new payment, they could request payment of EdEP
once 12 months has passed since they were last paid EdEP.

PPS customers not in receipt of PES transferring to PPP

PPS customers who transfer to PPP and continue in the same approved
course remain eligible for EdEP if in receipt of PPP before the start of
their next study period. They must also meet all other qualification
requirements.

This rule applies until the customer completes their same approved
course. If they start a new course (while on their new payment), EdEP
can only be granted once 12 months has passed since they were last paid
EdEP.

Claiming EdEP

A separate claim for EdEP is not needed. Proof of enrolment (POE) in a
course, inclusion of study in a Job Plan or a claim for a student
payment can be taken as a claim for EdEP depending on the customer's
circumstances.

POE is not needed from income support customers undertaking study as an
approved activity to meet their mutual obligation requirements.
Part-time or full-time study, included in the customer's current Job
Plan as an approved activity, is sufficient evidence to grant EdEP. The
Job Plan must provide sufficient details to verify the person intends to
enrol, or is enrolled in an approved course. These customers need
payments issued manually.

If study is not an approved activity in the customer's Job Plan, they
must provide POE to Services Australia and request EdEP be paid.

Requests for payment of EdEP can be accepted up to 13 weeks before the
course starts. However, details of the course cannot be entered into the
system with a future start date, so coding cannot occur until the course
start date.

If a claim for YA (student), Austudy, ABSTUDY or PES is submitted, this
can be accepted as a claim for EdEP. In most circumstances, EdEP is paid
when the claim is assessed. POE is not needed in these circumstances.

Note: customers must not be paid EdEP until on or after the start date
of the course and POE relevant to their circumstances is received where
needed.

EdEP cannot be claimed once the customer has completed the course of
study.

Payment of EdEP

EdEP is usually paid into the customer's nominated account after they
are assessed as eligible or when Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
starts. Alternatively, it can be paid manually where payment does not
form part of the PES claim.

One EdEP per calendar year

Customers are only eligible for one EdEP payment per calendar year if
they get:

-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Parenting Payment single (PPS)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)

In some circumstances, customers may get 2 EdEP payments close together.
For example, the system correctly determines they are entitled to one
EdEP payment in 2020 and one in 2021, if:

-   they enrol in a course late in 2020, and
-   continue in the same course in January 2021 and beyond

When this occurs, the grant letter shows both payments added together.
This gives the impression the customer is granted $416 instead of $208.
The actual payment is made as 2 separate payments:

-   one payment in 2020, and
-   the other in 2021

The customer is not entitled to get another EdEP payment until 2022, if
the correct criteria are met. Given the extremely low number of reported
cases, there are no plans to amend the grant letter in the near future.

See the Resources page for more examples of 'one EdEP per 12 months or
calendar year'.

Continuous receipt of Income Support Payments (JSP, YAL, AUS)

Customers receiving JSP, YAL or Austudy over the previous 12 months, can
be considered to be in continuous receipt of income support payment for
12 months. This includes periods where there has been a break in payment
of up to 13 weeks. This is under the notional continuous period of
receipt rule which can be applied in certain circumstances. Acceptable
reasons for this rule are:

-   a period of employment, resulting in payments cancelling because
    income is too high
-   income from employment, resulting in nil rate (CZR)
-   failure to attend interview, resulting in rejected or cancelled
    payment

See Resources for examples.

Date of payment of EdEP

A grant letter for the EdEP is generated and sent to the customer. The
letter uses the notification date and not the date of payment.
Therefore, the payment generally is not paid to the customer until they
start the course of study.

Participation in AMEP

Customers participating full-time in the Adult Migrant Education Program
(AMEP) may qualify for EdEP, provided they meet all other eligibility
requirements. The customer's Job Plan must display participation in
AMEP. They must also have been on a qualifying income support payment
when they start AMEP and have been in receipt of an income support
payment for 12 months to be eligible for EdEP.

A Job Plan coded with the AMEP activity is sufficient evidence to issue
payment of EdEP. The customer must contact Services Australia to request
payment of EdEP.

Note: customers eligible for the 13 week refugee exemption are not
entitled to EdEP when they start a short course during this period.

Participation in SEE

Customers participating full-time in the Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE) may qualify for EdEP provided they meet all other
eligibility requirements.

Customers participating in SEE will have the activity coded in their Job
Plan. Qualification for EdEP depends on how the study component is
structured.

Participation in NEIS

Customers may be eligible for EdEP while undertaking the 12 week New
Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) pre-training program.

Proof of participation in full-time NEIS pre-training must be provided
in the form of a Job Plan, which includes NEIS as an approved activity.

Service Officers must verify the Job Plan includes NEIS pre-training as
an approved activity before issuing the EdEP.

The Resources page has a link to the Pensioner Education Supplement form
(SY004) and examples of 'one EdEP per 12 months or calendar year'.

Related links

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

Commencing or returning to study

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Rates and Thresholds

Working Credit

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to full-time study

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
