
Assets hardship provisions - Pensions 108-04120010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before inviting a claim under assets hardship provisions, the case must
be discussed with a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) in the Assets
Hardship Team.

This document outlines the procedure for assets hardship provisions -
Pensions.

Hardship rules

Different rules apply to assets hardship provisions for allowances.
Note: Parenting Payment Single (PPS) is a pension under section 23(1) of
the Social Security Act 1991, but for assets hardship purposes, PPS is
treated the same as allowances.

The hardship rules allow for the value of particular assets to be
disregarded and for the rate of pension payable to be determined in a
special manner. For these rules to apply, a customer must be considered
to be in severe financial hardship with no other course of action, they
could reasonably be expected to take to alleviate hardship.

Assessing assets

The Assets Test presumes that pensioners with substantial assets, apart
from their own home, apply those assets to produce income for their own
support. If assets held produce little or no income, the owners are
expected to rearrange their finances before calling on the community for
income support. When customers are not able to rearrange their finances,
they may be eligible for consideration under the assets hardship
provisions.

Sometimes a customer is unable to rearrange their financial affairs, or
could not reasonably be expected to rearrange them due to particular
circumstances. Special provisions ensure customers are not placed in
severe financial hardship due to the normal application of the Assets
Test.

Hardship test

The hardship test for pension customers allows a test of
'reasonableness' to determine whether a customer is expected to sell or
realise an asset. The rate payable is determined by the Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO).

An asset is said to be unrealisable if the customer cannot sell or
realise the asset, or it would be unreasonable to expect the customer to
do so and the customer cannot, or could not, reasonably be expected to
use the asset as a security for borrowing:

-   a pension is precluded or reduced because of the Assets Test
-   an asset is owned which cannot be sold, or it is not reasonable to
    expect it to be sold
-   the asset(s) cannot be borrowed against, or it is not reasonable to
    expect it be borrowed against
-   the pensioner is suffering severe financial hardship

Qualifications for severe financial hardship

For a customer to be considered in severe financial hardship all the
following must apply:

-   The customer's and their partner's, if applicable, available funds
    must be less than the readily available funds limit. Note: from 3
    August 2007 the limits vary depending on the customer's income
    support payment
-   Fortnightly income is less than the maximum fortnightly rate of
    pension
-   There is nothing the customer can do to improve the situation

Deprivation of assets and/or income

A customer who has deprived themselves of assets and/or income would not
normally be considered eligible under the hardship provisions, even
though they may be suffering severe financial hardship. However, there
may be cases involving unusual circumstances which appear to warrant
additional consideration. If:

-   the severe financial hardship is not a direct result of the disposal
    of income and/or assets but of some other unforeseen event, and
-   the customer would have been eligible under the hardship provisions
    had the disposal not taken place
-   then the deprived asset or income is taken into account in the
    eligibility calculation and the customer must still meet all other
    eligibility criteria

Home Equity Access Scheme (the Scheme)

The Scheme does not preclude customers from consideration under the
hardship provisions. It may be appropriate to investigate whether a
customer has entitlement under the hardship provisions before proceeding
with a request for loan payments under the Scheme. The two provisions
are mutually exclusive and payment can only be made under one or the
other provision.

Granting and backdating of claims

The Social Security Act allows a delegate to backdate a claim for assets
hardship for up to six months before the signed claim form was lodged.
As most customers have limited knowledge of the assets hardship
provisions the CAO should view favourably a request to grant for an
earlier period in most circumstances.

Example - a customer makes claim for Age Pension in July and is rejected
under the assets test in August. They become aware of the assets
hardship provisions via their rejection letter and obtain a claim form
and apply for assets hardship as soon as practicable in September. In
this case the delegate has the discretion to pay assets hardship from
July if all the criteria are met from that time.

Members of a couple hardship provisions

If both members of a couple are applying for payment under the hardship
provisions, each person must lodge a claim. This can be done by each
completing separate forms or completing one claim form with both
partner's details provided.

Changes to assets or income since payment was granted

If the customer or their partner has changes to their assets or income
following the grant of their payment under the asset hardship
provisions, a reassessment is required by a CAO. For example,
notification of earnings via telephone or other contact.

An escalation for a CAO reassessment must be requested via a Fast Note.

CAO delegation

Before inviting a claim under the assets hardship provisions, Service
Officers must discuss the case with a CAO in the Assets Hardship Team,
who can advise the Service Officer of issues to consider and concessions
that may be available to the customer. CAO contact details can be found
in Office Locator. See Resources page for instructions and a link. If
CAO contact cannot be made send a Fast Note, see Process page for
details.

Note: the delegation to make decisions under the assets hardship
provisions lies with the CAO.

The Resources page contains some examples of circumstances where it may
be unreasonable to expect a customer to sell an asset and a link to the
SA233 - Claim for consideration under hardship which must not be issued
until after discussing the case with a CAO, and a link to Office
Locator.

Related links

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Assets hardship for Centrelink payments

Completing the Consideration under assets test hardship provisions

Assessment of assets hardship

Unrealisable assets under the Assets Test hardship provisions

Severe financial hardship under the Assets Hardship Test provisions

Notional income on unrealisable assets

Rejecting a claim

Contact in relation to an intended claim

Assessment of assets (CLK)

Deprivation effects on Centrelink payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
