
Historical recording and correcting employment income details (prior to 07/12/2020) 108-22063045

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document specifically concerns recording employment income earned
prior to the 7 December 2020 Changing the Social Security Income
Assessment Model (CAM) changes. Prior to 7 December 2020 employment
income was assessed under the earned income model.

Employment income paid after 7 December 2020 changes

For employment income paid after 7 December 2020 changes, see Recording
and correcting employment income details

Date of Event and reporting under the earned income model

Date of event (DOV) and Date of effect (DOE)

It is important to understand the difference between the DOV and the
DOE:

-   DOV is the date the event actually occurred
-   DOE is the date a particular change first affects the customer's
    entitlement

Notification or statement reporter

When determining the DOV, first determine whether the customer was a
notification reporter or a statement reporter:

-   a notification reporter is a customer who has to report any income
    or other changes within 14 days. Under the earned model, the
    customer was required to advise within 14 days when they or their
    partner started work.
-   a statement reporter is a customer who reports via a Reporting
    Statement. Under the earned model, the customer was required to
    advise any employment income they or their partner earned in each
    entitlement period on their Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) before
    their income support payment could be paid.

Assessment of employment income under the earned income model

Under Section 8 of the Social Security Act, people receiving a social
security income support payment generally had their employment income
assessed in the entitlement period in which it was earned, derived or
received.

Earnings apportionment referred to the spreading of employment income
evenly across all days in an entitlement period (EP). If a customer
earned, derived or received employment income during the whole or part
of an EP, the customer was taken to have earned on each day in that EP,
an amount of employment income worked out by dividing the total amount
of the employment income earned, by the number of days in the EP.

Employment income (including foreign employment income) earned in an
entitlement period was spread evenly over the period. It may have been
subject to Working Credit (WC), Work Bonus (WB) or Income Bank (SIB)
rules and income test rules each day of the period, however employment
income is apportioned before the application of WC, WB or SIB. This
means if a customer started work on the 10th day of their entitlement
period and earned $200 for the remaining 4 days in that entitlement
period, the $200 would affect their income support payment or ABSTUDY
Living Allowance over the full 14 days, not just the last 4 days. This
apportionment of income was the same whether or not the income recorded
was a continuous value, for example 2 weekly (2WE), income for one
period (IOP) or foreign income for one period (ONE).

JobKeeper Payment

JobKeeper Payments were paid to a customer as an employee and were
treated as employment income and were eligible income for Work Bonus and
Working Credits.

JobKeeper Payments were payable from 30 March 2020 to 28 March 2021 and
were paid to employees by the employer.

For more information regarding recording JobKeeper Payment for
Employees, see Assessment of employment income for Centrelink Payments –
Resources page

The Resources page contains examples of how to calculate and code income
for shorter income periods (due to a change to the customer's delivery
day) for variable lodgement statement reporters.

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of employment income for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
customers over Age Pension age

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Coding a manual rate of payment

Assessing fringe benefits for Social Security income test purposes

Estimating income for family assistance and Parental Leave pay scheme
payments

Cancellation of payments (CLK)

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Commencing or returning to work

Foreign currency and exchange rates

Employment income nil rate period

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Coding income from the Supported Wage System (SWS)

Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers

Wages and conditions of employment

Income from Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
