-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and record lump sums.

Types of lump sum

There are 2 types of lump sums:

A form of wage or amount received for a service provided. They are:

-   remunerative lump sums
-   generally assessable if received after claiming an income support
    payment

A 'profit' that is not an exempt lump sum. They are:

-   non-remunerative lump sums
-   treated as income for 52 weeks

Assessment start date

Remunerative Lump Sums:

For remunerative lump sums, the assessment start date is the entitlement
period start date (EPSD) of the period in which the lump sum is paid.
The assessment period will be for a number of days equal to the period
that the payment represents. Any period where an income support payment
is not paid is included in this period.

This applies to all remunerative lump sum amounts received by the person
or their partner after claiming.

For assistance in determining the correct date of event, see Determining
the Date of Event for employment income.

Non-remunerative lump sums:

For non-remunerative lump sums, the assessment start date will be the
earlier of the date the lump sum is received or is able to be received.
Assessment will be for a period of 52 weeks from this date. Any period
where an income support payment is not paid is included in this period.

-   For ABSTUDY payments, non-remunerative lump sums are only taken into
    consideration when they are paid on or after the date of claim. See
    Leave and Termination payments paid by an employer for details of
    specific coding.
-   All other income support payments, are assessed for a period of 52
    weeks even if they were paid before claiming a payment

Some assessable foreign lump sums are treated differently:

-   arrears of a comparable foreign payment are assessed for the period
    to which the arrears relates, and
-   arrears of foreign income streams are assessed as if the payment was
    received throughout the arrears period

Examples of lump sums

Some examples of lump sums include:

arrears of a comparable foreign payment

arrears of foreign income streams

other foreign lump sums, such as, payments in lieu of pensions and other
commutations or refunds of contributions or other withdrawals

arrears of defined benefit income stream payments from a superannuation
fund before starting regular ongoing payments. See Adding or updating a
defined benefit income stream

Total and Permanent Disability benefits (TPD) from superannuation:

-   arrears for the period before regular ongoing payments of a
    invalidity lifetime pension started, see Adding or updating a
    defined benefit income stream
-   paid as a one-off lump sum payment, see Assessing withdrawals from
    superannuation

Total and Temporary Disability benefits (TTD) from superannuation:

-   arrears of Income Protection or Salary Continuance Payments received
    for the period before regular ongoing payments started. See
    Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

lump sum withdrawal from a superannuation fund or lump sum arrears from
a defined benefit superannuation fund

leave paid out, but not taken. That is, the money received when accrued
leave entitlements are received but instead of taking time off, the
employee remains at work and receives wages at the same time. The
procedure, Leave and termination payments paid by an employer, provides
further details

royalties

payments to sports people (such as sign on fees, sponsorship)

compensation lump sums (refer all compensation related enquiries to the
Compensation Recovery Team in the relevant state)

income from a profit sharing arrangement

commissions from employment

2019/2020 Volunteer Fire Fighter payments

payments from state governments about the taxi industry reform

Aged Care Workforce Bonus payments

Seasonal Harvest Sign-on Bonus payments

Victorian Sick Pay Guarantee Payments

One-Off Payments to Employees for NSW Health

Victorian Healthcare Worker Winter Retention and Surge Payments

Cost-of-living payment for WA public sector employees

NSW Rural Health Workforce Incentive Scheme payments

Tasmanian Government Frontline Health COVID-19 Allowance Payments

Native Forest Workforce Transition Program 1 payments

Queensland Health Cost of Living Allowance (COLA) Payment

Aged Care Register Nurses' Payment

Some of these lump sums are exempt from the income test. See Exempt lump
sums.

Back pay for a period of employment

From 7 December 2020, arrears of wages are:

-   treated as income
-   assessed from the Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD) of the
    entitlement period in which the income was paid
-   assessed for the same period of time for which the income was paid.
    This includes where there was both a 'present legal entitlement' and
    'no present legal entitlement' for the period of back pay

For example, if a customer is paid a lump sum of back pay on 9 May 2022
for the period 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2020, the back pay is assessed as
income for 731 days from the EPSD of the customer's entitlement period
that includes 9 May 2022.

Note: From 7 December 2020, when back pay is paid for individual pay
periods, there is no need to correct the periods to include the back
pay.

Back pay received before 07 December 2020

Assessment of a lump sum of back pay received by a customer before 7
December 2020, depends on whether there was a 'present legal
entitlement' at the time it was earned.

Arrears of pay are assessed retrospectively as income if the person had
a 'present legal entitlement' at the time the arrears were earned. For
example,

-   they were paid less than the award wage
-   they were underpaid due to administrative error

The employment income must be corrected for the past period to which the
back pay applies and an overpayment raised.

If there was 'no present legal entitlement', for example when a
workplace agreement backdates a pay increase, the back pay is a
remunerative lump sum and the amount is held as income for 52 weeks from
the date the person becomes legally entitled to receive the payment.

Examples about back pay of wages (including before 07 December 2020) are
available in the Resources page.

Death benefits

Death benefits paid from an employer in respect of accrued leave or paid
by a super fund in respect of accumulated super to a beneficiary (for
example, partner or dependent child) of a deceased person are not income
for Centrelink purposes. Any increase in financial investments or other
assets must be notified.

Lump sums for Family Assistance

See:

-   Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
    payments, and
-   Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for
    family assistance payments

The Resources page contains examples and questions and answers about the
treatment of lump sums. There are also links to contact details for the
International Program for assistance with comparable foreign pension
lump sums.

Related links

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing scholarship income

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Comparable Foreign Payment (CFP) lump sum arrears debts

Determining the Date of Event for employment income

Exempt lump sums

Foreign income and assets

Foreign pension coding

How to code and action a manual review

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Leave and termination payments paid by an employer

Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

The effect of compensation on Social Security payments

Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
