-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Services Australia applies the Income Test
for pensioner/allowee couples differently for each member of the couple.

The agency:

-   combines their income and divides the total by two to get a personal
    income allocation
-   applies the personal Income Test to the personal income allocation

Applicable rates and tests

The allowance income test and the student or Australian Apprentice
income threshold is assessed differently to the pension income
threshold. The procedure, Personal Income Test and Income Bank for
ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian
Apprentices, has further information. For the allowance income test, see
the Allowances - Personal Income Test thresholds link on the Rates and
Thresholds page.

The Income Test has different applications for the following pension
customers:

-   single pensioners
-   pensioners with children
-   partnered pensioners
-   partnered pensioners where the partner is on an allowance payment
-   pensioners separated because of ill health
-   pensioners with children - if the pensioner is paid under the
    transitional rules for pension customers and the customer has
    children, an extra income amount per child may be deducted before
    the rate of pension payable is calculated

A separate rate is calculated under both the Income Test and Assets Test
with the one resulting in the lowest rate of pension being applicable to
that person.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) may be exempt from the means test. Income and assets details are
required to determine the partner's entitlement to payments or if the
customer is claiming rent assistance.

The procedure, Exempt income, provides information about assessing
income that is exempt from the Income Test.

International agreements and compensation

Customers may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate deduction if
they are:

-   granted a pension under an International Agreement, and
-   in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
    agreement country

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
result in a direct deduction.

Income from employment and self-employment

Additional deductions may apply if the customer is of:

workforce age, apply the Working Credit rules before applying the Income
Test

Age Pension age and receiving an income support payment other than PPS.
Apply the Work Bonus to their eligible income. Apply the Work Bonus
before the Working Credit calculations. Eligible income for Work Bonus
is:

-   employment income, and
-   self-employment income earned through personal exertion

The customer's payment may remain current at nil rate for up to six
fortnights' employment income nil rate period, if:

-   the customer's income reduces their fortnightly rate to nil, and
-   some of that income is employment income

Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

For children born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as
ordinary income for pensions. PPL and DAP for children who were born or
entrusted to care before 1 October 2016 is treated as exempt income.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will apply for as long as the customer
receives a higher rate of payment under the old Income Test (pre 20
September 2009) with no Work Bonus applied. This is in comparison to the
Income Test in place from 20 September 2009, which does include the Work
Bonus.

It is possible for their partner's income support payment rate to be
calculated under a different income test, that is:

-   the customer could receive a higher rate under the old income test,
    and
-   their partner may have been granted after 20 September 2009 and is
    only eligible to be paid under the new income test

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   tell them their review and appeal rights

The Resources page contains a link to rates factsheets.

Related links

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers on payment at 19 September 2009

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for pension partnered customers

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
