
Rent Assistance (RA) for care receivers 108-18102230

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

On this Page:

Permanent Residential Care

From 1 October 1997, care receivers in a funded place (bed) in an
accredited aged care service are not entitled to RA. Instead, a subsidy
is paid directly to the aged care service by Services Australia.

A customer in permanent residential care may be eligible to receive RA,
if they are residing in:

-   a multi-purpose service (MPS) facility
    Note: the Department of Health and Aged Care website contains a list
    of MPS providing care under the Aged Care Act 1997. See the
    Resources page for a link
-   a non-funded place (bed) in an accredited aged care facility. For
    example a partner without ongoing care needs has moved into a
    residential care facility with the care receiver, or
-   a bed in a non-accredited aged care facility

If the customer is eligible for RA the rate is based on the rent
component (accommodation only) of the fee payable by the resident.

Where the rent component:

-   can be determined then the rent type would be recorded as MNT -
    Maintenance fees for nursing home or retirement village
-   cannot be determined, then the total fee payable by the resident
    would be recorded as rent type BOA - Board and Lodging. The system
    will automatically apply the two thirds rule to the total amount
    when calculating the RA entitlement

Nursing Home type patient

Some customers need to reside in a hospital while waiting to be admitted
to aged care. They are assessed as a 'Nursing home type patient' and
have to pay fees even if it is a public hospital. These fees are based
on aged care home daily fees. A customer may be eligible for RA if:

-   the hospital stay is not for respite care, and
-   they do not occupy a funded bed

If the customer is eligible for RA the rate is based on the rent
component (accommodation only) of the fee payable by the patient.

Where the rent component:

-   can be determined then the rent type would be recorded as MNT -
    Maintenance fees for nursing home or retirement village
-   cannot be determined, then the total fee payable by the patient
    would be recorded as rent type BOA - Board and Lodging. The system
    will automatically apply the two thirds rule to the total amount
    when calculating the RA entitlement

Respite care

Respite care is provided for a permanently disabled care receiver,
giving respite to their usual carers. RA cannot be paid for respite care
fees.

RA is payable to the person in approved respite for up to 52 days if
they:

-   were paying rent for their principal home immediately before going
    to respite care, and
-   they continue to pay rent while in respite care

The 52 days is not cumulative. It starts again for each respite care
period.

National Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Program

Residents in the National Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care
(NATSIFAC) program are treated as residential care recipients in a
Commonwealth funded place and are not funded under the Aged Care Act
1997.

As these care recipients are receiving care in an unfunded place:

-   residential care subsidy is not payable under the Aged Care Act 1997
    and
-   the aged care resident exclusion does not apply to these care
    recipients

Rent Assistance (RA) is payable to NATSIFAC residents who:

-   get an eligible social security payment
-   pay rent as a component of their aged care fee, and
-   pay rent above the rent threshold

The rate of RA is based on the rent component (accommodation only) of
the fee payable by the NATSIFAC resident.

Where the rent component:

-   can be determined then the rent type would be recorded as MNT -
    Maintenance fees for nursing home or retirement village
-   cannot be determined, then the total fee payable by the resident
    would be recorded as rent type BOA - Board and Lodging. The system
    will automatically apply the two thirds rule to the total amount
    when calculating the RA entitlement

NATSIFAC residents are not classified as ineligible homeowners and are
excluded from the general ineligible homeowners rule because they are
regarded as an income support recipient who is in a care situation. For
more information search ineligible homeowners in the A-Z of Rent
Assistance terms and codes.

Other care situations

RA can be assessed for customers who are living in care services such as
a Supported Accommodation or Supported Residential Services.

RA for a temporary address can be assessed where the customer lives in
temporary accommodation for at least 14 days to:

-   receive a substantial level of care
-   access specific medical treatment not available where they live

For a temporarily illness separated couple RA is assessed using the
single persons rent threshold amount. The maximum amount of RA that can
be paid, is the member of a couple maximum rate.

The Resources page contains a link to more help and scenarios showing
the effect on the income and asset tests for a couple separated due to
illness, who reside in a retirement village or low level aged care and
the NATSIFAC Program Manual.

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Accommodation choices for older Australians

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged Care

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Care receiver permanently enters an institution

Change of address to an aged care home

Permanent vacation of principal home

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

Temporary accommodation and rent assistance

Temporary change of address to an aged care home for respite care

Temporary vacation of principal home

Vacation of principal home due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
