
I-Z Deeming Exemption Register 108-05050040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information relating to the Deeming Exemption
Register contains information about the income and asset tests treatment
of investments with companies and financial institutions which are
currently in financial difficulty.

On this Page:

Deeming Exemption Register

The Register is used in assessing the amount of income and assets of a
person in order to determine their entitlement to a social security
pension, allowance or benefit. Exemptions from the extended deeming
provisions can be made on a product or 'across the board' basis for the
above types of investments.

The Register contains information about these investments where an
application for exemption has been granted. If an investment is granted
an exemption from extended deeming, it will still be assessable under
the Assets Test. A deeming exemption is not an exemption from the Income
Test. Therefore, investments that are granted a deeming exemption will
have the actual income from the investment assessed.

The Register is updated when a determination is made regarding companies
and financial institutions that are in financial difficulty.
Consequently, information contained in a copy of this Register is
current at the time of issue.

Deeming exemptions do not apply where the investment is held by a Self -
Managed Super Fund (SMSF) or Small APRA Fund (SAF).

The Process page contains the I - Z listing of the Deeming Exemption
Register.

Using the Register

Income and asset values are recorded for each investment. These values
must be used in assessing pension/allowance entitlement. The investments
listed are exempt from the deeming provisions and should not have deemed
income applied to them. Where customers hold such investments, the
details should be recorded separately on the customer's record. If a
Service Officer has any questions about the Register, they should
contact financial.markets@servicesaustralia.gov.au for assistance.

Granting exemptions

The Ministers for the Department of Social Services and the Department
of Education, Skills and Employment have the legislative power to exempt
a financial investment or a class of financial investments from the
deeming rules for payments covered by their portfolio. Historical
information on the administration of Centrelink payments and the
responsibility for granting exemptions is available in the Policy
section of Deeming exemptions.

Church and charitable organisations

A number of church and charitable institution's development funds
received a deeming exemption prior to 1 January 2010. From 1 January
2010, the Minister for the Department of Social Services ceased
providing an exemption for these investment products. Note: the Minister
for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment ceased providing
a deeming exemption for these types of funds in 2007. For further
information on the assessment of investments in a church or charitable
development fund, see Deeming exemptions.

For historical information relating to specific church and charitable
funds required for overpayments and reviews of decisions, contact the
Financial Industry and Network Support (FINS) Helpdesk for assistance.

Customers may still apply for an individual deeming exemption for an
investment in a church or charitable development fund but only on the
basis that the investment is a failed financial.

Insurance or compensation payments

Insurance or compensation payments received by a person for loss of, or
damage to buildings, plant or personal effects and held as a financial
investment are not deemed under the Income Test. The exemption from the
Income Test deeming rules applies for a period of 12 months beginning on
the day that the insurance or compensation payment is or was received by
the person. For further information, see Exempt Income.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Financial
Industry and Network Support (FINS) Helpdesk, FINS Bulletin and Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) contact details via the homepage.

Related links

A - H Deeming Exemption Register

Deeming exemptions

Exempt Income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
