
Payments from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) and referrals to the DVA Clearance Team 108-03050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains what to do when a customer advises they receive
income from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) as part of a
general enquiry or through the new claim process. It shows how the
different types of payments from DVA affect entitlement to payments
administered by Services Australia.

Notification of DVA income

Notification is usually received from either DVA or the customer:

-   DVA automatically transmits details of grants and variations of
    certain payments, as well as indexation rates, throughout the year
-   If a customer advises at the new claim stage they are receiving DVA
    income, you must seek confirmation of the type of income and amount
    from the DVA Clearance Team

A manual process to confirm income as well as payment outcomes, like
overpayments, is undertaken where no automatic data transfer exists, or
where the automatic process has failed.

Rates held by Services Australia are automatically adjusted for CPI for:

-   DVA Disability Compensation Payment
-   Disability Compensation Payment Allowances
-   War Widow(er)'s Pension
-   Wholly Dependent Partner payment
-   Orphan's Pension, and
-   Veterans' Supplement

There is no automatic rate adjustment for other payments, including:

-   Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Social Security Age Pension (paid by DVA), and
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS)

Services Australia DVA clearance process

Information and data is exchanged between Services Australia and DVA.
This makes sure the customer, their partner, dependant, and/or carer,
get the correct benefit and payment.

A clearance can occur via automated or manual data exchange. Manual
intervention by a Service Officer may be required where data cannot be
loaded on a record automatically, and further assessment may be needed.
This includes where the payment type is not part of the automated
exchange.

The clearance process makes sure that:

-   DVA customer records are identified, linked to or unlinked from
    corresponding Services Australia records
-   Mutually exclusive entitlements are not paid by both Services
    Australia and DVA at the same time
-   Where eligible, a customer can transition between income support
    payments without interruption
-   Payments are coded with correct dates, and rate
-   Services Australia and DVA can recover overpayments

A ‘DVA Clearance’ refers to when DVA sends information to Services
Australia about a grant or change to a DVA benefit. A DVA Clearance is
required for a new claim assessment, an Aged Care assessment that will
be completed by Services Australia, or when a customer notifies they are
receiving a payment from DVA.

A ‘DVA Reverse Clearance’ refers to when Services Australia send
information to DVA about a change to a Services Australia payment or
benefit.

The Services Australia DVA Clearance Team

This is a specialist team which undertakes all work on DVA clearances.
The team are the direct liaison point with DVA except for specific work
done through the DVA Standardised Service Offer. The Clearance Teams’
role includes:

-   View only access to DVA customer payment records to verify details
-   Coding the Department of Veterans' Affairs Summary (DVAS) screen for
    all DVA income

See the Process page for instructions on referring DVA payment
verification and coding to the DVA Clearance Team.

Income from the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

Most of the payments administered by DVA are not paid under Social
Security legislation. Information on DVA legislation can be found on the
DVA website, this includes:

-   Veterans' Entitlements Act 1986 (VEA)
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA)
-   Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence-related Claims) Act
    1988 (DRCA)

Further information on legislation administered by DVA can be found by
visiting www.dva.gov.au.

Payments from Services Australia may be impacted by payments from DVA in
a number of ways. Further information on how DVA payments may be treated
are below.

Multiple entitlement exclusion

Payability of a benefit, pension, supplement or card, can be affected by
multiple entitlement exclusion rules where the customer is receiving
another payment delivered by Services Australia or another Australian
Government agency.

Customers who receive entitlement/s from DVA may not be able to receive
a payment from Services Australia and DVA at the same time. Through the
clearance process, any Services Australia payment the customer is
currently receiving will be reassessed upon advice of payment
information from DVA. An assessment is made to determine if the Services
Australia payment or benefit should be cancelled. The recording of DVA
payments makes sure that any future claims made with Services Australia
will have multiple entitlement exclusion rules applied.

Where a claimant receives Veteran Payment from DVA and are notified of
the end of their Veteran Payment entitlement period, they may claim with
Services Australia. These claims are not to be rejected without the DVA
Clearance Team first consulting with DVA, so that a transition to
Services Australia payments can be facilitated.

Payments treated as income

Some DVA payments are treated as income for social security purposes.
They will affect the rate at which a pension or benefit is paid by
Services Australia to the person or their partner. These payments
include:

-   War Widow(er)'s Pension (paid under VEA) and Wholly Dependent
    Partner Payment paid under Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
    Act 2004 (MRCA) are treated as income for the customer's partner
-   Temporary Incapacity Allowance (paid under VEA) is only payable for
    periods of incapacity before 20 September 2011
-   Dependant Allowance (paid under VEA) is only payable for periods
    before 20 September 2009
-   Eligible Young Person payments paid fortnightly (under MRCA) where
    the young person receives an income support payment
-   Other Dependant (under MRCA) where the young person receives an
    income support payment
-   'Prescribed Child' - (under MRCA) where the young person receives an
    income support payment
-   Adequate Means of Support. This payment has not been granted since 6
    June 1986, however a small number of customers may still be in
    receipt of this payment

Exempt income

DVA payments that are exempt under the income test for social security
purposes include:

Allowances:

-   Clothing
-   Recreation Transport
-   Remote Area
-   Telephone
-   Victoria Cross

Prescribed educational scheme benefits VCES and MRCAETS:

-   Exempt income if paid to parent/guardian on behalf of the child

Lump Sum payments:

-   Eligible Young Person
-   ‘Other’ Dependant (MRCA)
-   Wholly Dependent Partner Payment
-   Prisoner of War Recognition Payment

Weekly/ongoing payments:

-   'Prescribed Child' (under DRCA section 17) if the income is paid to
    a parent/guardian on behalf of the child

Supplements:

-   Energy Supplement
-   Gold Card Energy Supplement
-   Pension Supplement
-   Prisoner of War Recognition Supplement (POWR Supplement)
-   Veterans’ Supplement (equivalent to Services Australia
    Pharmaceutical Allowance)
-   Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence Related Claims) Act
    1988 (DRCA) Supplement and Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
    Act 2004 (MRCA) Supplement (both equivalent to Services Australia
    Pharmaceutical Allowance)

Rent Assistance

Vehicle Assistance Scheme

1 January 2022 changes

Adjusted Disability Pensions are exempt income from 1 January 2022, and
include:

Disability Compensation Payment paid under the Veterans' Entitlements
Act (VEA) 1986. For example:

-   General Rate Disability Compensation Payments (10% to 100%)
-   Disability Compensation Payment at the Special Rate - Totally and
    Permanently Incapacitated (TPI)
-   Temporarily Totally Incapacitated (TTI)
-   Extreme Disablement Adjustment (EDA) and
-   Intermediate Rate

Specific Disability Compensation Payment Allowances (paid under VEA)

Periodic Permanent Impairment payments and (paid under MRCA)

Special Rate Disability Pension (SRDP) (paid under MRCA)

Social security Age Pension (paid by DVA)

Veterans in receipt of a Disability Compensation Payment from DVA, who
are also eligible to receive a social security Age Pension (and their
partners who are eligible for Age Pension), have the choice of receiving
their Age Pension from either DVA or Services Australia. Any Social
Security Age Pension paid by DVA is assessed under social security law.

Incapacity Payments treated as compensation

The following payments represent compensation for loss of income or
earnings and are treated as true compensation payments for social
security purposes.

-   Incapacity Payment under Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
    Act 2004 (MRCA)
-   Incapacity Payment under Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation
    (Defence-related Claims) Act 1988 (DRCA)

The above payments are only assessed by the Compensation Team, see
Treatment of Compensation Payments for further information.

Education payments

The Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) and Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme
(MRCAETS) are prescribed educational scheme payments.

Customers cannot receive education payments from both Services Australia
and DVA, due to multiple entitlement exclusion rules. This means VCES
and MRCAETS recipients are precluded from receiving Youth Allowance
(YA), Austudy and ABSTUDY.

DVA should be advised by the DVA Clearance Team if a DVA student payment
recipient is in receipt of income support or other Australian Government
education assistance payment paid by Services Australia. However, VCES
and MRCAETS payments are treated as income only for the following social
security income support payments:

-   Disability Support Pension
-   Carer Payment
-   Parenting Payment

When receiving a VCES or MRCAETS payment, FTB is payable for a child
aged under 16.

Payment of VCES or MRCAETS, for a child 16 years and over, will prevent
a parent from receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB). Impacted parents will
need to consider implications if the FTB child transfers to a DVA
education payment. If the child is transferred to DVA and the parent is
not receiving FTB for another child, any FTB Rent Assistance will be
lost.

See DVA income and Family Assistance payments on this page for further
information on DVA student payments and implications for Family
Assistance, including shared care.

Totally and Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) Disability Support Pension Manifest Eligibility

A mutual customer who receives a Disability Compensation Payment at the
Special Rate - Totally and Permanently Incapacitated (TPI) paid by DVA
under the Veterans Entitlements Act (1986) satisfies manifest medical
eligibility criteria. This means if a claim is made for Disability
Support Pension with Services Australia, it may be determined without
the need for further medical assessment.

Note: This payment not the same as the ‘Special Rate Disability Pension
(SRDP)’ paid by DVA under the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act 2004 (MRCA). SRDP does not automatically satisfy manifest
eligibility. See Disability Support Pension (DSP) manifest eligibility.

Wholly Dependent Partner payment

Wholly Dependent Partner (WDP) payment, paid under the Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA), may be paid to
widow/ers (married/de facto/in a recognised relationship) of veterans,
where the widow/er was wholly dependent on the veteran immediately
before the veteran's death, and liability has been accepted for the
death as service related.

WDP is a tax free payment that can be paid as one of the following:

-   lifetime fortnightly payments equal to the War Widow(er)s pension
    provided under the Veterans Entitlement Act 1986 (VEA)
-   an actuarial lifetime equivalent paid as a lump sum, or
-   a combination of fortnightly and lump sum payments

WDP is generally granted with a date of effect of the date of the
veteran’s death. Due to the complex nature of the claim circumstances,
claims may be subject to lengthy backdating, generating large arrears.

WDP recipients are not eligible for a social security income support
payment due to multiple entitlement exclusion rules. In the case of WDP,
the exclusion is for the lifetime of the claimant. They may be entitled
to an Income Support Supplement from DVA instead.

For information on WDP and implications for family assistance payments,
see DVA income and Family assistance payments on this page.

A customer who is claiming, or already in receipt of, WDP may contact
Services Australia to discuss impacts to their Services Australia
entitlements. The customer may also contact Services Australia to speak
to a Financial Information Service Officer (FIS) about financial
information relevant to their entitlements.

WDP customers may also be entitled to receive the following from DVA:

-   Gold card
-   MRCA Supplement
-   Income Support Supplement
-   Benefits for dependent children

DVA income and the Parental Income Test

A Parental Income Test (PIT) exemption may apply if a parent or guardian
is receiving certain DVA payments and:

receives Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC), or

has a dependent child(ren) who receive or apply for:

-   Youth Allowance (YA), or
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

Services Australia will automatically apply a PIT exemption if the DVA
payment information is recorded on the parent's record.

If there is no PIT exemption, the DVA payment may count as taxable
income or a tax free pension/benefit under the Parental Income Test.

For further information, see Tax-free pensions and benefits for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments, and the Parental
Income Test for Youth Allowance, ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated
Children.

DVA income and family assistance payments

Some DVA payments are included in adjusted taxable income for Family
Assistance.

A referral to the DVA Clearance Team is required when a DVA payment is
indicated on a Family Assistance new claim. When the DVA income is coded
on the customer record, it will automatically apply the income test
exemption to the customer's rate of Family Tax Benefit Part A for
customer and/or partners receiving:

-   Service Pension
-   Veteran Payment
-   Income Support Supplement (ISS), or
-   Social Security Age Pension paid by DVA

Customers must also include these payments in the income estimate to
determine the correct entitlement to FTB Part B and Child Care Subsidy
(CCS). This means all customers need to provide an estimate of their
annual income, even if receiving an income support payment from DVA.

Customers receiving FTB and CCS must also include the following DVA
payments when advising estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for
family assistance payments:

-   MRCA Compensation payments (tax-free pensions or lump sums),
    including: Wholly Dependent Partner, Special Rate Disability Pension
    and Permanent Impairment.
-   Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA), for periods before 1
    January 2022
-   Invalidity and Partner Service Pensions paid to those who have not
    reached Age Pension age (not taxable)
-   Adjusted Disability Pensions
-   War Widows(er)’s Pension
-   Incapacity Payments

DVA Student Payments, including shared care arrangements

When Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) or Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme
(MRCAETS) payment is paid for a child, FTB is payable to the
parent/carer when the child is aged under 16.

Payment of VCES or MRCAETS, for a child 16 years and over, will prevent
a parent/carer from receiving FTB. Impacted parents will need to
consider implications if the child transfers to a DVA education payment.
If the child is transferred to DVA and the parent is not receiving FTB
for another child, any FTB Rent Assistance will be lost.

Where there are shared care arrangements, each parent/carer may choose
to receive different payment types for the same child. For example, one
parent/carer may choose to receive FTB and the other receive VCES or
MRCAETS. Where one parent/carer is receiving VCES or MRCAETS for a
child, this does not preclude the other parent/carer from claiming or
continuing to receive FTB for this child. Both parents/carer’s are able
to be paid their shared care percentage of the payment they elect to
receive. However, the parent/carer cannot receive FTB and VCES or
MRCAETS at the same time for the same child.

Treatment of Wholly Dependent Partner (WDP) payment arrears and Family
Assistance

The WDP arrears must be included as part of the customer's family income
estimate in the year that the arrears are paid to the customer.

If a customer elects to convert their fortnightly ongoing payments of
WDP to a lump sum, this must be included in the family income estimate
in the financial year in which it is paid.

The customer may also receive a lump sum payment from DVA of Additional
Death Benefit with their grant of WDP. This is not assessable as income
and is not included in the income estimate.

For further information on the treatment of DVA income for Family Tax
Benefit, see Updating income estimates for the current financial year.

For a list of DVA payments see the Resources tab.

Supplements

Supplement Hierarchy

A number of supplements are available from DVA. They are mutually
exclusive to those available from Services Australia, so the customer
will only receive the payment from Services Australia or DVA following
the set hierarchy (highest to lowest) below:

-   Pension Supplement (DVA)
-   Pension Supplement (Services Australia)
-   Energy Supplement (DVA)
-   Energy Supplement (Services Australia)
-   Gold Card Energy Supplement (DVA)
-   Veteran/MRCA Supplement (DVA)
-   Telephone allowance (Services Australia)
-   Pharmaceutical allowance (Services Australia)

Non-Taxable DVA Supplements:

These supplements are non-taxable and exempt from the income test for
pensions and benefits. They are not included in the family assistance
income tests or the Parental Income Test.

-   The Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence Related Claims)
    Act 1988 (DRCA) Supplement - equivalent to Services Australia
    Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA)
    Supplement - equivalent to Services Australia Pharmaceutical
    Allowance
-   Veterans' Supplement - equivalent to Services Australia
    Pharmaceutical Allowance
-   Energy Supplement
-   Gold Card Energy Supplement
-   Remote Area Allowance
-   Pension Supplement (tax-exempt portion only)

Taxable DVA Supplements:

Pension Supplement - equivalent to Services Australia Pension
Supplement; only payable with a qualifying income support payment, and
includes a taxable component. Only the taxable component is included in
the family assistance income tests.

Debts and Overpayments

Automatic debt calculation and recovery

If a Services Australia debt results from the grant of a DVA payment,
Services Australia transfers the debt information to DVA as part of an
automated recovery process. DVA will recover the Services Australia debt
from a customer's DVA arrears, and return the information to Services
Australia. The details are placed on the customer's debt record, and
finalised automatically. If there are not enough funds in the DVA
arrears to recover the Services Australia debt in full, the residual
amount will remain on the customer's Services Australia record.

Manual debt calculation and recovery

The Services Australia system may be unable to automatically calculate a
debt amount due to:

-   a limiting date
-   a cancelled payment record
-   manual rate case, or
-   where conflicting data exists

In these cases, a manual follow up will be generated by the system to be
actioned.

DVA may recover a debt on Services Australia's behalf, see Recovery of
debts via the Department of Veterans, Affairs (DVA) for more information

The Resources page has information about the different DVA payments.
There is also a link to the DVA website for current payment rates.

Related links

Completing Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clearances and income
coding

Locating debts in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS)

Multiple entitlement exclusions

Income and assets tests for income support payments made by Centrelink

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) benefits and services overview

Defence Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA)

Tax-free pensions and benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments, and the Parental Income Test for Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Exempt income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
