-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure explaining how to assess and code
lifetime income stream products.

Lifetime income stream

A lifetime income stream is guaranteed to be paid for the owner's
lifetime and stops on their death. A reversionary beneficiary can be
nominated:

-   these payments will continue on the death of the primary
    beneficiary, and
-   will be paid to the reversionary(s) during their lifetime

This product is not a life expectancy income stream.

It can be purchased with both superannuation money and ordinary savings.

Pooled lifetime income streams are lifetime income streams with a
purchase date on or after 1 July 2019. They are assessed under new means
test rules. A self-managed superannuation fund (SMSF) or small APRA
superannuation fund (SAF) cannot pay pooled lifetime income streams.

Income stream schedule

The income stream provider must provide details of the income stream on
a Details of income stream product (SA330) form or a similar schedule.

For an income stream from a self-managed superannuation fund (SMSF) or
small APRA superannuation fund (SAF), the form:

-   must be completed by the trustee of the fund (generally the customer
    for an SMSF),
-   who may get help from their accountant or financial adviser

Some SMSFs may have a retail provider as their administrator. For
example, AXA, MLC, who may complete the form.

Do not accept a schedule for a non-SMSF sourced income stream if
completed by a financial adviser, accountant or any other person.

Commutation

Lifetime income streams that comply with section 9A of the Social
Security Act 1991 are non-commutable except in extremely limited
circumstances.

Assessment of lifetime income streams

Lifetime products purchased on or after 1 July 2019 will be subject to
the pooled lifetime income streams means testing.

Lifetime income stream products purchased or acquired before 1 July 2019
are grandfathered. They continue to be assessed under the pre-1 July
2019 means test rules.

This assessment relates to all lifetime products purchased before 1 July
2019. The income stream is still assessed according to its purchase date
even if a reversionary beneficiary starts to receive the income after 1
July 2019.

Income assessment

Gross income - deduction amount = assessed income.

Asset assessment

Lifetime income streams that comply with section 9A are asset-test
exempt (ATE) income streams. ATE income streams purchased:

-   before 20 September 2004 are 100% ATE
-   on or after 20 September 2004 and before 20 September 2007 are 50%
    ATE

All lifetime income streams purchased on or after 20 September 2007 and
before 1 July 2019 are fully assessed using an asset assessment formula.
Exception: in very limited circumstances, certain ATE income streams
purchased before 20 September 2007 that are commuted and rolled over
into post 20 September 2007 ATE income streams can retain their 50% or
100% ATE status provided certain conditions are satisfied. The
References page contains a link to the conditions for retention of the
ATE status

Jointly owned income streams

Joint income streams can only be purchased with ordinary money, and not
superannuation money. The income stream payments are made to each owner
of the joint income stream. An income stream that has a single owner
with a reversionary beneficiary is not a joint income stream.

The purchase price and the gross income are halved and recorded on the
customer's and the partner's record. The relevant number is the same for
both. The product name field should identify the product as a jointly
owned income stream.

Note: if the product does not comply with section 9A, it may have a
residual capital value. This should be halved as well.

Reversionary income stream

The original purchaser of the income stream may nominate a person to
receive the income after their death, for example their spouse or
partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

When an income stream is passed on to a reversionary beneficiary:

-   Income is assessed from the day after the date of death of the
    primary beneficiary (deceased spouse or partner), which is the date
    the customer (reversionary) is entitled to receive the payments
-   The income stream is treated as a continuation of the original
    income stream. If it was originally purchased before 1 July 2019,
    but reverted after 1 July 2019, the pre 1 July 2019 assessment will
    continue
-   The ATE status, purchase price, purchase date and relevant number
    remain unchanged
-   The gross income may be reduced as specified in the income stream
    contract

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive regular payments. A
lump sum arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to
cover the gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream
for the period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the
person has been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   where the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation

Successor Fund Transfer

A Successor Fund Transfer (SFT) is where all members of a superannuation
fund move to another superannuation fund. This includes members who have
an income stream.

For an income stream recipient, there can be no change to the terms and
conditions of the income stream product. The income stream will continue
to have the same start date as the original income stream. The only
change would be to the provider name and possibly the product reference
number. The exemption from the assets test would continue to apply to
the income stream.

Refer to the FINS Bulletin for a listing of SFT/IFTs.

Online updates

[] Customers can advise of new lifetime income streams via their
Centrelink online account, however they cannot make changes to existing
lifetime income streams online. Manual handoff will occur where a
customer advises a new lifetime income stream. A DOC with keyword OIAICS
will start on the customer’s record and a Work Item for staff to manual
action is generated on the customer's record containing the details
given by the customer. Staff can select the Work Item to process in
Process Direct.

The Resources page contains links to the Details of Income Stream
Product form (SA330) and the New Level 2 enquiry web form at the My
Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Requests Summary page.

Related links

Adding or updating a defined benefit income

Adding or updating a pooled lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing lifetime income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation
Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

Income stream indexation review

Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset
test exempt income streams from Self Managed or Small APRA Super Funds

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Application to be allowed to commute all or part of an asset-test exempt
income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

Income and assets options online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
