
Deeming exemptions 108-05050020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure relating to financial investments
that are subject to deeming provisions. However, some investments may be
exempt from deeming provisions in special circumstances. This procedure
provides information about deeming exemptions.

On this Page:

Exempt from deeming

Exemptions from deeming are granted only in special circumstances and
are provided for failed investments. Exemptions are not granted for any
of the following:

-   poor investment performance, for example shares producing negative
    returns
-   companies or funds in short-term difficulties, for example temporary
    freezing of redemptions or distributions, or temporary suspension
    stock exchange trading
-   a low return investment was made to assist another person

Investments granted deeming exemptions are still assessable under the
Assets Test. A deeming exemption is not an exemption from the Income
Test, it only removes an investment from the customer's deemed income
calculation. Therefore, the actual income a customer receives from an
investment that has been granted an exemption is assessable.

Note: this procedure does not cover exemptions for superannuation
investments. Asset and deeming exemption applications for superannuation
investments with the necessary investment documentation and evidence are
sent to the Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer for assessment
of customer and investment circumstances and sufficiency of evidence.

Granting exemptions

Only the Minister for the Department of Social Services (DSS) can exempt
an investment or class of investments from deeming rules. Exemptions can
only be applied if the Minister has granted an exemption. Historical
information on the administration of payment types and responsibility
for granting exemptions is in the References page.

The name of the investment on the customer's documentation must match
exactly the name on the Deeming Exemption Register otherwise the
customer's investment cannot be given a deeming exemption. If the name
of the investment has changed in any way since the deeming exemption was
granted, a new application for exemption must be lodged.

Applying for an exemption

Customers who have investments experiencing financial difficulties can
apply for an exemption from deeming for their investments (this should
not be confused with poor investment performance). The procedures, A-H
Deeming Exemption Register and I-Z Deeming Exemption Register list
financial investments that have been granted exemptions.

The Minister has approved guidelines for exemption from the deeming
rules. Guidelines vary for different types of investments.

Applications for exemptions lodged by customers are provided by a
Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer. Completed application forms
with the necessary investment documentation and evidence of failure, are
referred to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) for assessment of
investment circumstance and sufficiency of evidence.

Church and charitable organisations

From 1 January 2010, the Minister for DSS no longer provides exemptions
for church and charitable institutions' investment products.

These investment products are assessed as follows from 1 January 2010:

-   If a current customer already has an exemption granted for an
    investment with a deeming exempt church or charitable development
    fund, their exemption will remain and any actual return they earn or
    receive must be declared for assessment under the Income Test. This
    includes interest or any benefit such as a discount in fees (that
    is, valuable consideration)
-   If a current customer increases their investment into the same fund,
    the additional amount will not receive a deeming exemption, but will
    be treated the same as other investments. The original amount
    invested is still exempt from deeming

If a new customer claims, or a customer who is cancelled and reclaims
after 1 January 2010, they cannot access a deeming exemption for an
investment with a church or charitable institution, even if other
customers have access to a deeming exemption for the same fund.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds

NDIS funds received from the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA)
which are deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of
managing the customer's NDIS plan are exempt from deeming. This includes
whether the funds are received periodically or as a lump sum and also
includes any interest accrued. NDIS funds are not required to be
reported, and if reported should not be taken into account in the income
and asset assessment.

ACT and NSW Government Buybacks

Payments to customers for homes purchased under the ACT Government
Loose-fill Asbestos Insulation Eradication Scheme or the NSW Voluntary
Purchase and Demolition Program (for example, homes insulated by Mr
Fluffy using loose fill asbestos) are to be considered compensatory. The
customer should be advised that the lessor of the sum received and the
amount they are intending to spend on a replacement will not be assessed
as an asset or deemed to be earning income. This applies until they have
replaced the property subject to a 12 month limit (unless there is a
valid reason reasons for taking longer).

The Resources page contains links to relevant training material and to
the proformas Deeming Exemption for a Failed Financial Investment and
Checklist for Application for Deeming Exemption for Failed Financial
Investment. It also contains a link to an Online Query Form to send
queries to the Financial Industry and Network Support (FINS) Helpdesk.

Related links

A-H Deeming Exemption Register

I-Z Deeming Exemption Register

Deeming provisions

Exemptions from income and assets tests for superannuation investments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
