
A-H Deeming Exemption Register 108-05050030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the Deeming Exemption
Register that contains information about the Income Test and Assets Test
treatment of investments with companies and financial institutions in
financial difficulty.

On this Page:

Deeming Exemption Register

The Register is used to assess the amount of income and assets of a
person to determine their entitlement to a social security pension,
allowance or benefit. Exemptions from the extended deeming provisions
can be made on a product or 'across the board' basis for the above types
of investments.

The Register has information about these investments where an
application for exemption has been granted. If investments are granted
exemptions from extended deeming, they are still assessable under the
Assets Test. Deeming exemptions are not exemptions from the Income Test.
Investments granted deeming exemptions have the actual income from the
investment assessed.

The Register is updated when a determination is made about companies and
financial institutions in financial difficulty. Information in the
Register is current at the time of issue.

Deeming exemptions do not apply to investments held by self- managed
superannuation funds (SMSFs) or small Australian Prudential Regulatory
Authority (APRA) superannuation funds (SAFs).

The Process page contains the A - H listing of the Deeming Exemption
Register.

Using the Register

Income and asset values are recorded for each investment. These values
must be used in assessing pension/allowance entitlement. The investments
listed are exempt from deeming provisions and should not have deemed
income applied to them. If customers hold such investments, the details
should be recorded separately on the customer's record. If Service
Officers have questions about the Register, they should contact
financial.markets@servicesaustralia.gov.au for assistance.

Granting exemptions

The Ministers for the Department of Social Services and Department of
Education, Skills and Employment have legislative power to exempt a
financial investment or a class of financial investments from the
deeming rules for payments covered by their portfolio. Historical
information on the administration of Services Australia payments and
responsibility for granting exemptions is available in the Policy
section of the procedure, Deeming exemptions.

Church and charitable organisations

Some church and charitable institutions development funds received
deeming exemptions prior to 1 January 2010. From 1 January 2010, the
Minister for the Department of Social Services ceased providing
exemptions for these investments. Note: the Minister for the Department
of Education, Skills and Employment ceased providing deeming exemptions
for these types of funds in 2007. The procedure, Deeming exemptions, has
more information on the assessment of investments in church or
charitable development funds.

For historical information about specific church and charitable funds
required for overpayments and reviews of decisions, contact the FINS
Helpdesk for assistance.

Customers may still apply for individual deeming exemptions for
investments in church or charitable development funds but only if the
investment is a failed financial.

Insurance or compensation payments

Insurance or compensation payments received by a person for loss of, or
damage to buildings, plant or personal effects and held as financial
investments are not deemed under the Income Test. The exemption from the
Income Test deeming rules applies for 12 months starting on the day the
insurance or compensation payment is or was received. The procedure,
Exempt income, has more information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk -
Online Query Form, which can be used to contact the FINS Helpdesk. It
also contains a link to the FINS Bulletin.

Related links

I-Z Deeming Exemption Register

Deeming exemptions

Exempt income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
