
Determining the appropriate tax year for the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme 108-02010050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the factors in determining the appropriate tax
year to use for the Parental Income Test (PIT) for dependent Youth
Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)
Scheme Additional Boarding Allowance.

On this Page:

Applying the PIT for YA, ABSTUDY and AIC

The PIT is applied to the customer's combined parental income for a
financial year. It is necessary to ensure that the parental income for
the appropriate tax year is used to make this calculation.

Normally, the combined parental income for the base tax year is used.
However, the income for the base tax year may not reflect the
circumstances of the parent(s)/guardian(s), or person(s) deemed to be a
parent/guardian for the purposes of the Parental Income Test, in the
year they make a claim for benefits. The current income may increase or
decrease from the base year income.

Decrease in Income

The parental income for the current tax year may be used to determine
the customer's entitlement where:

-   there is a substantial decrease in income for the current tax year
    from that of the base tax year, and
-   the drop in income is expected to last at least two years from the
    later of 1 January in the year of the claim or the date of the drop

Increase in Income

Similarly, if the parent(s)/guardian(s) have an increase in their
combined income for the current tax year of more than 25% over both that
of the base tax year and the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA), the
customer's entitlement is based on the current tax year figures from:

-   the first payment period that ends after 30 September in the year of
    the claim for YA customers; and
-   1 October in the year of study for ABSTUDY and AIC customers. For
    AIC, only an Additional Boarding Allowance received by a customer
    (usually the parent/guardian applicant for the student) is affected.
    Other AIC allowances are not affected as they are not subject to
    means testing

There is no provision to make an assessment of entitlement based on the
combined parental income for the financial year commencing 1 July in the
year of claim (i.e. the current tax year + 1).

A customer (or parent) may request a current year assessment up to 13
weeks in advance of an event. However, it must be satisfied that there
is sufficient evidence to support the estimate provided. If not, a
follow up action may be required to determine whether the information is
still accurate closer to the event.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) Impacts on parental income

For the purposes of a current year assessment, where a parent advises a
substantial decrease in income, because of coronavirus, Service Officers
must accept that the decrease will last for 2 years or more. Parents
will not be require to provide evidence of their decrease in income.
Both the online Advise Parental Income service and the paper MOD JY form
have been updated to cater for these circumstances.

The Resources page contains a link to relevant forms and a base tax year
chart.

Related links

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options Online

Advise parental income option online

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
