-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and code life expectancy income
stream products.

Life expectancy income stream

A life expectancy income stream is guaranteed to be paid for a fixed
period. The fixed term is based on the life expectancy rules and ranges
specified in section 9B of the Social Security Act 1991. It is not a
term income stream product (type TIS) for social security purposes.

Note: before 20 September 2004, complying life expectancy income streams
were known as 15 year minimum term income streams. Providers previously
reported these products as term products. From 20 September 2004, the 15
year minimum term rule no longer applies.

New life expectancy income streams cannot be purchased on or after 20
September 2007. However, under certain conditions, an existing
asset-test exempt life expectancy income stream can be fully commuted
and directly transferred (rollover) to a new life expectancy income
stream. This complies with section 9B.

The following are not life expectancy income streams for social security
purposes:

-   account-based income streams (also known as an allocated pension)
-   market-linked income streams (also known as a term allocated
    pension)
-   lifetime income streams

Income stream schedule

The income stream provider must provide details of the income stream on
a Details of income stream product (SA330) or a similar schedule.

For an income stream from a self managed superannuation fund (SMSF) or
small APRA Fund (SAF), the trustee of the fund, (generally the customer
for an SMSF), must complete the form. They may need help from their
accountant or financial adviser.

Some SMSFs may have a retail provider as their administrator. For
example, AXA, MLC, who may complete the form.

Do not accept a schedule for a non-SMSF sourced income stream if
completed by a financial adviser, accountant, or any other person.

Commutation

Life expectancy income streams that comply with section 9B are
non-commutable except in extremely limited circumstances.

Asset assessment of life expectancy income stream

Life expectancy income streams that comply with section 9B are
asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams. ATE income streams purchased:

-   before 20 September 2004 are 100% ATE
-   on or after 20 September 2004 and before 20 September 2007 are 50%
    ATE

All income streams purchased on or after 20 September 2007 are fully
assessed using an asset assessment formula.
Exception: in very limited circumstances, certain ATE income streams
purchased before 20 September 2007 that are commuted and rolled over
into post 20 September 2007 ATE income streams, can retain their 50% or
100% ATE status provided certain conditions are satisfied. The
References page contains a link to the conditions for retention of the
asset-test exemption

Income assessment of a life expectancy income stream

Gross income - deduction amount = assessed income.

Jointly owned income streams

Joint income streams can only be purchased with ordinary money, and not
superannuation money. The income stream payments are made to each owner
of the joint income stream. An income stream that has a single owner
with a reversionary beneficiary is not a joint income stream.

The purchase price and the gross income are halved and recorded on the
customer's and the partner's record. The relevant number is the same for
both. The product name field should identify the product as a jointly
owned income stream.

Reversionary income stream

The original purchaser of the income stream may nominate a person to
receive the income after their death for example their spouse or
partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

On reversion to a reversionary beneficiary or partner, the life
expectancy income stream:

-   is assessed from the day after date of death of the primary
    beneficiary (deceased spouse or partner), which is the date the
    customer (reversionary beneficiary) is entitled to receive the
    payments
-   is treated as a continuation of the original income stream
-   the purchase price, purchase date and relevant number are the same
-   the gross income may be reduced as specified in the income stream
    contract

If the income stream complies with Section 9B, upon reversion the ATE
status must be re-determined.

If the original purchase date was before 20 September 2004, the income
stream is assessed in the hands of the reversionary beneficiary based on
their characteristics and the characteristics of the income stream. The
income stream will continue to have 100% ATE status where:

-   the remaining term of the income stream (rounded up to the next
    whole number of years) is equal to the reversionary beneficiary’s
    life expectancy (rounded up to the next whole number of years), and
-   the reversionary has reached Age Pension age

The above requirement does not apply to products purchased from 20
September 2004 and before 20 September 2007. If the income stream loses
ATE status on reversion, it is assessed as a non-complying asset-tested
income stream.

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive regular payments. A
lump sum arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to
cover the gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream
for the period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the
customer has been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   where the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation

Online updates

[] Customers can advise of new life expectancy income streams via their
Centrelink online account, however, they cannot make changes to existing
life expectancy income streams online. Manual handoff occurs where a
customer advises a new life expectancy income stream. A DOC with keyword
OIAICS starts on the customer’s record and a work item for staff manual
action will be generated on the customer's record containing details
provided by the customer. Staff select the work item to process the
update in Process Direct.

The Resources page contains links to the Details of income stream
product form (SA330) and the Level 2 Policy Help Desk - Online Query
Form.

Related links

Adding or updating a term income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a pooled lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Assessing life expectancy income streams paid from Self Managed
Superannuation Funds (SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

Income stream indexation review

Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset
test exempt income streams from Self Managed or Small APRA Super Funds

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Application to be allowed to commute all or part of an asset-test exempt
income stream due to extreme financial hardship

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
