-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PIT, how it applies and exemptions.

Application of the PIT

The Parental Income Test (PIT) is applied to dependent ABSTUDY and Youth
Allowance (YA) customers (student, Australian Apprentice or job seeker),
as well as Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Additional
Boarding Allowance (ABA) students, unless there is circumstance when the
PIT does not apply.

A customer who is considered independent for Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY
purposes is not subject to the PIT (however the personal/partner income
tests and the combined assets test may apply).

The PIT for ABSTUDY applies to Living Allowance, the means tested
component of School Fees Allowance Group 2 and certain other allowances.
The amount of ABSTUDY School Fees Allowance Group 2 is also affected by
the level of the student's school (tuition) and boarding fees. If the
PIT precludes payment of ABSTUDY Living Allowance and associated
allowances, the customer may be eligible for ABSTUDY non-means tested
assistance.

For AIC ABA purposes, the amount received may also be affected by the
level of the student’s school (tuition) and boarding fees.

The PIT applies to the parent(s) or guardian(s) who the customer
normally lives with, or last lived with if they don't live with either
parent or guardian. A step parent's income may be disregarded where the
customer does not normally live with the parent and step-parent. For
more information, see Applying the Parental Income Test for ABSTUDY and
Youth Allowance.

The PIT for AIC ABA is applied to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the
student (usually the AIC applicant and/or their partner).

If parental income exceeds the maximum income limit (and if there is no
PIT exemption), YA or ABSTUDY Living Allowance is not payable to the
customer. If parental income exceeds the upper income limit for the
payment of AIC ABA, the ABA is not payable to the applicant. However,
the applicant is still eligible for the non-means tested AIC Basic
Boarding Allowance for the student.

Note: dependent YA customers and claimants are also subject to a
personal income test. The rate of payment each fortnight will be
determined by the test (on parental income or personal income) that
results in the greatest reduction of rate that is payable. If this rate
is nil, payment will not be made in that fortnight.

Dependent ABSTUDY students aged 16 years and over and dependent ABSTUDY
Australian Apprentices aged 16 years and over are also subject to a
personal income test (that is, dependent ABSTUDY students and Australian
Apprentices under 16 years are exempt from the personal income test).
Their payment of Living Allowance and other income tested allowances
each fortnight will be determined by the test (parental income or
personal income) that results in the greatest reduction of the customer
or claimant’s payment. If this rate is nil, payment will not be made in
that fortnight. Similarly, the amount of an ABSTUDY boarding instalment,
term in advance payment of Living Allowance and other income tested
allowances for students aged 16 years or over is also determined by the
test that results in the greatest reduction of the payment.

Note: a Maintenance Income Test may also apply, see Maintenance Income
Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA).

Exemptions from PIT

The PIT will not apply to a dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer during the
period where at least one of their parent(s)/guardian(s):

-   receives a certain social security benefit or pension or a payment
    paid by the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), listed in Module
    L of Section 1067G of the Social Security Act 1991 (for example,
    Service Pension, Income Support Supplement (ISS), Veteran Payment)
-   receives ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   receives Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

The parent(s)/guardians(s) are not taken to be receiving an income
support payment, and an exemption from the PIT will not apply if they:

-   are serving an Income Maintenance Period that reduces their rate to
    nil
-   are in an employment income nil rate period, or
-   have an AGE/CZR PLS status (indicating receipt of Home Equity Access
    Scheme payments only)

Note: an additional exemption only applies to dependent ABSTUDY
customers or claimants if a parent holds a current Health Care Card or
has a Health Care Card because they receive the maximum rate of Family
Tax Benefit Part A.

Parental income

Income assessed under the Parental Income Test (PIT) is combined
parental income in the appropriate tax year. This will usually be the
income of the base tax year (the financial year ending in June of the
previous calendar year), but can in some cases be the current tax year
(the year after the base tax year.

The PIT includes the following income:

-   taxable income (whether above or below the tax free threshold)
    Note: a taxation loss means the parent(s)/guardian(s) does not have
    a taxable income and is coded as zero
-   exempt reportable fringe benefits or salary sacrifice (a fringe
    benefit concession is applied, depending on the relevant financial
    year)
-   other reportable fringe benefits or salary sacrifice (100 per cent
    will be included to the PIT)
-   target foreign income
-   total net investment losses
-   reportable superannuation contributions
-   tax free pensions and benefits (from 1 July 2017 onward)

If a parent has paid maintenance (including child support) for other
children, this amount is deducted from the total parental income amount.

Parental income reviews

From 1 July to 31 December each year, a PIT Copy process applies to
parent(s)/guardian(s) who:

-   received Family Tax Benefit, Child Care Benefit or Child Care
    Subsidy in the base tax year, and
-   if single, have finalised their personal income tax returns, or
-   if partnered, both parents have finalised their personal income tax
    returns

The parent/guardian will have their income copied to their dependent
child’s record via this PIT Copy process.

This data will generally apply from 1 January of the following calendar
year, or from 1 October of the current calendar year if the new income
has increased to more than 125% of the previous financial year income.
See Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Note: a PIT Copy will not occur if the parent has any of the following
recorded on their family assistance record for the appropriate tax year:

-   Tax Exempt Foreign Income
-   Foreign Income
-   Tax Free Pension/Benefit, or
-   Deductible Child Maintenance Expenditure

In September each year, all dependent YA and ABSTUDY customers, except
those whose parent(s)/guardian(s) are providing a PIT exemption or have
had a PIT Copy process applied to their record, are issued an annual PIT
review letter and a One Time Access Code (OTAC). They are requested to
have their parent(s)/guardian(s) provide the necessary information
online using the []Advise Parental Income online service. See Completing
Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and Current Tax Year
(MOD JY) for more information.

Parental Income Free Area (PIFA)

The PIFA is the amount of income the parent(s)/guardian(s) can have
without affecting the rate of YA, ABSTUDY or AIC (ABA). If the
parent(s)/guardian(s) income is above the PIFA, the YA, ABSTUDY or AIC
ABA customer's or claimant’s rate is reduced.

For the Parental income free area, see:

-   Parental Income Test (PIT) - Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Parental Income Test (PIT) - Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

For the PIT, excess parental income is the amount by which the combined
parental income exceeds the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA).

If combined parental income exceeds the PIFA, the excess will reduce the
amount of ABSTUDY, YA or AIC ABA payable. The excess is divided amongst
each member of the family pool by the percentage share of the young
person’s payment of the total Maximum Payment Rate (MPR).

For example, if the total Family Pool Maximum Rate (FPMR).amount is
$1,000, and there are two members of the family pool where the
customer’s MPR is $600 (60% of the family MPR) and the sibling’s MPR is
$400 (40% of the family MPR), then the customer’s reduction is affected
by 60% of the parental income excess.

Where there is more than one dependent young person (including the
customer, claimant or AIC student) in the family pool, the rate
reduction is apportioned between the dependent young people. The
relevant portion is based on the young person's or AIC student's
percentage share of the total Family Pool Maximum Rate (FPMR).

All of the following payments will be included in the family pool where
there is only one dependent young person in the family and they also
receive more than one of the following payments:

-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   Group 2 School Fees Allowance – means tested component
-   Assistance for Isolated Children Additional Boarding Allowance, or
-   Meet the definition of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child or regular
    care child

For example, where a child receives AIC ABA and meets the definition of
a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child or regular care child simultaneously,
both amounts will be included in the family pool calculation.

The Resources page contains link to the Payment Rates and Thresholds
file.

Contents

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Determining the appropriate tax year for the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT)

Family taper for the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Assessing and coding parental income for ABSTUDY, Assistance for
Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme and Youth Allowance (YA)

Creating, updating and ending Parental Income Test (PIT) links with
dependent student, Australian Apprentice and job seeker recipients or
claimants

Linking sibling records with customers/students/Australian
Apprentices/job seekers - Parental Income Test (PIT)

Youth Allowance at pending status (YAL/PSA) and dependent siblings

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Related links

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

Allowance income and assets tests

The Parental Means Test

Independence for ABSTUDY customers

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Personal/Partner Income Tests for students, trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Assets Test for allowances, Austudy and independent ABSTUDY customers

Employment income nil rate period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
