-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to decide if verification of rent is needed.
It also explains what to code in the Verification field when
verification is not needed, or if it is needed and has not yet been
received.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) rent verification waiver

From 25 September 2020 onwards, the COVID-19 rent verification waiver
stops. See Resources for a timeline of system changes made to deliver
this waiver.

If a customer's new claim or updated accommodation details were:

-   received on or after 25 September 2020, follow the normal rent
    verification and exemption rules detailed on the Process tab
-   received from 26 March 2020 to 24 September 2020 for Group A payment
    types or received from 13 May 2020 to 24 September 2020 for Group B
    payment types, regardless of the claim processing date or update,
    they remain subject to COVID-19 rent verification waiver and will
    not need to verify their rent details for the claim or update, that
    is, the rent details given by the customer during these periods are
    regarded as verified

These rules apply to the following payment types:

Group A payment types

From 26 March 2020 to 24 September 2020, rent verification waiver
applied to customers or their partners who were claiming or receiving
the following payments and advised of a change in circumstance:

-   ABSTUDY - Living Allowance
-   Austudy
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (partnered and single)
-   Partner Allowance (PA)
-   Sickness Allowance (SA)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Widow Allowance (WA)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Group B payment types

From 13 May 2020 to 24 September 2020, rent verification waiver applied
to customers or their partners who were claiming or receiving the
following payments and advised of a change in circumstance:

-   Age Pension
-   Bereavement Allowance (BVA)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

There are no changes to existing date of event or date of receipt rules
when processing any RA related update.

When customers must provide verification

Generally, customers must verify their rent details to be paid Rent
Assistance (RA). This includes when the customer:

-   is lodging a new income support payment, ABSTUDY or Family Tax
    Benefit (FTB) claim, or
-   tells Services Australia about a change of accommodation
    circumstances

Only 1 member of a couple needs to return verification.

Some customers will be exempt from providing verification.

An A-Z of all Rent Assistance terms and codes is in Rent Assistance
(RA).

When customers do not need to provide verification

Customers selected for an RA Profile review must provide verification
regardless of their circumstances.

Customers not undergoing a review will be exempt from verifying their
rent details when:

living in exempt accommodation for the purposes of Rent Assistance. For
more details, see References page. Exempt accommodation is:

-   boarding style accommodation
-   living in 'refuge type' accommodation; that is, a refuge, crisis or
    emergency accommodation of generally not more than 3 months (short
    term)
-   living full time in a non-Commonwealth funded bed in residential
    care (including nursing homes and hostels)

living in a retirement village and qualified for RA as they are regarded
as a non-homeowner due to the amount of the entry contribution

reduced verification for rent assistance can be applied

claiming an income support payment/ABSTUDY or transferring from another
income support payment/ABSTUDY, and:

-   the rent has previously been verified, and
-   the details have not changed

they pay rent to a community housing organisation and they have provided
verification using the Electronic Verification of Rent (EVoR) service

Timeframes for providing verification

Customers are to provide verification within 14 days of receipt of
notice.

The system allows 7 days for postage each way. This means the system
will not cancel RA for 28 days from the date the activity is finalised.
Advise customers they have 14 days to return notice. Do not advise
customers they have 28 days.

Failure to provide verification

Customers in receipt of an income support payment, ABSTUDY and some
Family Tax Benefit customers can be paid RA for 28 days after the system
date of an update that is recorded with the rent verification codes of
COA, NCL, HAR or UPL.

Where customers fail to provide rent verification within the 28 day time
frame, automatic review processing will cease their RA by applying the
rent verification code of NVE. These customers retain entitlement to the
rent assistance received during the COA, NCL, HAR or UPL period. For
more information, see Types of Centrelink debts and how they are
generated.

The Resources page has links to the Rent Certificate (SU523HD), Rent
Declaration (SU336M), links to Centrelink online accounts and Rent
Assistance information on the Services Australia website and coronavirus
(COVID-19) rent verification examples.

Related links

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen including assessing
Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Manually issuing a Rent Certificate (SU523HD)

Processing proof of rent for the Verification field on the Accommodation
Details (AC) screen

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Types of Centrelink debts and how they are generated

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
