
Assessment of assets (CLK) 108-04020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assets owned by a customer that
are treated as assessable assets and included when calculating the rate
of payment unless specifically exempted under a provision of the Act.

Applying appropriate assets test

When calculating a customer's entitlement to a payment under the Social
Security Act 1991, qualification, eligibility and payability is tested
under various rules. This is done to ensure that financial assistance is
directed to those members of the community most in need.

The Assets Test is based on the principle that customers with
substantial assets, apart from their principal home, should use these
assets to produce income for their own support.

On 1 July each year, assets thresholds are indexed to the Consumer Price
Index (CPI) along with deeming thresholds and Income Test free areas.

The type of payment a customer is applying for or receiving determines
which Assets Test to apply. A customer can also apply under hardship
provisions if necessary.

For Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers aged under 21, the
allowable assets thresholds for full pension are the same, but the cut
off limits for part pension will be lower due to the lower maximum rate
of payment.

Assessable and exempt assets

Section 11 of the Social Security Act 1991 defines an asset as
'property'. Property is not defined in the Act, but has an established
common law meaning - any possession, belongings or property owned solely
or partly, including beneficial interests, and/or debts owed to a
person. Some assets are exempt under the Social Security Act 1991,
section 1118.

Market value

Assets are assessed at their net market value. Net market value is not
the replacement value or the amount it is insured for - it is the amount
likely to be received by selling the asset. The market value of an asset
can be reduced if there is an encumbrance or unsecured loan against it.

If the asset is owned with another person, the asset value for a
customer is determined using their proportion of their interest in the
asset.

Property settlements

Property settlement pending: The percentage of ownership the person has
before they are separated remains after the separation until any
property settlement is finalised. If the customer asserts a beneficial
or trust ownership different to the legal ownership of an asset, the
trust and companies provisions are applied to determine existence of a
trust and attribution of income and assets.

If proceeds from the sale of the customer’s principal home (exempt
asset) are in a solicitor’s trust account pending the resolution of a
property settlement, see Selling a home.

Example: If a separated couple sell their home on 1 July 2021 and the
division of property through the court occurs on 1 April 2022:

the home sale proceeds exemption applies from the date of sale for 12
months (or up to 24 months)

each member of the couple have 3 months (of the 12) left of their home
sales proceeds exemption. However if they meet the requirements:

-   they can apply for an extension of up to 24 months of the home sales
    proceeds exemption, and
-   they could have up to 15 months in total

Deeming only applies once the division of property is known, so in the
above example, the sales proceeds would be deemed from 1 April.

When a jointly owned assessable asset (e.g. rental property) is sold and
the funds are held in a solicitor’s trust account pending a property
settlement between a separated couple:

-   the percentage of ownership the person has before they are separated
    remains until any property settlement is finalised
-   the proceeds held in the solicitor’s trust account are deemed

Property settlement finalised:

-   The outstanding balance of a property settlement is an asset
-   If the court order allows for income to be paid on the outstanding
    balance, it is assessed as income
-   Financial assets are deemed
-   The trust and company rules apply to any trust created or declared
    by a court, tribunal or arbitrator as a result of a property
    settlement, or created as a result of a property settlement

Deprivation: When a person gives away assets as a result of a court
order or property settlement following a relationship breakdown, it is
not regarded as deprivation for Social Security purposes. Satisfying the
demands of a court order or property settlement is considered adequate
consideration for the asset.

Loans

An amount lent by a customer is an assessable asset and is assessed as a
financial investment subject to the deeming provisions. A customer may
apply through the Financial Information Service (FIS) Officer to the
Minister for Social Services to exempt investments and loans from the
deeming provisions.

Assessment of stolen assets

If a customer’s assets are stolen, including in cases of elder abuse,
refer the case to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for advice. Document the
customer’s record with the details of the situation and the date
referred.

Note: before referring, ensure the customer has provided any available
evidence to verify that theft has occurred. Suitable evidence could be a
police report or similar document verifying the circumstances.

Real estate, businesses, trusts and companies

To work out the total net value of a customer's assets, the primary
production aggregation rules are applied.

Real estate, businesses, trusts and companies are assessed as primary
production assets or a non-primary production asset so that negative net
primary production assets can be offset against other primary production
assets.

The Resources page contains a link to CPI information. It also contains
a link to assets information on the Services Australia website.

Contents

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Assessing a failed loan

Verifying and recording assets changes

Loans and liabilities against assets

Interest in an estate

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Exempt Assets

Pensions income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assets and liabilities of a business

Special Disability Trust (SDT) - initial contact

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
