
Determining the appropriate tax year for the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test 108-03020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify the correct financial year to use
in the assessment of the Carer Payment (CP) Income Test part of the
non-customer CRIA test.

Non-customer income and assets

How to identify whose income and assets should be included with the care
receiver's income or assets is not covered in this procedure. See
Applying the income test component of the non-customer CRIA test.

Base tax year

The base tax year is the appropriate tax year in most cases.

Base tax year income too high

A care receiver with taxable income over the care receiver's income
threshold in the base tax year can pass the care receiver Income Test if
their written estimate of their taxable income for the current financial
year is reasonable and is below the care receiver's income threshold. In
these cases, the appropriate tax year is the current financial year,
rather than the base tax year, and the estimate for the current
financial year should be coded. For care receivers income thresholds see
the Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on
the Rates and Threshold page

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), in an account specifically
for the purpose of managing the customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from
the income and asset test and deeming. They are not required to be
reported or if reported should not be taken into account in the income
and asset assessment.

Appropriate tax year for notifiable events for children

For notifiable event situations where an increase in income or assets
has been notified for a child care receiver while CP (child) is being
paid, the appropriate tax year may change to the financial year in which
the event occurred, or to the following financial year, if the estimated
taxable income for either of these years is over the care receivers
income threshold.

Assets over the care receiver's assets value limit

The appropriate tax year for the care receiver Income Test is generally
the current financial year if the assets are above the care receivers
assets test limit. This is because a care receiver may be exempted from
the Assets Test depending on their assets value, their liquid assets and
their estimated current financial year taxable income. For these cases
the appropriate tax year is usually the current financial year, rather
than the base tax year. For care receivers income thresholds and asset
limits see the Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset
Limits link on the Rates and Threshold page.

Related links

Applying the income test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Applying the assets test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Assets test exemptions for the non-customer Care Receiver Income and
Assets (CRIA) test

Payment rates and thresholds

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
