
Quarterly Supplement 108-08030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 20 March 2017, Energy Supplement grandfathering arrangements apply
for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders. Only CSHC holders
who are grandfathered for Energy Supplement will receive the payment
from 20 March 2017 onwards.

This document outlines the quarterly supplement for Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC) holders.

Payment of quarterly supplement

The quarterly payment is made up of Energy Supplement. From 20 March
2017, Energy Supplement will only be paid to CSHC holders who are
grandfathered. For more information about grandfathering for Energy
Supplement, see Energy Supplement for CSHC holders.

Eligible CSHC holders who are grandfathered for Energy Supplement, have
provided payment destination details and have not asked to stop
quarterly supplement will get quarterly supplement payments on 20 March,
20 June, 20 September, and 20 December each year.

If the customer ceases to be a CSHC holder before the next payment date,
any residual supplements are paid on cancellation.

The quarterly supplement is:

-   An arrears payment calculated on a daily rate based on the
    customer's marital status (single or partnered)
-   Paid each quarter on or shortly after the test days of 20 March, 20
    June, 20 September and 20 December. A quarter commences on a test
    day and ends the day before the next test day. Payments are usually
    made within a few days after the test day
-   A non-taxable payment
-   Not means-tested, so each grandfathered CSHC holder receives the
    relevant amount in full
-   An optional payment. Customers not wishing to be paid quarterly
    supplement can decline the payment at any time
-   Portable, for more information see portability of add-ons

The quarterly supplement is only payable to a bank account and is not
paid by cheque, in accordance with section 1061UA of the Social Security
Act 1991. See the References page for a link.

Quarterly supplement historical information

The Seniors Supplement payment (SSP) was introduced from 20 September
2009 to replace Seniors Concession Allowance (SCA) and Telephone
Allowance (TAL) for CSHC holders. The Seniors Supplement payment was
abolished from 20 June 2015.

Before 20 June 2015, the Energy Supplement was automatically paid to
CSHC holders who elected to receive Seniors Supplement payment (SSP). If
a CSHC holder declined the SSP, they would not have received Energy
Supplement.

Since 20 June 2015, the quarterly supplement's only component is Energy
Supplement.

Energy Supplement will no longer be paid from 20 March 2017 to CSHC
holders who do not meet the grandfathering provisions. Grandfathering
rules will determine a CSHC holder's ongoing entitlement to Energy
Supplement from 20 March 2017.

Delivery of quarterly supplement and payment nominee

For customers with a payment nominee, the nominee's bank account details
must be coded for the quarterly supplement to be paid.

There are two possible scenarios:

-   The customer has a new payment nominee arrangement and quarterly
    supplement payment has not been received, or
-   The customer has a payment nominee and the quarterly supplement has
    been paid by cheque

In both scenarios, to be paid correctly:

-   The payment nominee arrangement must be cancelled
-   Nominee bank account details must be recorded
-   The nominee arrangement must be manually reinstated for the
    quarterly supplement (and any arrears) to be paid

Rate of quarterly supplement payment

The quarterly supplement is calculated on a daily rate. The daily rate
is calculated by dividing the annual rate by 364.

Quarterly supplement may vary because it is calculated by the daily rate
multiplied by the number of days in the quarter. Test days are included
in the next quarter, for example, for the December quarterly supplement,
the first day of the quarter is 20 September and the last day is 19
December.

The rate of quarterly supplement is based on marital status:

Partnered rate applies whether or not the customer's partner receives a
payment or holds a CSHC. The rate may be affected by changes to the
partner's circumstances such as illness separation.

Single rate applies to customers who are:

-   Not a member of a couple
-   A member of an illness separated couple
-   A member of a psychological care separated couple
-   A member of a respite care couple, or
-   Partnered and their partner is in gaol

Cancellation of CSHC and quarterly supplement

Customers who have their CSHC cancelled are paid out their accumulated
quarterly supplement on cancellation. Customers moving from CSHC to any
pension or from any pension to CSHC, will be paid their accumulated CSHC
quarterly supplement or pension supplement on transfer.

As a result of immediate payment of all monies due on transfer, there
should not be any circumstances where dual payments are made.

Upon cancellation of CSHC, the accumulated rate is the daily rate
multiplied by the number of days the customer is entitled to up to but
not including the cancellation date. For example, if a customer's CSHC
is cancelled on 25 September, they would have accumulated five days of
payment (20-24 September).

Note: cancellation of CSHC after 19 September 2016 will result in the
loss of grandfathering for Energy Supplement.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

Contents

Suppression of quarterly supplement

Related links

Rates and thresholds

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Energy Supplement

Energy Supplement for Commonwealth Seniors Health Card holders

Quarterly supplement overseas absences

Portability of Add-ons

Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA) clearances

Changes in a customer's circumstances and effect on concession card
entitlement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
