-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how under the pension Income Test, a customer's
pension rate is reduced if their assessable income is above a certain
limit.

Applicable rates and tests

A customer under 21 years with no dependent children will have an
ongoing taper rate of 50 cents in the dollar if they:

-   claim DSP on or after 20 September 2009, or
-   are currently on DSP and have no affecting income

The DSP customer will be assessed under the youth rates for single
pensioners or the adult pension rates for partnered couples. They are
not eligible for the Pension Supplement until they turn 21 years. For
DSP customers under 21 to be eligible for Pension supplement they need
to have dependent children.

A separate rate is calculated under both the Income Test and the Assets
Test. The lowest rate calculated is the rate payable to the customer.

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement may
be subject to a direct deduction Income Test if they are receiving
income from that agreement country. Direct deductions may also apply to
compensation income.

For customers with employment income, apply the Working Credit rules to
the total ordinary income before applying the Income Test.

DSP (Blind) may be exempt from the Means Test, but income and assets
details are required to determine their partner's entitlement, or if the
customer wishes to apply for Rent Assistance. However, they may provide
their income and assets details if they wish.

Exempt income and assets

An exempt asset is one that is disregarded under the Assets Test,
irrespective of its value. However, an exempt asset may have assessable
income. For example, the proceeds from the sale of the principal home
are an exempt asset but the proceeds when invested are subject to
deeming as a financial asset.

There are four broad categories of exempt income. Although exempt income
is disregarded as income, the amount received may be an assessable asset
and if the funds are invested, deeming provisions apply.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), (whether received
periodically or as a lump sum and including interest accrued), which are
deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing the
customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the Income and Assets Tests and
deeming. They are not required to be reported or if reported should not
be taken into account in the income and asset assessment.

The Resources page contains a link to the Disability and Care Payment
rates and examples of rate calculations.

Related links

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for single pension customers

Rates and thresholds

Income, assets and rates of payment

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
