
Care Receiver Income and Assets 108-03020000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the care receiver's income
and assets test.

On this Page:

Care receiver

Both the carer and the care receiver must meet eligibility criteria when
applying for Carer Payment (CP).

A care receiver 16 years or over must meet the following conditions:

-   achieve a qualifying score as determined by the Adult Disability
    Assessment Tool (ADAT) Determination 1999
-   be likely to suffer from the condition or disability permanently or
    for an extended period of 6 months
-   meet the residence requirements
-   require care in their home or in hospital
-   meet an income and assets test unless they receive a Social Security
    or Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) income support payment, and
-   be 16 years or over with or without a dependent child in their care

Income and Assets test

To be eligible for CP, the person who is being cared for must generally
receive a Social Security or Veterans' Affairs pension or benefit. For
more information, see Applying the income test component of the
non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test.

If the person is not receiving a Social Security or Veterans' Affairs
pension or benefit then they are subject to the non-customer Care
Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds received from the
National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), whether received
periodically or as a lump sum (including interest accrued), which are
deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of managing the
customer's NDIS plan, are exempt from the income and assets tests and
deeming. They are not required to be reported or if reported should not
be taken into account in the income and asset assessment.

Income test

The care receiver's income threshold is determined under the Social
Security Act (SSA) 1991. The income to be assessed for the non-customer
care receiver is based on their personal circumstances (for example,
single or partnered, living with a parent/guardian, etc.), and their
income in the appropriate tax year as set out in the SSA. It does not
include any non-taxable income. For care receivers income thresholds see
the Carer Payment (CP) - Care Receiver Income and Asset Limits link on
the Rates and Threshold page.

Once income qualification is established, the non-customer care receiver
assets test is applied.

Assets test

The care receiver Assets Test includes assets within and outside
Australia and the value of the asset is the net market value. The family
home is not included.

If a care receiver does not pass the care receivers assets test limit,
they may be exempt from the Assets Test depending on:

-   the assets value
-   the liquid assets
-   the income amount

The effect of these exemption provisions is that a family with assets
over the assets limit will pass the Assets Test. They will still need to
meet the care receiver's income threshold. For care receivers income
thresholds and asset limits see the Carer Payment (CP - Care Receiver
Income and Asset Limits link on the Rates and Threshold page.

Exemptions

Adult care receivers are not subject to the non-customer CRIA test if:

-   they are a higher Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score
    adult who is receiving a social security pension or benefit, or a
    DVA Income Support Payment
-   they would be eligible to receive such a payment but for the sole
    reason that they have not been an Australian resident for a long
    enough period

Child care receivers are all subject to the CRIA test without exception.

Contents

Determining the appropriate tax year for the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Applying the income test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Applying the assets test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Assets test exemptions for the non-customer Care Receiver Income and
Assets (CRIA) test

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
