
Rent Assistance (RA) verification 108-18092609

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

On this Page:

Types of verification

Customers (unless exempt) must verify their accommodation details and
amount of rent paid.

Customers can provide a:

Current lease or tenancy agreement with a new claim

Current lease or tenancy agreement if they:

-   update their accommodation circumstances online
-   indicate they or their partner are named on the lease or tenancy
    agreement

Rent Certificate (SU523HD) (no other Rent Certificates are acceptable)
signed by the customer and the landlord or with a current lease or
tenancy agreement attached. Note: if a customer provides an obsolete
Rent Certificate (an SU523 or SU523HPA), see Processing proof of rent
for the Verification field on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen, or

Rent Declaration (SU336M) in limited circumstances

Lease or tenancy agreements

To verify a formal renting arrangement, the customer can provide a
current written lease or tenancy agreement.

A lease agreement can be provided as a stand-alone document for rent
verification under the following circumstances:

New claims

-   The customer provides the agreement to support a new claim for
    payment that includes required accommodation questions, and
-   The claim/supporting documents contain enough information to assess
    rent assistance.

Updates made online when all of the following are met

-   the customer updates their details using the online Address,
    Accommodation and Contact service
-   they are required to provide rent verification
-   they advise they have a lease agreement, and
-   have their or their partners name on the lease agreement

The agreement must be in accordance with state or territory
requirements. No Rent Certificate (SU523HD) is needed.

The customer may have an informal renting arrangement when:

-   there is no formal written lease/tenancy agreement, or
-   the customer (and/or their current partner) claiming RA is not named
    as a leaseholder or tenant on the formal written lease/tenancy
    agreement

Rent Certificates (SU523HD)

Customers can lodge an SU523HD (no other Rent Certificates are
acceptable) to verify the amount of rent paid whilst receiving a
Centrelink payment

Rent certificates may be issued when a customer:

lodges a new claim and a formal renting arrangement is not provided
and/or the accommodation questions were not asked or completed, or

advises of a change to their accommodation, for example:

-   the amount of rent paid, or
-   change of address

If the SU523HD is needed for rent verification, it must be signed by:

-   the customer, and
-   the landlord or the person who receives rent payments unless a
    current lease or tenancy agreement is attached

Rent Declarations (SU336M)

The SU336M may be used when a customer cannot get confirmation of the
rental details from their landlord, or is travelling and moves
regularly. It allows staff to verify the amount of rent paid by the
customer.

Customers are expected to first approach their landlord or agent, to
sign a Rent Certificate (SU523HD). A Service Officer may decide it is
unreasonable for the customer to approach their landlord. If the
customer is unable to provide a signed SU523HD, an SU336M may be lodged
instead. SU336M form can be issued:

-   using the Mail Forms guided procedure and search for SU336, or
-   by printing the form and sending to the customer

Customers travelling must notify Services Australia each time they
change address.

Community housing organisation rent deductions

To help in the identification and assessment of RA, customers who are
using the Rent Deductions Scheme (RDS) for the deduction type of Other
Housing Organisation (OHO), will be issued a Rent Certificate (SU523HD)
when:

-   an RDS/OHO transaction is sent to Services Australia, and
-   the amount of the deduction is greater than the RA threshold

The Accommodation Details (AC) screen will be automatically updated with
the amount of the deduction, and the verification code Chg Address/Accom
Circs-14 days to verify - COA to make sure an SU523HD is generated.

Payment of RA will also start based on the details coded on the AC
screen, and a review will be created for the return of the form 28 days
from the date the activity is finalised.

Customers are also able to include the advice of rent paid form as an
alternate means of having the landlord honesty declaration of the
SU523HD completed by the State Housing Authorities (SHA).

If the SU523HD is not returned by the due date, the review will mature
and RA will stop.

Providing verification documents

Acceptable verification documents are the same for RA assessed under
Social Security Law, Family Assistance Law or ABSTUDY Policy.

[] Verification documents can be supplied using Upload documents online,
faxed, presented in person or mailed to the agency.

Contents

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Determining proof of rent for the Verification field on the
Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Processing proof of rent for the Verification field on the Accommodation
Details (AC) screen

Manually issuing a Rent certificate (SU523HD)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
