-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Issuing an SU523HD

An SU523HD is automatically generated and issued to a customer when:

-   a new claim is granted
-   they are current on a relevant payment and notify of a change in
    their accommodation circumstances and the accommodation details (AC)
    screen is updated, and
-   verification of rent is required

After the AC screen is updated, automatic processing will occur
overnight and the SU523HD will be mailed to the customer’s postal
address the following business day. The SU523HD will then appear in the
Search Outbound Correspondence tool in Customer First.

Service Officers are only required to manually issue a SU523HD as an
‘Immediate Print’ using Process Direct when:

-   the AC screen has been updated with the correct details
-   the automatically generated rent certificate does not appear in the
    Search Outbound Correspondence tool in Customer First and
-   the customer is physically present in an office and needs a copy of
    the form as it has:
-   not been received
-   been misplaced, or
-   been incorrectly completed by a customer or landlord

Note: intermittent printing delays can be experienced when manually
requesting an 'Immediate Print' of a customer's Rent Certificate
(SU523HD) through Process Direct. Service Officers must not process
multiple manual 'Immediate Print' requests for the same customer before
receiving the 'Print was successful/not successful' message. Doing this
will increase the volume of items queued to print and cause further
delays.

SU523HD online

[] Customers with a myGov account linked to their Centrelink online
account can get a copy of their SU523HD through the Request a document
option online. This is available the next working day after they update
their accommodation details online.

The SU523HD is available in the Centrelink online account for up to 19
weeks from the day after the change is made to the customer's record.
Customers may view, print and save a copy of the form.

The SU523HD is not sent to a customer's myGov inbox.

The Resources page contains a link to a 'view' version of the Rent
Certificate (SU523HD) form, and a link to Centrelink online accounts.

Related links

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Determining proof of rent for the Verification field on the
Accommodation Details (AC) screen

Processing proof of rent for the Verification field on the Accommodation
Details (AC) screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
