-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility requirements for the employment
income nil rate period provision. This provision enables a customer to
retain certain benefits, such as a concession card when their rate of
income support payment is nil due to the effect of the Income Test. This
only occurs when the customer's total ordinary income includes
employment income.

Eligibility and duration of employment income nil rate period

A customer may qualify for an employment income nil rate period if their
social security pension or benefit is not payable because of ordinary
income, made up entirely or partly of employment income and they:

receive a social security pension or benefit, except:

-   Special Benefit (SpB) customers, or
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customers of Age Pension age

remain qualified for their social security pension or benefit, including
meeting the employment qualifications (employment qualifications exist
for Jobseeker Payment (JSP), Carer Payment (CP), Disability Support
Pension (DSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker), and

continue to satisfy the payability provisions for their social security
pension or benefit, except for being not payable due to the income

If the income nil rate period occurs for 6 consecutive full fortnights,
the customer’s payment will automatically cancel, See Resources for
examples.

Note: See Extended suspension periods for pension payments for pension
payments for Age Pension (AGE)/DSP and those with CP partners.

A customer may have multiple income nil rate periods without having to
reclaim if basic qualification for the income support payment is still
met.

There is no limit to how many times a customer can enter an employment
income nil rate period.

The employment income nil rate period applies to other payments
including Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA) students.

Pension payments extended suspension (excluding Parenting Payment Single)

Age Pension (AGE)

Age Pension (AGE) customers can be suspended for up to 2 years if their
Australian employment income precludes them from payment for more than 6
fortnights in a row. When the customer reports their employment income
on the seventh fortnight of the employment income nil rate period, they
will automatically be placed into the extended suspension period if
their rate of payment is still nil. The suspension reason code is ESP.
Staff must not code this suspension manually.

If the customer has a partner who receives AGE, DSP or Carer Payment
(CAR), they will automatically be placed into the extended suspension
period if their payment has also been reduced to nil rate due to
employment income. The suspension reason code is EPP. Staff must not
code this suspension manually.

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

DSP customers can be suspended, or cancelled deemed suspended, for up to
2 years if their employment income (combined with their partner’s
employment income, if applicable), precludes them from payment. This
does not have to be solely due to employment income earnt in Australia.
They can earn employment income from any location. When the customer
reports their employment income on the seventh fortnight of the
employment income nil rate period, they are automatically placed into
the extended suspension period if their payment is still nil rate. The
suspension reason will be EAN. Staff must not code this suspension
manually. If a customer reports their income late, their payment may be
cancelled deemed suspended for reason code EAL (which is coded
manually).

DSP customers can also have their payment suspended if they work 30 or
more hours per week in open employment on an ongoing basis. This
requires assessment by a Service Officer, who manually suspends the
customer’s DSP if appropriate. The reason code is FTW or FTY.

If the customer has a partner who receives AGE, DSP or CAR, the partner
is automatically placed into the extended suspension period if their
payment is also nil due to employment income. The suspension reason code
is EPP. Staff must not code this suspension manually.

Carer Payment (CAR)

Carer Payment (CAR) customers who earn employment income cannot access
the extended suspension period unless they also have a partner receiving
AGE or DSP who is also earning income. They may also access the extended
suspension period if they are not earning any employment income, but
have a partner on AGE or DSP who is earning employment income.

In both cases, they are automatically placed into the extended
suspension period if their rate of payment is reduced to nil due to
employment income. The suspension reason code is EPP. Staff must not
code this suspension manually.

See Extended suspension periods for pension payments.

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Customers who get loan payments under the Home Equity Access Scheme
(HEAS) will continue to get loan payments (both fortnightly and/or
advance payments) even if the qualifying pension payment stops due to
employment income.

Where the pension payment cancels, suspends or reduces to nil rate due
to employment income, the pension status will automatically adjust to
CZR (Current Zero Rate) for reason PLS. This allows the customer's loan
to continue, providing the customer is still otherwise qualified for the
applicable pension. See Extended suspension periods for pension
payments.

Working Credits or Work Bonus

If the customer is:

-   under Age Pension age, any Working Credits will be depleted before
    the employment income nil rate period is applied
-   over Age Pension age, and in receipt of a pension (excluding
    Parenting Payment Single) they may be entitled to the Work Bonus

Note: the Work Bonus is not used in the customer's transitional rules
calculation, however partners may still benefit by the reduction in
total income. This is applied before the employment nil rate period is
applied

A job seeker who is in an employment income nil rate period, whether due
to their own or their partner's income, does not have mutual obligation
requirements.

During the employment income nil rate period

The customer must remain qualified for their income support payment
during the employment income nil rate period. If qualification is lost
during the employment income nil rate period, the payment is to be
cancelled from the date that qualification stops. For example:

-   If a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer starts working in a full time
    job expected to last for at least 6 consecutive fortnights, they are
    no longer unemployed and payment should be cancelled once any
    Working Credits are depleted
    Note: this does not apply to JSP or YA (Other) customers who are
    employed under the Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) initiative. These
    customers will automatically suspend for 26 weeks instead of
    cancelling
-   If a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer commences working for
    30 hours per week or more at the relevant minimum wage, they will
    not be entitled to the employment income nil rate period. However,
    payment may be suspended for up to 2 years

For Parenting Payment (PP) customers (under Age Pension age):

-   an employment income nil rate period can continue if their
    relationship status changes, and
-   their PP is reassessed (transfers between PPS and PPP)

However, an employment income nil rate period ends if a customer loses
qualification for their payment and transfers to another income support
payment. For example, a PPS customer's youngest dependent child turns 14
and they transfer to JSP.

Reporting income

During the employment income nil rate period a customer must continue to
report fortnightly. Failure to report will result in the cancellation of
payment. The payment can be restored if they report their employment
income at a later date.

Note: if the customer's payment cancels due to failure to report income
due to staff error (for example, the income was coded but the payment
was not stimulated) then the payment can be restored.

Resuming income support payments

During the employment income nil rate period, if the customer's income
decreases or stops:

-   they may become eligible for a part or full rate of income support
    payment, and
-   payment may resume without the need to make a new claim

Eligibility for nil rate period where partner receiving payment

If the customer has a partner:

their partner is also entitled to the employment income nil rate period
if all of the following are met:

-   the partner is receiving an income support payment entitled to the
    employment nil rate period
-   the partner is receiving a nil rate due to employment income
-   the customer's excess income reduces the partner's payment to zero

the customer is entitled to the employment income nil rate period if all
of the following are met:

-   the customer is receiving an income support payment entitled to the
    employment nil rate period
-   the partner has employment income
-   the partner's excess income reduces the customer's payment to zero

Impact on partner's payment

If an allowance customer has returned to full time work, their payments
will cancel once their Working Credits have been depleted. This is
because they are no longer entitled to the employment income nil rate
period due to a lack of qualification. If their partner is on Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP), the system will:

-   SUS-INV the PPP customer's payments
-   automatically send an income estimate form for customer to complete
    for FTB and CCS estimate of income details update
-   create a manual follow up to check PPP entitlement

The PPP customer is entitled to the employment income nil rate period if
under Age Pension age, the PPP will need to be restored if there are no
other changes to their entitlement. Any Service Officer can do this once
the customer's entitlement is established.

If the partner's payment is not dependent on the customer being current,
the partner's entitlement needs to be assessed based on the payment that
they are getting for:

-   Working Credits or the Work Bonus, and
-   the employment income nil rate period

Benefits retained

Benefits the customer can retain vary according to the income support
payment that they are qualified for. Provided the customer has the
required qualification, the following benefits can be retained while the
customer is in an employment income nil rate period:

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A payment at the income tested rate for
certain customers:

-   Single customers will need to provide an income estimate when they
    enter an employment income nil rate period
-   Partnered customers will need to provide an income estimate when
    they enter an employment income nil rate period where:
    both customer and partner are receiving an income support payment
    and both are within an employment income nil rate period, or
    one member of the couple is in receipt of an income support payment
    and they enter an employment income nil rate period

FTB Part B:

-   Single customers receiving income support payments are paid FTB Part
    B at the maximum rate. FTB Part B is not income tested for single
    customers on income support payments
-   Partnered customers will need to provide an estimate of their income
    to be paid Part B. Partnered customers will have their Part B
    payments reconciled at the end of the income year

Rent Assistance (RA) in regards to the customer's partner is paid as if
they were both receiving an income support payment

For details on how an employment income nil rate period has impacted a
customer's FTB Part A rate, navigate to the FTB Income Support Payment
Explanation Screen (FTBISPX).

Retained eligibility for add-ons

For the Allowance Income Test the customer's partner is treated as if
both members of the couple are receiving an income support payment

Entitlement to a Health Care Card (HCC) or Pensioner Concession Card
(PCC), whichever is applicable to customer. If a customer is currently
entitled to retain their PCC for a longer period, that period starts at
the date of the first fortnight of nil rate of payments

Education Entry Payment entitlement maintained, if eligible

Special Employment Advance entitlement maintained, if eligible

Supplementary benefits/payments such as:

-   Approved Program of Work Supplement
-   Pensioner Education Supplement
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL), if receiving TAL before employment nil
    rate period
-   Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Concession cards

Customers may continue to be entitled to the HCC/PCC if they are in an
employment income nil rate period. If a customer is entitled to retain
their PCC for a longer period, the period starts at the first fortnight
of nil rate payments see Extended entitlement to Concession Cards.

Telephone Allowance (TAL)/Pension Supplement

Customers who qualify for TAL can continue to get it for 6 months (12
months for DSP under 21 with no dependent children) after their income
support payment is suspended or cancelled due to the customer or their
partner commencing employment. The customer must remain qualified for
TAL:

-   that is, be a telephone subscriber, during the extension period
-   if entitled, the 26 week extension of TAL starts from the end of the
    12 week employment nil rate period
-   TAL continues to be paid for those entitled through the 12 week
    employment nil rate period

TAL is not payable for customers getting:

-   Pension Supplement
-   the transitional rate of pension, or
-   the transitional rate of JSP
    Therefore, they are not eligible for a TAL extension if their
    payment is suspended or cancelled for an employment related reason.

PP customers under Age pension age who were granted on or after 1 July
2006 and::

-   
-   have an assessed partial capacity to work due to a disability as
    assessed by an ESAT, and
-   have their payments cancelled after their and/or their partner's
    employment income over the limit. They will have access to TAL for
    52 weeks from the date of cancellation

The Resources page has examples, historical information, and information
on system limitations for PP. This means that some payments are not
automatically cancelling after the employment income nil rate period.

Related links

Working Credit

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Reporting overview

Updating income estimates for the current income year

Health Care Card (HCC)

Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)

Pension Concession Card (PCC)

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

Extended suspension periods for pension payments

Payment of Telephone Allowance (TAL) to customer suspended or cancelled
due to employment income

Recording and correcting employment income details

Cancellation of Age Pension

Cancellation of payments Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation of payments - Disability Support Pension

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Wife Pension (WP) to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) transitional rate

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
