-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) use only

This document explains how to assess the transfer of a farm to a close
relative under deprivation provisions.

Transfer details and past contributions

If a customer has legally transferred ownership of a farm, farm assets
(or an interest in a farm) to a close relative as a gift, or sold for
less than its market value to a near relative, the value of any past
contributions to the farm made by the close relative may be taken into
account when assessing deprivation.

Past contributions are often referred to as forgone wages, but may also
include contributions made to improve the farm, the purchase of
livestock and equipment, or unpaid care of the customer.

A person's past contribution is calculated to be the value of unpaid
work that they performed, or contributions made, and it is to be
deducted from the deprivation assessment value of the property. Any
duties performed would have to be the type of work that another person
would have been hired to complete, such as a farm hand, or general
labourer. Future proposed contributions will not be taken into
consideration, neither will any increase in the value of capital accrual
as a result of the relative's contributions (for example, improvements
made by the relative have increased the value of the farm). Forgone
wages are not calculated for any period that the close relative was
under the legal age for leaving school (generally 15 years, or younger).
When calculating a person's forgone wages, weekend and after-school work
may be taken into account at the equivalent hourly rate, where the work
performed was in the nature of normal employment.

A relative may have performed unpaid care of the customer, and this may
be taken into account as past contributions. A close relative's unpaid
care of a customer is accepted as financial consideration if both the
following conditions are met:

-   a substantial level of care was provided, as defined in Chapter
    3.6.4 of the Social Security Guide, Qualification for Carer Payment
-   care was provided for a minimum of 12 months

Care value

The care value is the amount that would have had to be paid to purchase
equivalent assistance from community support agencies. It includes home
help, care at home, and the cost of providing food.

Forgone wages calculation

In order to calculate the value of someone's forgone wage, the Average
Weekly Ordinary Time Earnings (AWOTE) of Australian employees
(full-time) figure is used regardless of whether the family member would
have been paid a junior rate or adult rate at the time. Where the
person's close relative worked for less than normal wages, it is
necessary to establish the percentage of normal wages received.
Similarly, where the close relative did not work a full week or worked
part-time, it is necessary to establish the number of hours worked and
convert the AWOTE figure.

The period during which a relative's efforts were financially unrewarded
should be identified by reference to all the relevant evidence, for
example, taxation returns, books of accounts, receipts for capital
expenditure, workers compensation records etc. It is permissible to
accept the evidence of the client and the close relative if there is no
reason to doubt their statement(s). Where there is good reason as to why
this evidence is not acceptable, without support from another source, it
may be necessary to obtain statutory declarations from the parties.

Close relative entitled to share of profits

Where the close relative may have been entitled to a share of the
profits (for example, Share farming or in a partnership) or was the
proprietor of the business (for example, a farmer, grazier etc.),
forgone wages do not come into account. This is because, under these
arrangements the relative was not an employee but was party to an
agreement whereby normal market forces determined the income earned. If,
in an exceptional case, it can be clearly established that the relative
had contributed to the farm contrary to a normal share farming or
partnership arrangement, the value of the extra contribution may be
taken into account.

Retaining homeownership

Where the customer's principal home is the farm house, and the home is
included with the transfer of the farm, the asset value of the home and
curtilage is not taken into account for the forgone wages calculation
(that is, the value of the home and curtilage is not included in the
value of the property transferred). However, if an extended land use
exemption applies to the adjacent land, the extended land use exemption
is disregarded in the foregone wages calculation (that is, the home and
curtilage is limited to the land used for private use on the same title
document up to a maximum of 2 hectares). Where the customer retains a
life interest in the principal home this is to be assessed under the
granny flat provisions. If the customer has transferred all their
farming assets but continues to do some work on the farm, they would be
considered an employee as they have legally transferred the ownership of
farm, stock and equipment to the new farmer.

Primary producers who meet certain requirements

Primary producers who meet certain income and asset requirements, and
wish to retire from farming and hand control over to the next
generation, may be allowed to retain limited appointorship of the
primary production private trust, and not have farm assets or income
attributed to them. This document does not cover limited appointorship.

Related links

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Assessment of sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Granny flat provisions

Limited appointorship concession

Assessing house and curtilage

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
