
Adding or updating a term income stream 108-05060050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to add or update a term income stream.

Term income stream

A term income stream is a set of regular payments payable for a set
period. The term can be from 1 year to up to 35 years. Note: a life
expectancy income stream is not a term product for social security
purposes. A Self-Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF) or Small APRA Fund
(SAF) could only offer a life expectancy product.

One of the options available with fixed term income streams is for the
purchaser to receive back part, or all, of the purchase price on
completion of the term.

For example, a 10 year term annuity purchased for $100,000 may have
$100,000 returned as a lump sum at the end of the 10 years.

This amount returned is called the residual capital value (RCV). The RCV
may be less than 100% of the purchase price and can even be zero. If the
income stream product held by the customer or their partner has an RCV
amount greater than zero recorded, the system will send a letter to the
customer on the expiry of the product term for the review of income
stream products with a residual capital value.

Term income streams are non-complying and asset-tested. If the term of
the income stream is:

-   greater than 5 years, or is less than 5 years and equal to or
    greater than the owner's life expectancy, it is an asset-tested
    (long term) income stream (category 2)
-   five years, or is less than 5 years and not equal to or greater than
    the owner's life expectancy, it is an asset-tested (short term)
    income stream (category 3)

Income stream schedule

The income stream provider must provide details of the income stream on
a Details of income stream product (SA330) or a similar schedule.

Note: do not accept a schedule for a non-SMSF sourced income stream if
completed by a financial adviser, accountant, or any other person.

Asset assessment of term income stream

Term income streams can never be asset-test exempt, as they do not
comply with sections 9A, 9B or 9BA of the Social Security Act. This
means they are fully assessed using an asset assessment rule. The asset
value is recalculated in arrears annually if the payment frequency is
annual; otherwise, it is reviewed every 6 months.

Income assessment of a term income stream

-   For an asset-tested (long term) income stream, gross income -
    deduction amount = assessed income
-   An asset-tested (short term) income stream is treated as a financial
    investment with deeming applied to the assessable asset value to
    determine assessable income

Jointly owned income streams

Joint income streams can only be purchased with ordinary money, and not
superannuation money. Term income streams purchased with ordinary money
can be jointly owned. The income stream payments are made to each owner
of the joint income stream. An income stream that has a single owner
with a reversionary beneficiary is not a joint income stream.

The purchase price, gross income and any residual capital value, must be
halved and recorded on the customer's and the partner's record. The
relevant number is the term of the income stream and will be the same
for both. The product name field must include the term 'joint income
stream' or 'jointly held' to identify the product as a jointly owned
income stream.

When one of the owners dies, the surviving partner will start getting
the full gross income from the income stream. The existing income stream
must be:

-   cancelled, and
-   recoded with the total original purchase price and gross income
    amount

Reversionary income stream

The original purchaser of the income stream may nominate a person to
receive the income after their death, for example their spouse or
partner. This person is the reversionary beneficiary.

When an income stream is passed on to a reversionary beneficiary:

-   Income is assessed from the day after the death of the primary
    beneficiary (deceased spouse or partner), which is the date the
    customer (reversionary) is entitled to receive the payments
-   The income stream is treated as a continuation of the original
    income stream. If it was originally purchased before 1 July 2019,
    but reverted after 1 July 2019, the pre 1 July 2019 assessment will
    continue
-   The purchase price, purchase date and relevant number remain
    unchanged
-   The gross income may be reduced as specified in the income stream
    contract

There may be a gap between the death of the original beneficiary and the
date the reversionary beneficiary starts to receive regular payments. A
lump sum arrears payment is made to the reversionary beneficiary to
cover the gap. The lump sum is assessed as income from an income stream
for the period to which it relates. This may result in a debt if the
person has been receiving an income support payment.

Waiver provisions came into effect from 9 May 2018:

-   where the lump sum arrears results in a debt during the bereavement
    period for the surviving spouse, and certain conditions are met
-   only debts within the 14 week bereavement period can be waived under
    these rules

The 9 May rules are not retrospective. Any of these debts occurring
before 9 May 2018 cannot be waived using these rules.

See the References page for a link to the legislation

Online updates

[] Customers can advise of new term income streams via their Centrelink
online account; however, they cannot make changes to existing term
income streams online. Manual handoff will occur where the customer
advises a new term income stream, a DOC with keyword OIAICS will start
on the customer’s record and a Work item for staff manual action will be
generated on the customer's record containing details provided by the
customer. Staff can select the Work Item to process the update in
Process Direct.

The Resources page contains links to the Details of Income Stream
Product form (SA330) and the Level 2 Policy Help Desks Online Query
Form.

Related links

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating pooled lifetime income stream

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Assessing income streams paid from Self Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Income stream reviews

Income stream indexation review

Review of income stream products with a residual capital value

Commutation of asset-tested income streams

Income and assets option online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
