
Loans and liabilities against assets 108-04020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assessing loans and liabilities
against assets. Assets are assessed at their net market value. The
market value of an asset may be reduced if a loan was taken out to
purchase it.

Net assessable asset

Where there is a small change to asset values determine whether the
customer is required to notify.

The value of the excess of assets over liabilities represents the
asset's net value. Sections 1121 and 1121A of the Social Security Act
1991, allow the deduction of liabilities owed by a customer to determine
the asset's net assessable value. This also applies to assets held by a
business entity. Section 1121 refers to the amount of a charge or an
encumbrance over a particular asset. Generally the value of a secured
loan is to be deducted from the asset against which it is secured.

Sole trader or partnership

Generally, all liabilities on the balance sheet of a sole trader or
partnership can be deducted from the value of assets owned by the
business to determine the assessable value of the business, even if
secured over non-business assets.

Each type of business structure has specific guidelines regarding
treatment of secured liabilities. There are some qualifications and
secured liabilities exceptions to the general rule.

Private trust or company

The assets of a private trust or private company are assessed by a
Complex Assessment Officer (CAO), who determines the recognition of the
liabilities and the level of net assets attributed to a customer
depending on their level of control. For example if a customer is a 100%
controller of a private trust that has net assets of $200,000, the
$200,000 is attributed to the customer and included with their assets
for the Assets Test.

Loans which cannot be deducted from the value of an asset

There are, however exceptions, even for secured liabilities. A charge or
encumbrance cannot be deducted from the value of an asset if:

-   it is for the benefit of a person other than the customer or the
    customer's partner
-   it is a collateral security, or
-   the asset it is secured against is disregarded under section 1118 of
    the Social Security Act 1991 (for example the customer's principal
    home)

If a company or trust liability is secured against an asset owned by a
customer, the amount of the liability that may be deducted from the
value of the asset provided as security is limited by the customer’s
attribution of the entity’s assets

The value of the trust or company liability secured against a personally
held asset, can only reduce the value of the asset to the extent that
the customer (and/or their partner) is a controller of the trust or
company. For example, if the customer was a 50% controller of a private
company, only 50% of the secured liability can be deducted from the
value of the personally owned asset used as security. This is because
the other 50% of the money borrowed was to the benefit of the other
attributed controller of the company or trust.

Margin and encumbrance loans on financial investments

A margin loan is a loan that use shares and managed investments as
security for borrowing. This type of borrowing is also known as
'gearing'. The individual shares and managed investments are not
recorded as separate items. Details of the current market value of the
portfolio and the current loan balance are obtained from statements
issued by the lender. The current loan balance is not usually the loan
limit amount. The loan limit amount is the maximum the investor can
borrow against the portfolio and is usually shown on the statements.

Under the Assets Test, the value of the customer's asset is reduced by
the value of the encumbrance over that asset (that is current market
value less the loan balance). Under the Income Test, the gross current
market value is used to calculate deemed income. Margin loans are
reviewed in March and September. These investment portfolios are updated
in the MIN system.

Unsecured loans

If a customer has an unsecured loan and provides evidence the loan was
specifically obtained to purchase the asset, including financial
investments, the outstanding loan amount is deducted from the value of
the asset. Although reduced for the asset test, deeming will however
still apply to the gross value of any financial investments. Note: the
value of an asset-tested income stream cannot be reduced by the amount
of an unsecured loan.

Bankruptcy

A charge on an asset under section 189AB of the Bankruptcy Act 1966, is
a 'charge or encumbrance' for the purpose of section 1121 of Social
Security Act. When determining the value of a customer's asset, it is to
be reduced by the amount of the 'charge or encumbrance' imposed under
the Bankruptcy Act 1966.

Line of credit

A line of credit is a loan secured against a customer's asset, usually
the principal home. The approved funds are available to the customer to
access. For social security purposes, only an account with a positive
balance can be assessed as an asset.

Typically a line of credit account has a negative or zero balance and is
not an assessable asset.

The asset value of any items purchased (for example motor vehicle, boat)
cannot be reduced, if the funds used to purchase them are secured
against another asset.

Redraw facilities and credit cards

A redraw facility is not an asset. Therefore, they are not recorded on
the customer's record.

Credit cards with a negative balance that is not drawn to the maximum
borrowing limit is not an asset. For Social Security purposes, only a
credit card or an account with a positive balance can be assessed as an
asset.

The asset value of any items purchased (for example motor vehicle, boat)
cannot be reduced, if the funds used to purchase them are secured
against another asset.

The Resources page has examples of different encumbrances and their
treatment. It also contains links to a quick reference guide, the
Financial Industry and Network Support (FINS) Bulletin and information
on margin loans. It also contains a link to the Mortgage Apportionment
Calculator.

Related links

Assessing a failed loan

Business assets

Business liabilities

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Primary production aggregation

Managed investments - adding a new investment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
