-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the effect of compensation on
social security payments and explains the action required by customers
who are affected by compensation provisions.

Definition of compensation

Compensation is defined in section 17 of the Social Security Act 1991 as
any payment made for a personal injury, illness or condition that has
been made at least in part to cover a person's loss of earnings or lost
capacity to earn (economic loss). The types of compensation under this
definition include:

-   Damages from a worker's compensation scheme
-   Motor vehicle third party scheme
-   Personal accident, sickness and accident or income replacement
    policy
-   Professional negligence claim, for example, medical negligence that
    includes a component for lost earnings
-   Other personal injury compensation payments

Compensation affected payments

A compensation affected payment (CAP) is any social security benefit or
pension affected by the receipt of compensation payments. Most
Centrelink income support payments are a CAP. This means they are
subject to the compensation provisions set out in Part 3.14 of the
Social Security Act 1991.

The compensation provisions have the following effect:

-   A person who is able to claim compensation, but who does not do so,
    cannot be paid
-   Lump sum compensation amounts may preclude a CAP for a period
    (preclusion period)
-   Lump sum compensation payments are considered an asset
-   Periodic compensation payments are deducted from the CAP as either a
    direct deduction or other ordinary income
-   Compensation payments are not counted as employment income or other
    ordinary income
-   Compensation payments that are not subject to these arrangements are
    treated as other ordinary income

Recording compensation

Record compensation payments on the Compensation Management System (CMS)
in the customer's record unless otherwise advised by the Compensation
Recovery Team (CRT).

Do not use Employment Income Details (EAN) screen to record periodic
compensation paid as part of a customer’s wages. It is not employment
income and to do so may result in an incorrect payment as well as
incorrectly allowing a Working Credit offset.

Referring compensation payments and claims

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will investigate the payment and
advise how it should be assessed.

Do not refer compensatory payments to the CRT for clearance. Record
these payments on the Other Income (OIN) screen.

Compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Different rules apply to ABSTUDY for the treatment of compensation
payments.

Where ABSTUDY Pension Education Supplement (PES) is paid with a:

-   compensation affected payment (CAP), the PES is assessed as a CAP
-   payment that is not a CAP (such as ABSTUDY), the PES is not
    considered a CAP

Assessment of compensation payments

Income from compensation is never treated as employment income. When
income from compensation is treated as other ordinary income, it is used
in calculating the accrual of Working Credits. The customer is unable to
deplete their Working Credit balance to offset compensation income.

Compensation can be made as a:

-   periodic payment, which generally reduces CAP dollar for dollar
-   lump sum payment, where a person may be required to serve a
    preclusion period or
-   a combination of the two

Excess periodic compensation can affect partners as ordinary income if
it is paid at a higher rate than the maximum CAP rate. Periodic
compensation is treated under the ordinary income test when:

-   a compensable event occurs and
-   the customer is in receipt of a CAP at the time of the compensable
    event

Compensation recipients must take reasonable action to claim or obtain
any compensation they are potentially entitled to.

Compensatory payments

Many payments commonly called compensation do not meet the definition
contained in the Social Security Law. Compensatory payments are

other ordinary income when:

-   paid periodically or
-   a lump sum is received instead of periodical payments

not social security income when:

-   a lump sum is received that does not replace periodical payments

Record compensatory payments on the Other Income (OIN) screen. These
payments are:

-   income from the time they commence being payable and
-   excluded for the period represented by any arrears due at the time

Lump sums of compensatory payments for non-economic loss are not
assessed as compensation. See Assessment of income for Centrelink
payments.

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

If the customer and/or partner is only claiming for a LIC:

-   the periodic payments are recorded on CMS and on the LIC claim as
    income for 8 weeks before the actual claim
-   the lump sum is recorded on CMS apportioned across 52 weeks from the
    day the person is entitled to receive it

Examples of compensatory payments

Compensatory payments are assessed as other ordinary income. Examples
are payments:

to victims of crime under state based criminal injury compensation
schemes

for the death of a relative or dependency based death benefits claims

for unlawful dismissal, sexual harassment or racial discrimination

related to a natural disaster

from a personal accident or insurance policy when:

-   the person contributed to the premium and there is no offset clause
    or
-   the person contributed to the premium and there is an offset clause
    but it has not been invoked

for sporting injury compensation (unless the policy contains an offset
clause against social security payments that has been invoked)

solely for a permanent impairment

as periodic personal injury compensation when the compensation recipient
is currently in receipt of a saved compensation affected payment (SCAP)

as compensation payments for the assessment of a Low Income Health Care
Card (LIC)

For ABSTUDY, ongoing periodic compensation, that is, taxable and paid
for economic loss associated with personal injury may be assessed as
other ordinary income

For Centrelink family assistance payments:

-   Taxable compensation payments count as part of the person's taxable
    income in the year the compensation is received
-   Periodic compensation (including arrears) for loss of earnings is
    usually taxable
-   Some lump sum compensation may be taxable if it has an identifiable
    economic loss component
-   Certain non-taxable payments made by the Military Rehabilitation and
    Compensation Commission also affect the family assistance Income
    Test

Working Credits

When income from compensation is treated as other ordinary income:

-   it is used in calculating the accrual of Working Credits and can
    only be depleted by employment income
-   the customer is unable to deplete their Working Credit balance to
    offset compensation income

Lump sums or pensions paid to surviving partners

Lump sums or pensions paid to the surviving partner of a deceased person
are assessed as ordinary income. This includes:

-   workers compensation
-   some motor accident authorities

These are not compensation for personal injury. See Assessment of income
for Centrelink payments.

Defence Reserve wages

Payments made to replace part-time Defence Reserve wages because of
injury are not compensation. These payments are exempt if the
compensation recipient was in receipt of a CAP at the time.

Treat any compensation payments paid because of an inability to attend
the usual workplace (including payments by the Defence Forces) as
compensation.

Related links

Compensation affected payments (CAP)

Reasonable action to claim compensation

Compensation and Supplementary payments

Effect of periodic compensation on partner's income support payment

Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
