
Income from boarders and lodgers 108-05040010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess income received by a customer from
boarders and/or lodgers living in the customer's principal home. Only a
percentage of the amount received is assessed as income, depending on
whether the customer is providing lodging only, bed and breakfast, or
board. It also outlines the need to reassess the customer's Rent
Assistance (RA) entitlement if they are renting their principal home.

Income assessed from boarders and lodgers

As the customer will incur costs in providing the accommodation, not all
the income they receive from boarders and lodgers is assessable. The
amount assessed depends on the type of accommodation provided.

The percentage of the gross amount received that is assessed as income
less costs:

-   lodging only (no meals) - 70%
-   bed and breakfast (no lunch or dinner) - 50%
-   board (any meal(s) other than just breakfast) - 20%

A lower amount may be assessed if the customer can show that more than
the allowed percentage is expended in costs. For example, via an Income
Tax Return (ITR).

If the customer has a mortgage or pays rent for their principal home,
the amount of interest on the mortgage or rent paid is deducted from the
percentage of income assessed. If the interest or rent amount is more
than the percentage of income assessed, no income is assessed from the
board and lodging.

If the customer has income from more than one boarder or lodger, add the
percentage of income from each person before applying the deduction due
to interest on the mortgage or rent paid.

If the customer runs a boarding house, for example more than 5 rooms to
let, that they see as a commercial venture, they are considered
self-employed. Issue a Business Details form (MOD F), and ask the
customer to provide their latest ITR.

For a single customer with a boarder who is not a close relative,
verification of their living arrangements may be needed. This is based
on information from the Living Arrangements question set.

If the customer advises via an online update that they receive income
from boarders or lodgers, the prefilled 'provisional' update in Process
Direct automatically applies the above calculation.

Boarder is a near relative

If the boarder or lodger is a near relative, the income received is not
treated as income for social security purposes. Note: if a partnered
child lives with the customer, it is accepted that board or lodging paid
to the customer is paid by the child, not their partner.

The area occupied by the near relative is still part of the customer's
principal home even if:

-   it is a self-contained living area, or
-   the home is a dual occupancy

A boarder or lodger is a near relative if they are the person's:

-   parent (may include step-parent, foster parent or adoptive parent)
-   child (may include step-child, foster child or adoptive child, or
-   sibling (may include step-brother, step-sister, foster brother,
    foster sister, adoptive brother or adoptive sister)

See Determining homeowners and non-homeowners

If the customer is temporarily absent from their principal home, any
payments received from a near relative for residing in the home are not
treated as income for social security purposes. When the temporary
absence provisions cease to apply because the customer has not returned
within the allowable absence period, the property becomes a normal
rental property, the board and lodging rules do not apply and income
from the near relative is assessable under normal rules for rental
income.

If the customer has temporarily vacated their principal home and
receives rental income from someone other than a near relative, rental
income is assessable for this period. See Temporary vacation of
principal home. The property becomes a normal rental property once the
temporary absence provisions cease to apply because the customer has not
returned within the allowable absence period. See Assessing income from
real estate or time share and Assessing and coding the Real estate
details Mod R.

Homestay International Student Accommodation

Provisions relating to income from board and lodging would not normally
apply to hosts under the Homestay International Student Accommodation,
Australian Asian Centre Exchange, or similar organisations if only one
student is involved. Generally, the difference between the amount paid
by such organisations for services provided (that is use of the home,
food, care for and general socialising activities of the student) and
expenses incurred, would be assessed as income.

However, given the range of activities undertaken by Homestay 'hosts'
for the student, it would not be unrealistic to expect their total
outlays would absorb all the funds provided, for example, hosts would
not make a profit. For one student, no income from board and lodging
would be assessed for the host. However, if more than one student is
staying under Homestay, then economies of scale are made and income from
board and lodging could be assessed if the person is undertaking the
operation for profit.

Example: if a host has one student for a set period with an income of
$150 a week, this income can be disregarded as expenses would likely
absorb the income. However, if a host has three students either for a
set or overlapping period with an income from each of $150 a week,
totalling $450, the host may be required to declare that total income.
This income is assessed under the boarder and lodger provisions.

Note: it may appear that someone could run a Homestay, etc. business by
having multiple students staying in a large house and getting some
economies of scale. Service Officers must determine if the arrangement
is 'board and lodging' undertaken for profit and be assessed as
commercial profit under the self-employment/business provisions, or if
it is more like a domestic arrangement where the activity involves more
personal services, for example, driving students to school and taking
them on sightseeing trips. This indicates the arrangement has a
domestic, rather than commercial character. Such services are not
usually offered by boarding houses. Service Officers should contact
their Zone Policy consultant if uncertain.

Australian Homestay Network for refugees

Where a person receives income from the Australian Homestay Network for
providing accommodation for a refugee, the assessment of the income
depends on the level of board or lodgings provided as per the board and
lodging income assessment policy.

Temporary boarders and lodgers (including Accommodation Booking Services)

A customer may receive income from short term (temporary) boarders and
lodgers. Examples include a homeowner or tenant who only rents out a
room when there is a test match at the nearby ground, or someone who
rents out a room via a home share site such as Airbnb.

This income is treated in the same manner as other board and lodging.
The customer can choose to use the board and lodging rules or supply a
profit and loss statement outlining the actual expenses, including any
commissions or charges paid to a home share website.

If the customer has regular lodgers, the department assesses an average
over a period of 12 months. For one off or irregular instances, the
department only maintains a rate while the room is occupied.

Income from people staying at a property that is not the customer's home
is assessed as real estate income.

Self-contained dwellings (dual occupancy)

If the property is separate from the customer's principal home (for
example, it is a self-contained flat or other dwelling on the same title
as the principal home that is rented to person(s) other than a near
relative) see Determining homeowners and non-homeowners, Assessing and
coding the Real estate details Mod R and Assessing income from real
estate and timeshare.

If the second dwelling is a granny flat right or interest, the property
is assessed using the granny flat provisions.

Assessing RA

This procedure applies for income testing purposes only; it does not
apply for calculating Rent Assistance (RA) where different assessment
rules apply. The rate of RA payable to the customer may be affected
under the 'total household rent' rules, links to which can be found in
the References page.

Income from boarders and lodgers is not employment income, it is
ordinary income, and used when calculating the accrual of Working
Credits. Customers cannot deplete their Working Credit balance to offset
this type of income.

The Resources page contains examples of how income from boarders and
lodgers is assessed and links to the Business Details form (MOD F),
Relationship Details (SS284) and Relationship Details - Separated under
one roof (SS293).

Related links

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Free board and lodging

Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Temporary vacation of principal home

Granny Flat Provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
