
Assessment of assets hardship 108-04120040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before inviting a claim under assets hardship provisions, discuss with a
Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) in the Asset Hardship Team.

This document outlines how to assess the financial circumstances of a
customer claiming under the assets hardship provisions.

Assets Hardship

The hardship rules allow for the value of particular assets to be
disregarded and for the rate of pension, allowance or benefit payable to
be determined in a special manner. For these rules to apply, a customer
must be considered to be in severe financial hardship with no other
course of action, they could reasonably be expected to take to alleviate
hardship.

Deprivation

Deprivation occurs when a customer destroys, disposes of or reduces the
value of an asset or income without receiving adequate financial
consideration in return.

A customer who has deprived themselves of assets and/or income would not
normally be considered eligible under the hardship provisions. This
includes where they are in severe financial hardship. Each case needs to
be looked at to check for any unusual circumstances that warrant
additional consideration.

Deprivation can be disregarded when:

-   the severe financial hardship is not due to the disposal of assets
    and/or income but an unforeseen event out of the customer's control,
    and
-   the customer would be qualified for the hardship provisions even if
    they had not disposed of the asset

If the deprivation can be disregarded, the deprived asset or income is
added to the eligibility calculation. The customer must still meet all
other criteria.

Unrealisable assets

A customer will note on the assets Hardship claim form which asset(s)
they wish to have disregarded.

The CAO must consider if there are valid reasons why:

-   the asset cannot be sold, or
-   it is unreasonable to sell or borrow against the asset. Further
    examples of why a property cannot be sold are available

A customer may ask for the asset value of a loan to be disregarded. This
may be due to the debtor's not being able to repay the loan. The
circumstances should be examined to see if the loan is irrecoverable.

A customer may question a real estate valuation. If they can provide
evidence that will affect the property value, they can apply for a
formal review of the valuation decision. A downturn in rural economy is
not enough evidence, as the approved valuer takes this into account.

Other Commonwealth assistance

If a benefit or allowance customer is eligible for alternative
Commonwealth assistance, they are not eligible for payments under
hardship provisions.

For example:

-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) pension
-   Payments made by or on behalf of another government department

Severe financial hardship

To meet severe financial hardship under the assets test hardship
provisions, the customer must have:

-   all other income must be less than the customer's maximum
    fortnightly rate of allowance/pension
-   customer and partner available cash is less than the readily
    available funds limit
-   no other course of action they could reasonably be expected to take
    to improve their financial position. This does not include selling
    the principal home

Approving a claim

The customer completes a Claim for consideration under hardship form
(SA233). Each member of a couple must lodge a claim. They can lodge
separate or dual claims. The CAO assesses all claims under assets test
hardship rules.

A decision under the asset test hardship provisions takes effect from
the lodgement day of a signed claim form. The Social Security Act 1991
(sections 1129, 1130B and 1131) contain provisions that allows a
delegate to backdate a claim for assets hardship for up to six months
before the signed claim form was lodged. These backdating provisions do
not mean that a claim must be lodged within 6 months after the rejection
of claim for pension.

As most customers have limited knowledge of the assets hardship
provisions the CAO should view favourably a request to grant for an
earlier period in most circumstances. This can be to the date the
customer was first assessed or affected under the assets test. See
Resources for an example.

CAO reassessments

If the customer or their partner has changes to their assets or income
following the grant of their payment under the assets hardship
provisions, a reassessment is required by a CAO. For example,
notification of earnings via telephone or other contact.

An escalation for a CAO reassessment must be requested via a Fast Note.

The Resources page contains examples of applying deprivation rules, an
example for approving a claim, Q999 letter template, links to forms,
Office Locator and how to contact an Assets Hardship CAO.

Related links

Assets hardship for income support payments

Assets hardship provisions - Pensions

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Unrealisable assets under the Assets Test hardship provisions

Severe financial hardship under the Assets Test hardship provisions

Notional income on unrealisable assets

Deprivation effect on Centrelink payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
