
Family taper for the Parental Income Test (PIT) 108-02010080

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the 20% family taper for
the Parental Income Test (PIT) and how it is applied when calculating a
dependent child's payment.

On this Page:

Family taper affected payments

The family taper rate used to calculate the PIT result is 20%, $0.20
reduction for every $1.00 over the Parental Income Free Area (PIFA). For
the PIFA amounts, see Rates and Thresholds. The family taper rate for
the PIT is aligned with the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A income test.
Once the 20% taper rate is calculated, it is applied as a 'per family'
taper rate.

Affected payments include:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   ABSTUDY Group 2 School Fees Allowance (means tested component)
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Additional Boarding
    Allowance (ABA)

The family taper commenced from 1 July 2010. Prior to this, siblings in
the family pool provided a sibling concession towards the PIT.

For more information about PIFA, see Parental Income Test (PIT).

Eligible recipient/sibling

A person is included in the family pool for calculating the PIT
reduction amount if the PIT applies to each of them. A dependent person
has the PIT applied if they are:

-   qualified and payable, or
-   qualified and not payable due to an Income Maintenance Period (IMP),
    Seasonal Worker's Preclusion Period (SWPP), or a compliance penalty
    period

Other siblings may also be included in the family pool. For further
information see Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the
family pool for the Parental Income Test (PIT).

Family group

Members of the family group include:

-   siblings sharing one or two parent(s)/guardian(s)
-   blended families/step parents

Note: young people who do not normally live with a step parent can have
the step parent's income disregarded for Youth Allowance (YA) and
ABSTUDY PIT purposes. When calculating the PIT reduction amount,
sibling/s are included in the family pool of children if the PIT applies
to each of them, and they share at least one parent/guardian.

See Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth
Allowance (YA) for who is a parent/guardian for parental income
assessment.

If a change in circumstance affects an ABSTUDY/AIC ABA/YA claimant or
recipient, it may affect each sibling. For example, a grant, restoration
or cancellation on a sibling record can result in follow-up action on a
sibling's record. For further information see Youth Allowance at pending
status (YAL/PSA) and dependent siblings.

Current at zero rate

YA recipients whose payment is current at nil rate for a maximum of 6
consecutive fortnights are treated as in receipt of payment for the
purposes of being included in the family pool, after which Youth
Allowance will cancel.

ABSTUDY recipients whose payment is current at nil rate, are treated as
in receipt of payment for the purposes of the family pool.

The Resources page contains examples of applying the 20% family taper.

Related links

Linking sibling records with customers/students/Australian
Apprentices/job seekers - Parental Income Test (PIT)

Determining a dependent child for inclusion in the family pool for the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for Youth Allowance (YA)

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Youth Allowance at pending status (YAL/PSA) and dependent siblings

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
