-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details for assessing and coding parental income
for ABSTUDY, AIC Scheme and YA.

The Parental Income Test

The Parental Income Test (PIT) is applied to dependent Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme customers,
unless an exemption applies. Services Australia collects parental income
from parent(s)/guardian(s).

In most circumstances, the PIT is assessed using actual parental income
figures, however in some situations a reasonable estimate of parental
income may be accepted.

Accepting an estimate of parental income

A reasonable estimate of parental income can be used to apply the PIT
where the:

-   parent(s)/guardian(s) do not have taxable income that is assessed by
    the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
-   actual income for the relevant financial year is not known by the
    parent(s)/guardian(s)

These situations may occur when:

-   parent(s)/guardian(s) has been given an extension by the ATO to
    lodge their tax return, or
-   the parent/guardian has lodged their income tax return and the ATO
    is yet to finalise the income tax assessment, or
-   a current tax year assessment is in place

Verification of income estimates

If the Service Officer is in doubt that the estimate is reasonable, they
may ask the parent(s)/guardian(s) to give written verification of the
estimate. For example:

-   a letter from the accountant/tax agent advising an estimate of
    parental income, or
-   an Income Statement provided by the ATO, or a Payment Summary (Group
    Certificate) and a Commonwealth statutory declaration

If the parent(s)/guardian(s) give a reasonable estimate, they must
provide verification of the actual income as soon as it is available.

Debts

Debts may be raised for ABSTUDY and AIC Additional Boarding Allowance
(ABA) payments if the actual income figures are higher than the
estimates provided and the estimate used to calculate their rate of
payment was over the Parental Income Free Area.

AIC Scheme debts are usually the responsibility of the applicant, but in
some circumstances, may be the responsibility of a third party. This
could be an education provider, parent or guardian. Check to confirm
which party directly received the overpayment.

For YA, debts are only raised in certain circumstances. Only Service
Officers trained in debt raising should make decisions about whether an
overpayment for YA has occurred as a result of the application of PIT is
a legally recoverable debt.

For staff trained in raising debts, see Raising Parental Income Test
(PIT) debts.

Related links

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Circumstances when the Parental Income Test (PIT) does not apply

Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices

ABSTUDY annual Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Create a new debt record manually on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
