-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for assessing income from seasonal
work.

On this Page:

The Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

SWPP assesses high income from seasonal, intermittent or contract work.
It makes sure the income from work is used before claiming a payment.
SWPP assesses the past 6 months of income before claim lodgement.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customers or
partners may need to revise their current income estimate. It will
reduce the chance of a debt during the reconciliation process.

The SWPP will only apply to:

-   single people who have earnings more than the Average Weekly
    Ordinary Time Earnings (AWOTE) or
-   couples whose combined earnings are more than twice the AWOTE (high
    income). See References for a link to section 1.1.A.375 of the
    Guide.

The SWPP can be waived in certain cases of hardship.

Seasonal work

Any work that is only available for a part (or parts) of the year, each
year.

Examples of seasonal work include, cray fishing, abalone diving, deep
sea fishing, shearing, pearl diving, tourism and fruit picking.

Seasonal workers who accrue leave entitlements can still be affected by
the SWPP. Only intermittent workers who accrue leave entitlements are
not affected.

Intermittent work

Intermittent work is work that stops and starts at intervals. It does
not include work where the person:

-   has leave entitlements, or
-   could not predict when there would be no work

Contract work

Contract work is any intermittent work that is performed under a
contract for a specific function and/or period, including sub-contract
work.

Allowable deductions

Seasonal, intermittent and contract work income comprises the gross
income from work. For the purposes of SWPP, allowable deductions can be
made if they are in related to the work and allowed by the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

Gaps in employment

Treat short gaps in employment as 1 continuous period of work. The gap
must be less than 14 days and within the same industry. This is known as
the '14 day gap rule'.

Where there is a gap in time, or a change of industry, and the customer
stops work for:

-   less than 14 days and resumes in the same industry, treat the work
    as 1 continuous period
-   less than 14 days and starts in a new industry, treat the work as 2
    separate periods
-   more than 14 days and resumes in the same or a different industry,
    treat the work as 2 separate periods

Working Credits

A Working Credits balance cannot be used during a SWPP. Working Credits
will not accrue or deplete during these periods.

Seasonal Worker Incentive Trial

The Seasonal Worker Incentive Trial (SWIT) is run over a two year period
from:

-   1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018 and
-   1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019

JobSeeker Payment and Youth Allowance (Jobseeker) customers who have
received these payments continuously for at least three months may
participate. Those who participate will benefit from:

-   Being able to earn up to $5000 per financial year from eligible
    seasonal horticultural work, without affecting their payments
-   Relaxed qualification rules, so they continue to receive their
    payment while undertaking seasonal work
-   Access to a Seasonal Work Living Away and Travel Allowance. It is
    worth up to $300 per year. They must undertake seasonal
    horticultural work more than 120km from their home

Related links

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Assessment of hardship for Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Treatment of lump sums

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme

Working Credit

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
