-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the purpose of the Income Test. The Income Test
is one of two Means Tests (Assets Test is the other) used to establish
the level of income support required by a person. The Income Test
establishes the level of a couple's total combined assessable income and
then, based on that assessable income, calculates the couple's
entitlement.

Income Test applications for different pension customers

The Income Test has different applications for the following pension
customers:

-   single pensioners
-   partnered pensioners
-   partnered pensioners where the partner is on an allowance payment
-   pensioners separated due to ill health
-   pensioners with children - if the pensioner is paid under the
    transitional rules for pension customers at 20 September 2009 and
    the customer has children, an extra income amount per child may be
    deducted before the rate of pension payable is calculated

A separate rate is calculated under the pension Income Test (or if
eligible, the Income Test under the transitional rules) and Assets Tests
with the one resulting in the lowest rate of pension being applicable to
that person.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) may be exempt from the Means Test, but income and assets details
are required to determine the partners' entitlement to payments or if
the customer is claiming rent assistance.

International agreements and compensation

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate
deduction.

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
result in a direct deductions.

Income from employment and self-employment

A customer is eligible for Work Bonus if they are:

-   of Age Pension age, and
-   in receipt of an income support payment other than PPS

Work Bonus applies to income, which is from:

-   employment, and
-   self-employment if the customer has earned the income through
    personal exertion

Where a working age customer has a partner of Age Pension age who is
entitled to Work Bonus, the Work Bonus is applied to the partner's
employment or and/or self-employment income before calculating the
employment income component for the customer’s Working Credits.

For customers of workforce age, apply the Working Credit rules.

If income of the customer or their partner reduces their fortnightly
rate to nil and some of that income is employment income, the person's
payment may remain current at nil rate for up to 6 fortnights, known as
the employment income nil rate period. Customers also in receipt of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A will be subject to the FTB Part A income
test during this period and will be required to provide an income
estimate within 21 days of commencing the period or their FTB payment
will cancel.

[] The online estimator options can be used to estimate the effect of a
change in income on a customer's Centrelink payments.

Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

For children born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as
ordinary income for pensions. PPL and DAP for children who were born or
entrusted to care prior to 1 October 2016 is treated as exempt income.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules.

The transitional rules will apply if the customer receives a higher rate
of payment under the old Income Test (pre 20 September 2009) with no
Work Bonus applied compared to the Income Test in place from 20
September 2009, which does include the Work Bonus.

If the customer's pension is paid under the transitional rules, the Work
Bonus is not used to determine their rate of entitlement under the pre
20 September 2009 Income Test.

It is possible for their partner's income support payment entitlement to
be calculated under a different income test, that is, the customer could
receive a higher rate under the old income test and their partner may
have been granted after 20 September 2009 and therefore only eligible to
be paid under the new income test.

The Resources page contains an example of using the Income Test to work
out a customer's member of a couple pension rate. It also contains a
link to the Services Australia website for Income Test information.

Related links

Online estimator options

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Employment income nil rate period

Rates and thresholds

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

Income, assets and rates of payment

Working Credit

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
