
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about superannuation. Superannuation
is an investment for a person's retirement, to provide financial
resources during their retirement years.

Government intent

Money is accumulated during the person's working life in specialised
superannuation funds or schemes. Contributions are made by employers,
employees and self-employed individuals into these funds. Sometimes the
Government will add to it through co-contributions. The period during
which moneys are contributed to the fund is known as the accumulation
phase. This topic contains information about the assessment of
Australian superannuation investments.

On this Page:

Overseas superannuation

Overseas superannuation investments do not meet the definition of a
superannuation fund in Section 9(1) of the Social Security Act.
Consequently overseas superannuation investments are treated as overseas
managed investments for social security purposes.

Accessing superannuation

Following retirement from the workforce, a person is able to access
their superannuation and can either make lump sum withdrawals from their
superannuation fund or receive regular ongoing payments from an income
stream product. This is known as the draw down phase. Where
superannuation assets are used to purchase or to commence an income
stream, it is assessed under the income stream rules.

Note: regular withdrawals from a superannuation fund do not constitute
an income stream.

A person can also move from retirement (draw down phase) back into
employment (accumulation phase).

Superannuation guarantee legislation

Since the introduction of the Superannuation Guarantee legislation, all
employees must have superannuation contributed on their behalf by their
employer; therefore most customers who have been recently employed
should have some superannuation investment. There are a range of
superannuation investments customers may have and are not to be confused
with income stream products like annuities and superannuation pensions.
See the Guide to Social Security Law, 4.8.2.10, Principles for Assessing
Superannuation Investments for more information. The References page
contains a link to this.

Early release

Generally, accrued superannuation benefits are not accessible until the
fund member leaves the workforce and reaches preservation age. However,
the superannuation trustee does permit early release of preserved
superannuation benefits in limited circumstances.

Splitting superannuation

From 28 December 2002, new laws allowed the Family Court, or parties to
a property settlement, the power to split superannuation. The laws also
gave the Court the power to 'flag' a superannuation interest for future
splitting. Note: this is not to be confused with income stream payment
splits. All Means Test assessments of 'split' income stream payments are
currently undertaken by the Department of Social Services (DSS). The
Service Officer must forward a copy of the supporting documentation to
the Financial Industry and Network Support (FINS) Helpdesk.

Most splits of superannuation investments will involve customers under
Age Pension age, and as Australian superannuation in the accumulation
phase or in the draw down phase where an income stream has not commenced
is exempt for under Age Pension age customers, splits should have no
effect on income support entitlements. Where a superannuation investment
is split for customers who are of Age Pension age, the customers changed
superannuation details must be updated in the usual manner.

Assessment of superannuation as income and asset

For assessment under the Income and Asset Test, the procedure, Assessing
superannuation contains further information.

Contents

Assessing superannuation

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Exempting for superannuation investments

Related links

Income streams

Early release of superannuation on financial hardship grounds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
