
Assessing caravans, boats and park homes 108-04070080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the assessment of
caravans, boats and park homes. If a customer resides in a campervan,
park home, caravan or a boat which they own (or are purchasing), they
are considered to be a homeowner and the lower assets limits apply. Rent
Assistance (RA) can be paid if the customer does not own the land the
dwelling is situated on and is paying site or mooring fees.

On this Page:

Customers living alone

Single customers living alone in a caravan, boat or park home are exempt
from the sharer's provisions for RA, even if they are sharing a major
area of accommodation in the park or marina.

If a customer lives in a park home they own, they are treated the same
as if they live in a caravan they own, that is they are homeowners but
may be paid RA when they do not own the land the dwelling is situated on
and pay site fees.

Travelling around Australia

If a customer decides to travel around Australia and leaves their
principal home temporarily for up to twelve months, RA is not payable.
They are a homeowner of their principal residence which they have
temporarily vacated. However, if they are absent for more than twelve
months, RA may be payable. The home is then classed as an asset as it is
no longer their principal home. The customer may then be eligible for RA
for site or mooring/marina fees paid in respect of their caravan, mobile
home or boat, which would then be classified as their principal home.

For more details see Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers.

Lifestyle villages, Park homes or over 55 villages

A caravan park, transportable (mobile) home park, or a lifestyle park
that includes non-moveable dwellings may promote itself as a retirement
park or village by using a name which gives the impression of it being a
retirement village. Although it may restrict occupancy to residents over
a specified age and may satisfy the basic criteria of a retirement
village, it should not be classified as such when not covered by state
retirement village legislation. RA may be paid to residents of all park
types not covered by state retirement village legislation, counting
ongoing maintenance, service or site fees as rent.

Factors to consider:

-   It is essential to clarify what state legislation covers the
    facility and only those facilities covered by state retirement
    village legislation are retirement villages. A copy of the contract
    is required to see if the home is covered by state retirement
    village legislation. If unsure, contact the RA Level 2 Policy
    Helpdesk via the Online Query Form.
-   Names used by these facilities include lifestyle villages, park
    homes, mobile park homes, over 55 villages, etc.
-   Even if the dwelling is not moveable, it is still assessed as a park
    home.
-   The customer may own the dwelling but have a lease for the use of
    the land, that is pays site fees.
-   If the customer moves to other accommodation, what happens with the
    dwelling? In most cases these are sold to the next resident.

If there is doubt about if the accommodation facility meets the
definition of a retirement village, obtain a copy of the contract and
relevant details, and refer to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for
assistance with the decision.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesks -
Online Query Form.

Related links

Permanent vacation of principal home

Temporary vacation of principal home

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Rent Assistance (RA)

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Temporary accommodation and Rent Assistance (RA)

Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA)

Retirement villages

Supported Residential Services (SRS)

Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
