-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the application of the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for dependent ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance (YA) customers.

Dependent customers

Dependent customers who are subject to the Parental Means Test and the
personal income test will have their fortnightly rate of payment
determined by the test that results in the greatest reduction of their
payment in that fortnight.

Note: some ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance customers may be exempt from the
application of the PIT.

Who are the parent(s)/guardian(s) for PIT

The parent(s)/guardian(s) identified for PIT are:

-   The natural, adoptive or relationship parent(s) of the customer if
    the customer normally lives with them. Note: the birth/natural
    parent is no longer the parent for ABSTUDY purposes when a student
    has a parent under traditional Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
    adoption. This means that the birth parent may be the private board
    provider, and/or the travel supervisor. The birth parent is not
    considered the parent when assessing eligibility under the Away from
    Home award for students in traditional Aboriginal or Torres Strait
    Islander adoption relationships
-   The parent and step-parent if the customer normally lives with them.
    See the References section in this procedure and in Changes which
    may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT) for more information about
    step-parents
-   If the customer does not normally live with their parent(s) and is
    wholly or substantially dependent on someone other than a parent,
    this person may be considered to be the parent for the PIT; for
    example the customer's grandparent(s). This cannot be the partner of
    the customer
-   If the customer does not normally live with their parent(s) and
    their parents are divorced or separated, the PIT is applied to the
    parent they last lived with. If that parent has a partner who is not
    the customer’s natural or adoptive parent, the step parent's income
    is not taken into account if the customer does not normally live
    with the step-parent. See the Step-parents section below, or
-   If none of the above applies, the PIT is applied to the parent they
    last lived with. For further information see the Step-parents
    section below
-   If the customer has been assessed for the Away from Home rate, the
    parent being used to assess the away from home rate must be the same
    parent used for the purposes of the PIT. It is not possible to pay
    the Away From Home rate based on the natural parents and then use
    someone else's income for the PIT (for example, a grandparent the
    customer is living with)

Note: in shared custody situations (including parents separated under
the same roof), a dependent ABSTUDY or Youth Allowance
claimant/recipient nominates the parent with primary care
responsibility. In 50/50 shared care situations the customer may
nominate which parent they want to use for the purposes of the PIT.

Applying the PIT

Any parental income above the threshold, is divided among the children
within the family pool. The share of the parental income for each child
will depend on the maximum amount of the payments for which that
particular child is eligible. The total amount of payments for all
dependent children contribute to the family pool maximum rate.

A sibling is included in the family pool if they are in receipt of:

-   Youth Allowance (YA), or
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance, or
-   Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme Additional Boarding
    Allowance (ABA), or
-   A sibling who meets the definition of an FTB child or regular care
    child and aged 0 - 15 or 16-19 and in full-time secondary study

The contribution to the family pool of the FTB and regular care
child/ren is the Maximum notional FTB rate (as applied to Youth Payments
only).

Both amounts will be included in the family pool calculation if a child
receives:

AIC ABA, or

ABSTUDY Living Allowance and/or School Fee Allowance Group 2, and

-   is approved to live away from home,
-   attends secondary boarding school, and
-   meets the definition of an FTB child or regular care child
    simultaneously

The contribution to the family pool of the Youth Allowance child is
their Maximum Payment Rate

The Family Pool (NSFP) screen displays the current and historical
maximum payment rate contribution of the customer, and their linked
siblings.

If the parental income reduction is less than the Maintenance Income
Test Reducible Amount (MRA) and maintenance income is received in
respect of the customer, the Maintenance Income Test is calculated. For
more information, see Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and
Youth Allowance (YA).

If the parental income reduction is equal to or more than the
Maintenance Income Test Reducible Amount (MRA), the family taper of 20%
is then applied to the child's share of the parental income above the
threshold. This means that the rate of payment is reduced by 20 cents
for each dollar of the child's share of their parents' affecting income.

Current at zero rate

YA customers whose payment is current at zero rate are treated as in
receipt of payment for the family group for a maximum of 6 consecutive
fortnights, after which YA will cancel.

ABSTUDY customers whose payment is current at zero rate are treated as
in receipt of payment for the family group. ABSTUDY customers who do not
receive Living Allowance will display on the Family Pool Summary (NSFP)
screen as 'other'. These siblings will have a zero contribution to the
family pool.

Note: YA or ABY customers are not considered to be current at zero rate
if they are receiving at least $1 of payment, i.e. Rent Assistance or
Youth Disability Supplement.

Parental income

Income assessed under the PIT is combined parental income in the
appropriate tax year. This will usually be the income of the base year
(the financial year ending on 30 June of the previous year) but can in
some cases be the current financial year (the year following the base
year).

The PIT includes the following income:

Taxable income

Adjusted employer provided reportable fringe benefits including salary
sacrifice. The reportable fringe benefit amount as recorded on a
customer's group certificate should be advised and recorded:

-   exempt reportable fringe benefits is automatically converted to the
    lower adjusted amount using the fringe benefits tax rate
-   other reportable fringe benefits will not be converted. 100% will be
    included in parental income

Target foreign income (except if received as a gift from an immediate
family member) - also know as overseas income

Total net investment losses

Reportable superannuation contributions

Tax free pensions and benefits (included in the PIT from 1 July 2017)

Note: where the parent/s have received income from overseas, the foreign
income must be converted to Australian Dollars (AUD).

If a parent has paid maintenance (including Child Support) for the
support of other children, this amount is deducted from the total
parental income amount.

Note: maintenance income received on behalf of the customer may need to
be recorded separately to be applied in the Maintenance Income Test.

Step-parents

For Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY purposes, a step-parent is the married
or de facto partner of the parent who has primary care and
responsibility of the dependent customer.

The income of the step-parent is included in the Parental Income Test
(PIT) for the purposes of determining the rate of Youth Allowance or
ABSTUDY Living Allowance for a customer where:

-   the step-parent lives with the parent, and
-   the customer normally lives with the parent and step parent

The earliest the income of the step-parent may be applied to the PIT is
from the date the parent and step-parent are considered to be normally
living together. This may include while the customer is absent from the
primary home but normally lives with the parent.

The customer is considered to be normally living with the parent and
step-parent where the customer's primary home address is the same as the
parent and step-parent. This includes customers who live away from home:

-   for study
-   to undertake their Australian Apprenticeship
-   to search for work
-   to undertake other activities, and
-   who have not established their own permanent and separate home away
    from their parent and step-parent. That is, they intend to return to
    the parental home

Customers living arrangements may be deemed temporary, for example, if
they:

-   live in campus accommodation
-   must pack up their belongings and return home during semester break,
    and
-   will not have a lease during the semester break

For the purposes of the PIT, the step-parent's income should not be
included when the customer:

-   has established a separate home, and
-   has no intention of returning, other than for a visit

Where a customer has established a permanent home and they return to the
parental home to live, they must notify Services Australia as per their
payment notification requirements.

For Youth Allowance customers see Change of circumstances for Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices.

For ABSTUDY customers, see Change of circumstances for ABSTUDY
customers.

Exemptions from the PIT

The PIT will not apply to a dependent YA or ABSTUDY customer during the
period where at least one of their parent(s)/guardian(s):

-   receives a certain social security benefit or pension or a payment
    paid by the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA), listed in Module
    L of Section 1067G of the Social Security Act 1991 (for example,
    Service Pension, Income Support Supplement (ISS), Veteran Payment)
-   receives ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   receives Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

The parent(s)/guardians(s) are not taken to be receiving an income
support payment, and an exemption from the PIT will not apply if they:

-   are serving an Income Maintenance Period that reduces their rate to
    zero
-   are in an employment income nil rate period, or
-   have an AGE/CZR PLS status (indicating receipt of Home Equity Access
    Scheme (HEAS) payments only)

Note: an additional exemption only applies to dependent ABSTUDY
customers or claimants if a parent holds a current Health Care Card or
has a Health Care Card because they receive the maximum rate of Family
Tax Benefit Part A.

Income from overseas/foreign income

Parent(s)/guardian(s) who reside outside of Australia are still required
to supply combined parental income. Where evidence of foreign income is
provided, and does not align with an Australian Tax Year (1 July to 30
June) Parent(s)/guardian(s) must supply additional evidence, such as:

-   Letter from their employer
-   Payslips
-   a Commonwealth of Australia Statutory Declaration

Note: where the parent/s have received income from overseas, the income
should be declared in the foreign currency. Services Australia will
convert the figures to Australian Dollars (AUD).

Letters from employers or payslips can be accepted in a language other
than English and can be referred by Service Officers for translation.
See Translation of documents.

When YA exemptions do not apply

For YA, an exemption from the PIT does not apply for any period where
the customer's parent is:

receiving an income support payment and

-   is in an employment income nil rate period, or
-   receives their entire payment as a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

When ABSTUDY exemptions do not apply

For ABSTUDY, an exemption does not apply:

for a period after the expiry date on the Health Care Card (HCC)

if a parent holds a HCC because they receive a social security Mobility
Allowance (MOB) or Carer Allowance (CA) (in respect of a disabled child)

if the applicant or the applicant's partner is not in receipt of an
income support payment and holds only a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
or a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

if a parent only holds a Low Income Heath Card (only for ABSTUDY Living
Allowance customers), or

for any period where the customer's parent is:

-   receiving an income support payment and
-   is in an employment income nil rate period, or
    receives their entire payment as a Home Equity Access Scheme (HEAS)
    loan

The Resources page contains links to a relevant form and the Payment and
Service Finder, information about applying the PIT reduction, social
security payments and payments from the Department of Veterans Affairs
that provide exemption from the PIT and questions and answers and
scenarios for Income Maintenance Period.

Related links

Apply for a Payment or Concession Card Options online

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA)

Determining the appropriate tax year for the Parental Income Test (PIT)
for Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children
(AIC) Scheme

Increase or decrease in parental income for Youth Allowance (YA),
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

Employment income nil rate period

Changes which may affect the Parental Income Test (PIT)

Documents required for new claims

Youth Allowance at pending status (YAL/PSA) and dependent siblings

Tax-free pensions and benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments, and the Parental Income Test for Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
