
Mutual Client Register (MCR) for Service Delivery staff 108-20111656

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page provides an overview of the Mutual Client Register (MCR) and
the role of Service Delivery staff in the MCR process.

MCR Overview

The Mutual Client Register (MCR) is the system the Australian Tax Office
(ATO) uses to match and register customers of interest from Services
Australia, for the purposes of sharing Single Touch Payroll (STP) data.

STP data will only be shared for Persons recorded on the MCR that have a
current legislative link authority.

Services Australia will attempt to establish a link with the ATO for:

-   all current customers, partners and other related individuals, and
-   non-current customers and partners who have an outstanding debt with
    the agency

The ATO records that the person is a mutual client and advises Services
Australia of the result. Services Australia then advises ATO under what
legislative authority ATO can share that person's data. This must happen
before the ATO can send STP data to Services Australia.

There may be instances when a person is active on the MCR and has an
Active Link Authority, but it appears that no STP data is being
received. This may be because

-   the person is not currently working
-   the person’s employer(s) does not report income to ATO using STP
-   the employer may be late submitting their payroll data to the ATO
-   there is an issue with the incoming STP data itself so has been
    quarantined, or
-   there is a technical problem

Note: not every Services Australia customer will be able to be matched
with the ATO and added to the MCR (for example: a young person who does
not have a Tax File Number).

MCR process

Events such as granting a benefit, pension or Low Income Card (LIC),
raising overpayments, or changing a customer’s relationship status, may
automatically trigger the addition of a customer to the MCR.

If a customer is not already active on the MCR, Services Australia will
send an Add person request to the ATO containing the following
information:

-   Customer Reference Number (CRN)
-   Date of Birth
-   Name (up to 3eg. 1 current + 2 historical)
-   Address (up to 3) - If a No Match outcome is received from ATO on
    the first try, the system will try again with a new Add person
    request including the next 3 historical addresses. This will repeat
    until all addresses have been tried)
-   Phone number (up to 3)
-   Email address (up to 3)

MCR match

The ATO will send a response to each ‘Add Person’ request, advising if
the person was matched and subsequently added to the MCR. Where a person
is not matched successfully, an Error response is received from the ATO,
and the Person status will be set to ‘Unavailable’ on the MCR.

Note: specific Error response reasons are only viewable on the View
transactions screen (not all staff will have access to this screen).

MCR Link authority

After a person is successfully added to the MCR, at least one “Add link”
request is sent to the ATO. This advises the ATO of each legal basis
they can share a customer’s STP data with Services Australia, for a
given timeframe. Once the link authority has been successfully added for
a person, STP data will then be sent for a person in near real time
(that is, where STP data from an employer is reported to the ATO, the
ATO will forward that data on).

When Services Australia no longer has the authority to receive STP data
for a given Link reason (for example, a customer’s benefit has been
cancelled), an “Update link” request is sent to the ATO to end that Link
Authority. ATO will then stop forwarding STP data under that Link
Authority. If there are no other active Link Authorities registered on
the MCR for them, then ATO will stop sending STP data outside the scope
of the Link Authority’s Active period.

Resources contains a list of Link Authorities.

STP Historical data

This functionality is expected to be delivered during Quarter 3 2021.

When a customer starts a new claim (either via Online Claims or Staff
Assisted Customer Claim), an “Add STP History” request is sent to the
ATO. This is to request that ATO sends Services Australia all the STP
pay events that fall within a specified period, relevant to the
particular claim being made (e.g. the last 8 weeks of STP pay events
when a customer claims for Age Pension benefit). This assists in
pre-populating income-related fields during the claim, for which the
customer still needs to confirm.

Note: 'Add STP History' requests will only occur if the person is Active
on the MCR.

Role of Service Delivery staff

All Service Delivery staff should have basic access to the MCR Person
Summary screen.

The role of Service Delivery staff in the operation of the MCR is
limited to checking the MCR Person Summary screen to determine a
customer’s status on the MCR, in the event that a customer asks why they
are not seeing STP data as they make new claims or report their
earnings.

Where the customer’s Person or Link authority status on the MCR is not
Active, and the reason is not obvious, the Service Delivery staff member
should escalate the issue via mySupport for further investigation.

Resources contains a table of explanations of fields on the Mutual
Client Register (MCR) Person Summary screen, a list of Link Authorities
and information about which mySupport form to use if additional support
is needed.

Related links

Mutual Customer Register (MCR) process for Support and Administration
Staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
