
Valuation of real estate and other assets 108-04130090

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the value of real estate and other
assets within a new claim, or when a customer advises of an asset for
the first time.

Risk based assessment

From 28 June 2014, a risk based model for real estate assessments was
introduced. The model is responsive to individual circumstances and
changes in the real estate market. Customers need to provide an
estimated value of real estate or other assets they own when they:

-   claim an income support payment for the first time, or
-   when they first purchase it, or
-   major changes are made that would change the value

The model automatically determines the appropriate method of assessment.
Depending on the customer's individual circumstances, the risk based
assessment could result in:

-   accepting the estimated value provided by the customer
-   checking the estimated value against the property market, or
-   a formal valuation by a professional valuer

Formal valuations

Formal valuations are not completed by Services Australia staff. They
are referred to external companies contracted by the agency to complete
property valuations. These valuations are at a cost to the agency on an
agreed pricing scale. There is no cost to the customer.

A formal valuation can be:

-   started by the system at any time under the risk based model, or
-   manually by an APS5 or above

If a formal valuation is in progress, an activity displays on the Future
Activity List (FAL) screen. The activity:

-   can be on the customer's or partner’s record
-   displays Valuation, and the property ID(s) it relates to

Some formal valuations need to be initiated outside the system and may
not have a FAL activity. For example, a historical valuation. The
details will be on a DOC, or noted on a separate activity.

The Real Estate Details (RE) screen is automatically updated when a
formal valuation is completed. The Asset Valuation Source will be:

-   VAL for Desktop or Kerbside Valuations, or
-   ONS for Onsite Valuations

Annual indexation

Once a value is initially determined for real estate assets, it is used
to apply annual indexation (up or down) to eligible properties.

Eligible properties are houses, townhouses and units only. This is based
on the performance of the local property market. Ineligible properties,
such as farms or commercial properties are automatically tested against
the risk profile every 2 years. If required, a desktop, kerbside or
onsite valuation will be requested to update the market value for these
property types.

Some property types are not subject to indexation, although an
indexation date will display on the record. See Maintaining the value of
real estate assets on customer records for more information.

If a customer disagrees with an indexed value applied, with the
customer’s permission a formal onsite valuation can be arranged. This is
at no cost to the customer.

An onsite valuation involves a professional valuer contacting the
customer directly to arrange a suitable time to assess the property in
person. For this to occur, the customer or a representative will need to
provide access to the interior and exterior of the property. Once the
assessment is complete, it can result in the valuation decreasing,
increasing or remaining the same.

For more information on the process to follow, see Maintaining the value
of real estate assets on customer records.

Real estate located in Australia

Staff can accept a customer's estimate of the value of real estate for
all income support payments, unless they think it is unreasonable. Note:
exceptions apply to claims for Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP)
or the Pension Bonus Scheme (PBS) where a valuation must be requested.

After the grant of the income support payment, the property and customer
circumstances are profiled. The appropriate valuation regime is applied.
If a formal valuation is required, it will automatically submit this to
the professional valuation service external to the agency. Once
complete, the returned valuation data automatically uploads to the
customer's record.

Staff must correctly record all information provided by the customer,
including all mandatory fields on the Real Estate Valuation Information
(REVI) screen. The Real Estate Details (MOD R) and property details
within a claim for payment collects and helps assess real estate
details. Supporting documents needed may include:

-   evidence of any mortgage on the property
-   latest council rates/valuation notice - this is to confirm the
    property address and title, not the property value. The property
    value shown on council rates and valuation notices are for
    calculating rates, fire and ambulance service or other taxes. They
    do not always reflect the current market value but they can assist
    to determine if a customer's estimated value is acceptable
-   certificate of title or any other title document

Unreasonable estimate at claim

If it is considered that the customer's property estimate is
unreasonable, a valuation is needed before grant. For example, if a
customer lives on 25 hectares and advises the value of the home and 2
hectares is the same as the total property, this could be considered
unreasonable.

An APS5 or above can request a property valuation within the new claim
activity from the Real Estate Valuation Information (REVI) screen.

PBS and PBBP claims

Some claims will not finalise without a valuation of real estate assets.
They are:

-   Age Pension claims for customers registered for Pension Bonus Scheme
    (PBS)
-   Pension Bonus Bereavement Payment (PBBP)

Liabilities secured over exempt and assessable assets

Accept the customer's estimated value of the exempt asset (for example,
principal home) in most circumstances. If it appears the value is
unreasonable, email details to the Valuation Helpdesk.

If the property has an apportioned liability, the apportionment needs
recalculating if the assessed asset value changes due to an estimate
verification or formal verification.

Review of decision

If a customer disagrees with the amount assessed for real estate assets
a review of decision is not always required. The majority of new
valuations can be requested without the need for an explanation or
formal review of decision.

A formal review of decision may be sought where the:

-   current valuation source is ONS which does not allow for further
    formal valuation
-   customer has not provided authority to inspect the property, for an
    onsite valuation

For more information on the process to follow, see Maintaining the value
of real estate assets on customer records.

Properties not included in the risk based model

The following properties are not suitable for inclusion in the risk
based model. The manual valuation process applies:

-   Real estate type SCF (self-contained flats)
-   Real estate type OTH (other real estate assets for example car
    parks, marina berths)
-   Real estate owned by a private trust or company. See Real estate
    owned by a private trust or private company
-   Real Estate linked to a business
-   Real estate located overseas
-   Real estate that has been gifted
-   Real estate not recorded on a customer record
-   Exempt real estate assets
-   Principal home where the house and curtilage value is equal to the
    market value

The Process page has information about requesting manual valuations for
these assets

Valuation of non-property assets

Various assets can have a valuation request. These assets include, but
are not limited to:

-   coin collections
-   art collections
-   fishing licences or other licences
-   taxi licences
-   vintage or classic car collections
-   racehorses
-   other livestock
-   marina berths
-   plant and equipment

The Resources page contains links to the Real Estate Details (MOD R),
the Valuation Request (SA470), contact details and information on taxi
licences.

Related links

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Address recording for real estate

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Real estate owned by a private trust or private company

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
