
Assessing fringe benefits for Social Security income test purposes 108-05020040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of fringe benefits for pension and
allowance Income Test purposes. Fringe benefits are employer provided
benefits not received directly as a wage or salary.

Salary sacrifice/Salary packaging

An amount of salary or wages voluntarily sacrificed into superannuation
is assessed as employment income. A customer’s payment summary will
include details of the amount salary sacrificed into superannuation as
reportable employer super contributions. Salary sacrificing into
superannuation is not subject to Fringe Benefits Tax rules.

Where an employee salary sacrifices for a benefit other than
superannuation (fringe benefits), this is known as salary sacrificing or
salary packaging and is assessed as income.

Fringe benefits received in addition to a salary paid example

A person is paid a yearly salary of $50,000 and receives employer
provided fringe benefits in the form of use of a leased car in addition
to their salary. The grossed-up amount of the fringe benefit is $10,000,
this means the non-grossed-up amount is $5,300. This makes their total
assessable income $55,300 (salary paid + non-grossed-up fringe benefit
amount = assessable income).

Fringe benefits purchased through salary sacrifice example

A person is paid a yearly salary of $50,000 and chooses to salary
sacrifice $10,000 (the grossed-up amount) for the year to lease a car.
The non-grossed-up amount of the fringe benefit purchased is $5,300. The
person’s post-sacrificed wage ($40,000) is included as income. This
makes their total assessable income $45,300 (post-sacrificed wage +
non-grossed-up fringe benefit amount = assessable income).

Fringe benefits

A separate procedure applies for assessing fringe benefits for family
assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

Fringe benefits are a valuable consideration for social security Income
Test purposes; the non-grossed-up value of the fringe benefit is
assessed as employment income. This is the actual cost to the employer
of providing the fringe benefit. (Exception: there are specific
exemptions such as the value of board and lodging).

The fringe benefits total shown on a person's payment summary (group
certificate) or individual income tax return is the grossed-up amount.
These are also known as reportable fringe benefits. The total is
reported on the payment summary or individual income tax return (as a
separate item) if the non-grossed-up amount is more than $2000 ($1000
before 1 July 2007). For Income Test purposes, the value of all
non-grossed-up fringe benefits (that is, reportable and non-reportable)
must be determined regardless of whether or not they appear on the
payment summary or individual income tax return. These amounts are for a
prior period and may not be an indication of current FBT amounts.

When a customer advises of fringe benefits and provides the reportable
fringe benefits amount shown on their or their partner's payment summary
or individual income tax return, this amount is to be adjusted to
calculate the non-grossed-up amount, which is then recorded as
employment income.

Non-grossed-up amount = grossed-up amount x (100% - Fringe Benefit Tax
rate).

As fringe benefits are considered employment income, they can be used in
calculating the reduction of affecting income through the use of Working
Credits and Work Bonus.

Whether a customer or their partner salary sacrifices into a fringe
benefit, the income sacrificed is assessed as income for income support
payments. There is no further calculation required where it can be
determined that the income sacrificed for the fringe benefit is the
non-grossed-up amount.

Where the grossed-up amount is provided, the Service Officer must
determine the non-grossed-up amount.

The Resources page contains examples of calculating the non-grossed-up
amount.

Related links

Adjusted fringe benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Assessing salary sacrificing/salary packaging arrangements for
employment income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
