-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist Service Officers in
terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction.

Terminating RDS deductions

Services Australia customers can volunteer to participate in the Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS) to pay their government housing payments directly
to a State and Territory Housing Authority (HA). They can withdraw from
the scheme and terminate their RDS deduction at any time without giving
a reason. They do not need an authority form to stop an RDS deduction.

Customer can terminate their RDS deduction by contacting the:

-   relevant Housing Authority (HA), or
-   agency in person or over the phone

Customers cannot terminate an RDS deduction themselves through
self-service and online channels.

After a customer terminates RDS they must discuss alternative rent
payment options with the relevant HA. This is to ensure they do not miss
their rent payments.

If a customer has terminated their RDS deduction and later decides they
want to restart the deduction they must contact the HA, and sign a new
Deduction Authority. The agency cannot restart an RDS deduction.

The HA may stop a deduction on behalf of a customer if they identify the
customer should no longer be paying rent.

The customer will receive a letter when the agency terminates an RDS
deduction.

Services Australia’s role

All Service Officers can end an RDS deduction when asked by the
customer. However, they should encourage the customer to speak with
their Housing Authority (HA) before they terminate their deduction. This
is to ensure that they make other arrangements to pay their rent and
avoid missing payments.

If a HA has system issues and requires help with ending a current RDS
deduction, they will contact the National Business Gateway –
Confirmation Services helpdesk.

Note: the agency is not legally able to terminate an RDS deduction
without advice from the customer or the relevant State and Territory
housing authority.

Housing Transitions

Customers may contact the agency regarding termination of RDS deductions
related to housing transitions.

Housing Authorities (HA) may transfer the tenancy management of
properties to a (non-government) Community Housing Organisation. If this
happens it means that customers will no longer pay their HA government
rent liability via the RDS. The customer’s rent obligation will transfer
to the Community Housing Organisation and they can pay through Centrepay
deductions. These customers may also become eligible for Rent
Assistance.

If a transition occurs, Services Australia works with HA’s and Community
Housing Organisations to end existing RDS deductions, and commence new
Centrepay deductions and Rent Assistance on behalf of affected
customers.

Allowing Community Housing Organisations to start Centrepay and Rent
Assistance on behalf of a customer is voluntary. Some customers may
choose to contact the agency themselves to apply for Rent Assistance or
set up a Centrepay deduction.

During the housing transition period, customers who are being
transitioned will receive:

-   an RDS cancellation letter
-   a Centrepay deduction commencement letter
-   a Rent Assistance commencement letter

If a customer contacts in relation to a housing transition, refer them
to their Community Housing Organisation to discuss. This includes if a
customer wants to discuss changes to their deduction arrangements or
management of their tenancy from a HA to a Community Housing
Organisation in their state.

Overpayments

Occasionally, RDS overpayments are made to HAs. The HA has the
responsibility to refund any RDS overpayments to the customer. RDS
refunds are not to be made by Centrelink.

If a customer contacts the agency to discuss an RDS overpayment, tell
them it may take up to 8 days for their RDS deduction to stop, although
legally it stops from the day the customer withdraws their authority.
This can result in the HA receiving extra rent payments from the
customer through RDS. Tell the customer to contact their HA to discuss
any RDS overpayments.

Grace period when payment ceases

When an income support payment ceases, a grace period applies to
deduction instructions for 13 weeks.

If the customer’s payment:

-   is restored during the grace period the deduction instruction
    remains valid
-   is not restored the RDS deduction is terminated

Customer moves interstate

If a customer has an RDS Rent (RNT) deduction and they move interstate,
the change of region from one state to another will automatically
terminate the deduction. If the deduction is still needed, the HA must
send a new instruction.

Any other RDS deductions the customer has, for example, LON, ARR or OHP
will not cease automatically, and a Service Officer should terminate
these manually if required.

Income Management for customers with RDS deductions

When a customer has an existing RDS deduction in place, and is placed
onto Income Management, the rent amount is deducted from the customer's
discretionary funds by default, not their income managed funds. The
agency should engage with the customer if possible, to determine if they
want to pay their rent from their:

-   discretionary funds
-   available income managed funds, or
-   a portion from both available funds

Termination of the existing RDS deduction may be required if the
customer chooses to pay their rent payment from their available Income
Management funds.

RDS deductions are voluntary for all customers including those who are
income managed. All customers are able to terminate their RDS deductions
at any time without giving reasons. Under no circumstances should a
service officer refuse to terminate an RDS deduction. For further
information, see Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)
deduction for a customer who has commenced Income Management.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the National
Business Gateway Confirmation Services helpdesk, links to the Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS), Third Party Programs Team and National Business
Gateway intranet pages, and a link to the MoneySmart website.

Related links

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

Eligibility for Crisis Payment

Advances

Social Work Services

Centrepay

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
