-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Personal Assets Test for JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Austudy and independent Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY. The
value of a customer's assets must be below the allowance Assets Test
limits. Once a customer's assets are over the Assets Test limit, they do
not qualify for payment.

Assets Test

The Assets Test is based on assessable assets that the customer owns. An
exempt asset will not be counted in the Assets Test.

There is a distinct cut off point for the allowance assets test limit,
depending on the customer's relationship status and whether the customer
is a home owner or not. If a customer is in severe financial hardship,
hardship provisions may apply. Limits are not increased for dependent
children. For the allowance assets test limit, see the Allowance
(Independent) - Assets test link on the Rates and thresholds page.

There are some differences for Special Benefit (SpB) and Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP) customers.

Estimate of assets

Customers are asked to provide their own estimate of the net market
value of their assessable assets. This is the amount of money they would
get by selling the asset, less any debts on the assets such as
registered mortgages, hire purchase debts or loans. Net market value is
not the replacement value or the amount the asset is insured for - it is
the market place/garage sale value. Customers are not asked to obtain
professional valuations - if necessary, Services Australia will arrange
for these to be done.

If an allowance customer (or partner) disposes of income or assets
without adequate financial consideration, the income or asset amount may
be maintained for 5 years. This is known as deprivation provisions.

Services Australia must be notified of any changes in asset
circumstances of a customer and/or their partner within 14 days of the
change. The customer may provide the notification by telephone, online
channels or by attending a service centre.

The Resources page contains links to modules required for Assets Test
details and details on how the Assets test was impacted by the
coronavirus (COVID-19).

Related links

When to request an Australian Valuation Office (AVO) valuation or title
search

Assessment of assets

Assets and liabilities of a business

Assets hardship provisions for allowances

Exempt Assets

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Referrals for actuarial valuations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
