
Deeming provisions 108-05050000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how deeming is used to work out income from some
financial assets.

On this Page:

How deeming works

Deeming is used to determine the assessable income a customer receives
from their financial assets which are subject to deeming.

Rather than use the actual dividends or interest earned by individual
assets:

all of the customer's financial investments, and the value of any gifts
above the allowed limit (deprived assets), are added together

the deeming percentage rate(s) are then applied to the total value,
however a threshold amount exists:

-   the portion of the total value of all assets below the threshold
    amount is multiplied by the lower deeming percentage, and
-   the portion of the total value above the deeming threshold is
    multiplied by the higher deeming percentage

the result is called the deemed income

The deemed income is added to the customer's assessable income from all
other sources for income test purposes. Deemed income from financial
assets is not employment income. Working Credit or Work Bonus cannot be
used to offset deemed income.

The deeming thresholds are indexed by the Consumer Price Index (CPI)
each July

For more information, the Resources page includes:

-   a list of financial assets
-   a table of the current deeming rates and thresholds, and
-   examples of calculating assessable income

Deeming of income streams

Deeming only applies to 2 types of income streams. They are:

-   Product Category 3 (Assets Tested (Short Term)), and
-   Product Category 9 (Asset Tested (Long Term))

Income from other Income Streams is assessed in a different way.

Mortgage saver or loan offset accounts

A mortgage saver or loan offset account is a savings account linked to a
mortgage. It is not a loan or liability against an asset.

Under the deeming provisions, the balance of an offset account is a
financial investment and is included in the deemed income calculation.

Superannuation Investments

Superannuation investments held by customers under Age Pension age are
not subject to the income or assets tests. They are therefore not
included in deeming.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

NDIS funds received from the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA)
which are deposited into an account specifically for the purpose of
managing the customer's NDIS plan are exempt from the income and assets
test.

Funds held in a NDIS account, including any interest earned, are not
included in deeming.

NDIS funds:

-   can be received periodically or as a lump sum. This has no impact on
    the assessment
-   are not required to be reported, and if reported should not be taken
    into account in the income and assets test assessment

Deeming exemptions

An exemption from deeming can be granted where special circumstances
exist. Exemptions are not granted because of poor investment
performance, such as shares producing negative returns, or because a low
return loan was made in order to help another person.

If an investment is granted a deeming exemption:

-   its value is not included in the calculation of the customer's
    deemed income
-   the actual income a customer receives from a financial investment is
    used in assessing their income

The Deeming Exemption Register:

-   has information about the income and asset tests treatment of
    investments with companies and financial institutions which are in
    financial difficulty
-   assists with the assessment of the person's income and financial
    assets

When applying the Non-farm Assets Test for Farm Household Allowance
(FHA):

-   A loan made by a person to a trust or private company may be treated
    as a farm asset rather than a financial asset of the customer in
    certain circumstances
-   If it is treated as a farm asset, it is exempt from deeming rules

The Resources page contains:

-   a list of financial assets
-   a table of the current deeming rates and thresholds
-   examples of calculating assessable income
-   a link to the Services Australia website

Related links

Deeming exemptions

A-H Deeming Exemption Register

I-Z Deeming Exemption Register

Verifying income and assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
