
Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance (YA) 108-02040000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for dependent
customers receiving ABSTUDY Living Allowance (aged 16 and over) or Youth
Allowance (YA).

On this Page:

Dependent customers subject to the Parental Means Test

Dependent customers who are subject to the Parental Means Test and the
personal income test will have their rate of payment determined by the
test that results in the greatest reduction of their payment.

The Parental Means Test consists of two tests:

-   Parental Income Test (PIT)
-   Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

These tests are calculated based on the parent(s)/guardian(s) financial
circumstances and reduce the customer’s rate of payment by one of the
following:

-   PIT reduction amount
-   Maintenance Income Test Reducible Amount (MRA), or
-   Maintenance Income Test Notional Reduction (MITNR)

The parental means test does not apply to ABSTUDY or YA customers who
satisfy the independence criteria.

Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

The Maintenance Income Test (MIT) assesses maintenance income received
for the purpose of supporting the individual dependent customer. Other
maintenance income received by the parent in respect of other dependent
children is not counted in this test

The MIT may be applied to dependent ABSTUDY Living Allowance (aged 16
and over) and Youth Allowance customers unless they are exempt from the
MIT.

Prior to 1 January 2019, the MIT also applied to ABSTUDY Living
Allowance (aged under 16), School Fees Allowance Group 2 and Assistance
for Isolated Children (AIC) Additional Boarding Allowance.

From 1 January 2020, the MIT will not be applied where ABSTUDY Living
Allowance or Group 2 School Fee Allowance and FTB is being received
simultaneously. The MIT will apply to the FTB payment for the child.

The MIT may be applied to a relevant period (any period within a
financial year a customer or their parent(s)/guardian(s) are entitled to
receive maintenance income from a paying parent). A customer will not be
subject to the MIT where there is no entitlement to maintenance income.

Maintenance Income – Child Support Assessment, Voluntary and Capitalised Maintenance

Maintenance income is financial support given from a non-custodial
parent to:

-   the custodial parent the child is dependent upon, or
-   the child

Maintenance income can include any of the following:

-   cash payments
-   lump sum payments and non-cash benefits
-   food or clothes
-   payments made to another person or organisation on a person's behalf
-   loan repayments, rates, insurance, household expenses, child care
    fees or school fees, and
-   payment made directly to the ABSTUDY (16 and over) or Youth
    Allowance customer
-   Capitalised maintenance

Capitalised maintenance is maintenance income provided by a lump sum
payment or, transfer of an asset or, a property settlement where the
value exceeds $1500. To be assessed as maintenance income, it must be
provided specifically for child support. For MIT, it is the
responsibility of the customer, parent/guardian to advise Services
Australia when capitalised maintenance is received. Capitalised
Maintenance applies to MIT from the date it was received and ends when
the child turns 18 years, unless a different period is indicated in a
court order or an agreement.

Maintenance income can be received through:

-   a Child Support Assessment
-   Voluntary Maintenance - Voluntary maintenance will only be included
    in the MIT where no child support assessment has been made
-   Capitalised maintenance - Capitalised maintenance will be included
    in the MIT in addition to child support assessment or voluntary
    maintenance

To determine the amount of maintenance income received, any amount of
capitalised maintenance received, during the relevant period, will be
added to the CSA or Voluntary amounts received to get the total amount
of maintenance income received.

Relevant period

A relevant period is the total of all periods within a financial year a
customer or their parent(s)/guardian(s) are entitled to receive
maintenance income from a paying parent. For voluntary maintenance
income the relevant period begins on the date the maintenance income
commences and ends the day the maintenance income stops.

Maintenance income is used to calculate the customer’s rate of payment
during a relevant period.

Annualised maintenance income

Maintenance income is always converted to an annual amount using either
the entitlement or disbursement method. The method will depend on if a
Child Support assessment has been made, the method of collection
requested and if the person has elected the disbursement method.

The entitlement method will be used where a child support assessment has
been made and:

-   the person has elected to collect maintenance income privately, or
-   the person has elected the entitlement method and requested Child
    Support to collect maintenance income, or
-   when there is a voluntary maintenance arrangement

The disbursement method will be used where a child support assessment
has been made and both:

-   the person has elected Child Support to collect maintenance income,
    and
-   they have elected the disbursement method

Note: this is recorded on the applicant/parent/guardian’s record.

Entitlement method calculation:

the current entitlement amount is used as the annual maintenance income

if child support entitlement varies, annual maintenance income is
recalculated and, under the Entitlement Method, includes:

-   each entitlement amount (or actual voluntary maintenance income
    amount) apportioned for the period it applies: entitlement X number
    of days / 365
-   an estimate for the remainder of the income year: entitlement X
    number of days / 365

These amounts are added together and then annualised.

Disbursement method calculation:

all Child Support disbursements received so far in the financial year,
plus

-   the lower of:
    current month or previous month disbursements (whichever is the
    higher amount) X number of months left in the financial year
    or
    one twelfth of the current annual entitlement X number of months
    left in the financial year, plus
-   for previous private collection periods in the financial year, the
    annual entitlement apportioned for the period each applied

The annualised maintenance is then calculated as follows:

-   total maintenance income from payer X 365 / number of days the
    customer is entitled to receive maintenance income from the payer in
    the financial year (relevant period or periods)

Applying the MIT

The MIT is made up of:

-   MIT Reducible Amount (MRA)
-   PIT Reduction Amount (PITRA) - if the PITRA is more than the MRA the
    PITRA will reduce the customer's payment
-   MIT Result
-   MIT Notional Reduction (MITNR)

To calculate the customer's MIT result, firstly calculate the annualised
maintenance income as above. Then calculate the customer's Maintenance
Income Free Area (MIFA). Their MIFA is calculated based on who in the
family receives or attracts maintenance income:

-   where the annual maintenance income is less than their MIFA, the MIT
    result is nil, or
-   where the annual maintenance income is more than their MIFA, the MIT
    result is calculated (annual maintenance income – MIFA) X 0.5 / 26

To calculate the Customer's MITNR the MIT result is added to the PITRA.

The lower of the MITNR and the MRA reduces the customer's Maximum
Payment Rate (MPR).

Note: for calculation of the PITRA see Applying the Parental Income Test
(PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance or Applying the Parental Income
Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme.

Determining if the customer has a current Child Support Assessment

The Dependent Youth Maintenance Income (DYMI) table/screen in Process
Direct displays the annual maintenance amount currently being used and
all historical end dated maintenance amounts. If there is a current
child support assessment in place, the most recent entry on DYMI will
display the following:

-   Type - CSA
-   Frequency - ANN (annual)_
-   Maintenance Amount - the maintenance amount (provided by child
    support)
-   Annual Maintenance amount - the annual maintenance amount being used
    for the maintenance income test assessment

Where a current child support annual assessment is in place, it is
possible for ‘one time’ child support maintenance payments to be made at
the same time. These onetime maintenance amounts will be displayed on
DYMI with a frequency of (ONE) and the amounts will be automatically
included as part of the annual maintenance income test assessment.

If the most recent entry on DYMI displays an annual maintenance amount
of $0 (zero), this indicates there is no current child support
assessment in place and the child support agreement has ended.

Voluntary Maintenance Income

Voluntary maintenance is a private agreement where the payer agrees to
pay the payee (the PIT linked parent) maintenance for the dependent
youth customer. Voluntary maintenance and any changes to the
arrangement, must be advised to the agency by the customer or parent or
guardian. A current child support arrangement will supersede the
voluntary arrangement and the system will automatically end date the
voluntary arrangement if a child support assessment is received. The
voluntary arrangement will not be re-instated when the child support
assessment ends, and the customer or parent or guardian must advise the
agency if a new voluntary agreement is arranged.

Viewing Maintenance Income

Child Support, Voluntary and Capitalised maintenance income can be
viewed in:

-   Process Direct on the Dependent Youth Maintenance Income (DYMI)
    table/screen
-   Customer First on the Maintenance Income ABY/AIC/YA guided procedure

The Maintenance Income Test results are displayed on the:

-   MIT Youth table in Process Direct
-   Dependent Youth Rate Summary screen in Process Direct (DYRSUMM) and
    in Customers First (!DYRSUMM), and
-   NSS Period Rate Explanation (NREX) screen (YA only) in Customer
    First

For some customers, maintenance income information can also be viewed
for:

-   child support - see the Maintenance Entitlement Group Summary (MNGS)
    screen in the parent(s)/guardian(s) record. For more information,
    see Where to find child support information on Centrelink systems

Recording Voluntary and Capitalised Maintenance Income

Voluntary maintenance income can be recorded in:

Process Direct:

-   Within a new claim on the Maintenance Income Test (NMITS) table
-   For a change in circumstance, on the DYMI table

Customer First:

-   For a change in circumstance, on the Maintenance Income ABY/AIC/YA
    guided procedure

Capitalised maintenance income can only be recorded in Process Direct on
the DYMI table.

Child support maintenance income cannot be manually recorded as it is
provided by Child Support.

Reconciliation of maintenance income

Annual maintenance income is estimated based on a Child Support
assessment, voluntary and capitalised maintenance income over the
financial year. Any changes to maintenance income during the financial
year applies from the date paid to plus one day, regardless of when the
change occurred.

Maintenance income reconciliation occurs after the end of the financial
year and uses actual maintenance income and the date of event of any
changes. For more information see Maintenance income reconciliation for
ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AIC) and Youth
Allowance (YA).

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk,
examples of each of the entitlement disbursement method calculations,
the template for voluntary maintenance income disclosure, Services
Australia website links and a link for the Education Payment Rates
factsheet.

Contents

Maintenance income reconciliation for ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated
Children Scheme (AIC) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Related links

The Parental Means Test

Parental Income Test (PIT)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance
(YA)

Applying the Parental Income Test (PIT) for Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC) Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
