-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of house and curtilage.

Assets test

The principal home and the private land (curtilage) adjoining the home
may not be considered an asset under the assets test.

Legislation about assets test assessment for the principal home and
curtilage includes a single title rule, private land use test and
concession known as extended land use test or extended curtilage.

Single title rule

Regardless of payment type, all new claimants from 1 January 2007 are
assessed under the single title rule.

Curtilage amount is limited to land on the same title document as the
home, to a maximum of 2 hectares (but there is no size limit if eligible
for extended curtilage concession). Note: single title documents may
have more than one parcel of land included.

Exceptions to land being held on one title document

Three exceptions exist to the rule requiring land adjacent to the
principal home to be held on one title document:

-   Where the dwelling-house is located on both blocks of land
-   Where all or part of the blocks of land are protected by a law
    because of the land's natural, historic or Indigenous heritage, or
-   Where the alienation (sale) of one of the blocks would seriously
    undermine the function of the house as a dwelling

Under the 3 exceptions land held on more than one title document can be
treated as if it were held on the same title document as the person's
dwelling-house.

Private land use test

Unless the extended land use test applies, the private land use test is
applied to determine if the principal home and up to the first 2
hectares (5 acres) of adjacent land meet both of the following:

-   on one title (Note: a title document may have more than one parcel
    of land included), and
-   the land is used wholly or partly for private or domestic purposes,
    that is, not entirely for commercial purposes

If the land is used primarily for commercial purposes, then the private
land use test is not satisfied, and the land is an assessable asset.
Refer to ‘Business premises located in customer’s principal home’ below,
if part of the principal home or surrounding land is used for business
purposes.

Examples of how to assess land, rooms, and dual occupancies depending on
their usage, can be found on the Resources page.

If the customer satisfies the private land use test, the land up to 2
hectares is exempt from the assets test.

If the property is larger than 2 hectares (5 acres) and the customer
does not meet the extended land use test criteria, the value of the
excess land must be determined. The customer is required to provide:

-   a valuation of the home and surrounding 2 hectares
-   a valuation of the home and all surrounding land on the title

A grandfathered savings provision for real estate allows adjoining
titles to be considered curtilage, if they were or should have been
assessed as such immediately before 1 January 2007 under the prevailing
policy. Savings provisions cease when the customer's payment cancels for
any reason, or the property ceases to be the home after 1 January 2007.

Extended land use test

If the principal home and adjacent land is on one title and is over 2
hectares, the extended land use test may allow the whole property (on
that title) to be exempt from the assets test if all following criteria
are met:

-   The customer is Age Pension age and in receipt of or qualified for
    Age Pension, or qualified for Carer Payment (CP), and the payment is
    payable.
    Note: where one partner qualifies for the concession, the customer's
    partner will also qualify, even if the other partner is a social
    security income support recipient or a Department of Veterans'
    Affairs income support recipient who is under Age Pension age or
    service pension age. If the relationship status changes in future
    (for example separation or becomes a widow/widower), the partner's
    concession is saved providing they continue to live in the home and
    are making effective use of the land
-   The customer has long term 20 year continuous attachment to the land
    as their principal home (temporary absences less than 12 months do
    not break the 20 year period)
    Note: for partnered customers, the Age Pensioner or Carer Payment
    recipient of Age Pension age is required to be the person who has
    the long term 20 year continuous attachment to the land, not the
    partner who is under Age Pension age or service pension age
-   The customer makes effective use of productive land to generate
    income, taking into account their capacity to do so.
    Note: unlike the private land use test, there is no requirement the
    land be used for private or domestic purposes. See Resources for
    additional information and examples of effective use of productive
    land

If the customer does not meet the extended land use test, and the
principal home and adjacent land is on one single title and is more than
2 hectares, only the surrounding 2 hectares is assessed as curtilage.

Business assets

Business assets not included in value of land exempted under the
extended land use test

To avoid all doubt, the assets test exemption of land under extended
land use test does not include the value of commercial or business
assets, or structures and improvements, such as:

-   plant
-   stock
-   machinery
-   equipment
-   machinery sheds

As the business assets are not subject to indexation, if the entire
property has been exempted under the extended land use test, these
assets should be recorded as Other Assets on the real estate (RE)
screen. See Assessing and coding real estate details.

Business premises located in a customer's principal home

Any room located in a customer's principal home that is used purely for
commercial purposes, that is not also used for domestic purposes, should
be assessed as an asset.

If there are distinct areas of the property used for business purposes,
these areas are not part of the principal home and are NOT exempt. This
would include leasing out part of the property.

Exemptions from the assets test for house and curtilage may apply if the
business real estate is also the customer's principal home and the
customer satisfies the extended land use test.

Value of crops, orchards or timber plantations

Where a farm property is used for crop production any crops that are not
yet ready for harvest will be exempted with the land under the curtilage
concession, because they cannot be sold separately to the land itself.
This includes sugar cane, orchards, vineyards and all other crops.

Generally, once the crop is ready for harvest it will become assessable
and the income generated from the sale of the crop will be assessed via
the latest tax returns for the farming enterprise.

Where extended land use test applies, any orchard or crop on the home
title will be exempt. Therefore, it will not be necessary to obtain
valuations of the crop where there is only one title.

Where the private land use test applies, any crop or orchard will be
assessable once it is ready for harvest, regardless of whether it is on
the 2 hectares surrounding the principal home. Therefore, it may be
necessary to obtain valuations where the crop is ready for harvest.

A forest that is ready for harvest, but not yet harvested, has an
assessable asset value.

Where extended land use test applies, forest on the home title will be
exempt. Therefore, it will not be necessary to obtain valuations of the
crop where there is only one title. If a plantation was ready for
harvest, but the customer did not take any action to realise that value,
a decision would need to be made whether the customer was still meeting
the effective land use test.

Where the private land use test applies, a forest that is ready for
harvest is assessable, regardless of whether it is on the 2 hectares
surrounding the principal home. Therefore, a valuation may be required.

Dual occupancy

A dual occupancy home built on the same title document as the customer’s
home may not be part of their principal home. This is determined by
factors such as who paid the construction costs and whether it is
rented. For information on how to code dual occupancy homes, see Step 7
of Table 1 under the Process tab in Determining homeowners and
non-homeowners.

Other assets

Crop supply contracts are business arrangements between the grower and
the purchaser, they are not attached to the land and can be sold
separately, for example, grape supply contracts. They will be assessed
as primary production business assets.

Amalgamation of titles

If a principal home property has more than 1 title and they are
amalgamated into 1 title with a total area under 2 hectares, then under
the private land use test all of the land is now exempt and deprivation
does not apply.

If a principal home property originally had 2 or more titles which are
then amalgamated into 1 title with a total area of over 2 hectares, this
may impact whether or not the extended land use test can be applied
based on the effective use of productive land. Services Australia
considers the date of the amalgamation and whether the amalgamation
reduces the potential for the land to support the customer.

If the principal home property titles were amalgamated before 9 May
2006, this will not be considered to prevent the customer from meeting
the effective use of productive land criteria and so the extended land
use test may still be able to be applied (if all other criteria are
met). In this situation, deprivation will not apply.

If the principal home property titles were amalgamated after 9 May 2006,
the agency will consider how amalgamation affects the ability of the
customer to support themselves, and the reason for the amalgamation of
the titles.

If the amalgamation of the titles was involuntary (a council/government
requirement), this would not be considered to prevent the customer from
meeting the effective use of productive land test.

If the amalgamation was voluntary and increases the ability of the
customer to generate income (for example zoning requirements to operate
a specific business), the effective use of productive land test would be
met and the extended land use test may still be able to be applied (if
all other criteria are met).

Also, deprivation will not apply to the amalgamation of the titles if
the amalgamation of titles reduces the ability of the customer to
support themselves. For example, if they cannot sell the land
individually, the effective land use test will not be met. The home
property would then need to be assessed under the private land use test.
However, deprivation will not be applied.

If a customer amalgamates the titles of 2 or more assessable parcels of
land (where the principal home property is not included), and the result
is that the total property value is reduced, deprivation may apply. To
determine whether or not deprivation applies, see Deprivation where
voluntary amalgamation result in reduced value. If it applies,
deprivation would be calculated by deducting the new property value from
the combined total value of the previous titles and deducting any
available and allowable gifting limit.

The Resources page has examples of amalgamation.

Private trusts and companies and rural leaseholds

These curtilage concessions also apply to the principal home if it is
held in a private trust, private company or held through a rural
leasehold. The controller of the private trust or company and the title
holder of the leasehold property, are able to access the grandfathering
title concession and the extended curtilage concession, on the same
basis as customers who own their principal residence directly. Rural
leaseholds include both perpetual leaseholds and pastoral leases.

Tenants in common

Customers who own real estate as 'tenants in common', will have the
legal share assessed under the assets test based on the agreed ownership
percentage. For example if a customer owns 60% of the property then 60%
of the whole property value is assessable. This differs from customers
who own real estate as joint tenants with one or more people. In this
case, the property will be assessed in equal proportions. Home and
curtilage will then be exempt from the assets test in both these cases,
if the real estate is considered to be the principal home.

Documents required

Information for assessing real estate is collected from the Real estate
form (MOD R) and supporting documentation. Note: only one MOD R needs to
be issued if multiple titles are adjoining. Relevant documents may
include evidence of a mortgage on the property, latest council
rates/valuation, certificate of title or another title document. A title
document must be supplied for any home property where house and
curtilage applies and the property comprises multiple titles. All
relevant title documents for multiple title properties are required to
provide correct valuations for exempt and assessable portions of the
property.

Relevant documents to prove 20 year continuous attachment to determine
if the extended land use test applies may include:

-   evidence of a mortgage on the property
-   historical council rates/valuations
-   historical utility accounts
-   solicitor and legal documents
-   electoral roll documents
-   Australian Taxation Office (ATO) documents
-   a statement from the customer stating a 20 year attachment to the
    land
-   certificate of title, or
-   another title document

Documents to prove effective use of productive land may include any
contracts relating to the rent or use of the land, taxation or other
business documents that indicate the land is being used productively or
a counter statement, stating the land use for more formal arrangements.

Primary production aggregation

For any excess land that is not exempt under either the private or
extended land use tests, primary production aggregation may apply. Real
estate is assessed as a primary production assets or a non primary
production asset so that negative net primary production assets can be
offset against other primary production assets under the primary
production aggregation rules.

Note: real estate owned via shares in a private company will be assessed
via trust and company rules.

House and curtilage before 1 January 2007

Curtilage is the land around the house and for social security purposes
is the land that is similarly exempt from the assets test. Before 1
January 2007, curtilage was limited to 2 hectares (5 acres) of adjoining
land that is used primarily for private or domestic purposes, although
this may be across more than 1 title. These rules applied to all income
support payments and no other concession apart from 2 hectares was
available.

The policy intent was that curtilage (private land) is the normal size
house block for the area, with an upper limit of 2 hectares. Therefore,
if a property is greater than 2 hectares, then the excess land would not
be considered to be part of the principal home and therefore would not
be exempt from the assets test.

If the property (including any of the first 2 hectares) was in any way
related to a business, including leasing out part of the property, then
it may not be exempt. The income and asset value of the business also
needed to be assessed from income tax returns and financial papers.

Water Licences and Water Rights/Allocations

Water licences and rights vary from state to state and areas within
states. In some areas the term Water Rights refers to Water Licences and
Water Allocation owned by the landholder. In other areas, Water Rights
refers to the Allocation or Licence only.

An owner of a land parcel may apply for a Water Licence for the land
parcel or parcels. Water Licences and interim Water Licences are usually
attached to specific land holdings. Water Licences are assessed with the
land value and included in the total value of the real estate, because
previously they could not be sold or traded, and had a relatively low
value. In some areas, legislation governing Water Licences changed,
allowing them in some circumstances, to be traded or leased. Water
licences held on property a customer does not own is recorded as an
'other asset' on the Other Assets (OAS) screen.

Current Department of Social Services (DSS) policy is Water Allocations
are assessed with land value, even if they have their own title and can
be traded as personal property.

Water Licences and Water Allocations may be assessed as assets. Whether
the Water Right is assessable depends if the land it relates to is
exempt from the assets test. If 100% of the property is exempt from the
assets test, the Water Right that relates to the property is also
exempt. If the Water Right relates to a partially exempt property, the
Water Right is also partially exempt. Asset value of the Water Right is
shared between assessable and exempt portions of the property in
accordance with their value. If the total property is assessable, 100%
of the Water Right is assessable. The value of these assets varies
depending on the size of the Allocation/Licence and market forces.

If a customer owns the land and Licence or Allocation, the value of the
Licence or Allocation should be included in the total real estate value
recorded on the Real Estate (RE) screen. All details of Water Rights
should be included on the Real Estate Valuation Information (REVI)
screen, so that it can be considered if a formal valuation is required.
If the customer owns only the Allocation or Licence and no real estate,
they are listed as separate assets on the Other Assets (OAS) screen.

If a customer is generating income from their Water
Licence/Rights/Allocations (for example by leasing their Water Rights),
this income will be assessable regardless of whether or not the Water
Licence or Allocation is assessable as an asset. The Resources page
contains examples of the assessment of Water Rights.

Farm Household Allowance customers

This treatment of water assets is not applicable for Farm Household
Allowance customers. See Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance
(FHA) for the treatment of water under the FHA assets test.

The Resources page contains links to the online versions of the forms
used to assess real estate as an asset, contact details, and a table of
additional information and examples for real estate assessment.

Related links

Assessing and coding real estate details

Assessing asset attribution

Valuation of real estate and other assets at new claim

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Business revenue

Exempt assets

Loans and liabilities against assets

Income and assets from business structures

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Permanent vacation of principal home

Purchasing another residence

Selling a home

Vacation of principal home due to illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
