-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of dependent children, additional
income free area and child income under social security law.

Dependent child and additional income free area

The Social Security Act defines a dependent child for the purpose of
qualifying for payment or for a higher rate of payment. Children who
meet this definition may also attract an additional income free area for
customers depending on the payment the customer is receiving. In some
cases a child who does not meet this definition may attract a higher
rate and/or an additional income free area.

In some cases a customer may benefit from having a dependent child even
though the child may not entitle the customer to Family Tax Benefit
(FTB). In most cases a dependent child is also an FTB child. However,
there are some differences between an FTB child and a dependent child
which are explained in chapter 2.1.1 of the Family Assistance Guide. A
Regular Care Child is not an FTB child but may entitle the customer to
ancillary benefits and the 'with child' rate of income support.

A separate procedure covers a dependent child for ABSTUDY purposes.

Benefits under social security law

A person who has a child in their care may benefit from the following:

The principal carer of a child may be eligible for Parenting Payment
(PP) if they have a child under 14 (single) or 6 (partnered)

Single principal carers may be paid JobSeeker Payment (JSP) at the 'with
child' rate and also have access to a more generous single principal
carer income test. All other JSP customers (who are not single principal
carers) are subject to the usual income test for single allowance
customers. Principal carers may be subject to part-time participation
requirements. Single principal carers are also entitled to a Pensioner
concession card

Single principal carers with an

exemption from mutual obligation requirements for special family
circumstances may have access to a 'higher rate' of JSP which is more
than the ‘with child’ rate and equivalent to the rate of Parenting
Payment Single (PPS)

Single principal carers on JSP/YA are automatically exempt from their
mutual obligation requirements if they are:

-   an active foster carer
-   involved in home schooling or distance education for their child
-   have a large family or caring for a child when the customer is a
    relative (other than a parent), or
-   as directed by a Parenting Order made through the Family Court

These JSP and Youth Allowance (YA) customers may be paid the 'higher
rate'. JSP customers who are single carers are subject to the JSP single
principal carer income test. YA customers are subject to the YA income
test

A customer may be paid the 'with child' rate if they are not a principal
carer but they have a dependent child in their care where care of the
child is shared, and even in some cases where the dependent child
definition is not met but the child is considered a regular care child
(with 14% or more care). These customers do not have access to the
single principal carer income test. See ‘With child' rate of benefit for
non-principal carers with shared care

Qualification for Carer Allowance (CA) if they provide daily care and
attention for a child with a disability or severe medical condition at
home and/or Carer Payment (CP) if they are caring for a child with a
disability or severe medical condition who has extremely high care needs

For PPS customers an additional income free area applies based on the
number of children in care. This is regardless of the percentage of care
in shared care cases, providing:

-   the child continues to meet the definition of a dependent child, and
-   the customer still has principal care of at least one child under 14
    years to retain qualification for PPS

For pension customers who are eligible for payment under the
transitional rules for pension customers an additional income free area
applies for children in their care

Definition of a dependent child under social security law

A child aged under 16 years is a dependent child of an adult if:

-   the adult has legal responsibility for day to day care, welfare and
    development of the child, either alone or jointly with another
    person, and the child is in the adult's care, or
-   the child is not a dependent child of someone else and is wholly or
    substantially in the adult's care

If they are not in full-time education, the child's weekly income must
not exceed the child income limits - permissible limits. Note: for Carer
Allowance, a child care receiver can be a dependent child even if they
are not a full-time student and their income exceeds this amount.

A young person 16-21 years (under 22) can be a dependent child of the
adult if:

-   the young person is wholly or substantially dependent on the
    customer, and
-   they are undertaking full-time education at a school, college or
    university

The young person cannot be a dependent child if their income exceeds the
child income limits - permissible limits in the current financial year,
or if they receive a social security pension/benefit or payment under a
Labour Market Program. However, a young person aged 16-17 years in
receipt of a social security pension/benefit may still attract the 'with
child' rate of payment for the customer.

Australian residence requirements

If the customer is an Australian resident, the child must also be an
Australian resident or be living with the adult for the child to be a
dependent child.

If the customer is not an Australian resident, the child must be an
Australian resident, or have been an Australian resident and now living
with the customer outside Australia, or have been living with the
customer in Australia and now living with the customer outside
Australia.

The customer is no longer entitled to benefits and ancillaries when
qualification is lost where the customer is no longer considered to be a
principal carer of a dependent child under Social Security Law. A
customer ceases to be a principal carer if the child:

-   has departed Australia permanently or has been overseas temporarily
    for a period greater than 6 weeks, or
-   has returned to Australia after a temporary absence of more than 6
    weeks and they have departed again within 6 weeks of their last
    return, and
-   where a customer has ceased to be a principal carer of a child for
    either of the above reasons, the child may continue to be a
    dependent child

Assessment of additional income free area

Generally, a dependent child attracts an additional free area for
Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers and pension customers paid
under the transitional rules. However:

-   a child who meets the definition of a dependent child does not
    attract the additional free area if they are a prescribed education
    scheme student child aged 18 or over for whom CA is not payable to
    the customer or their partner
-   a child who does not otherwise meet the definition of dependent
    child becomes one solely for the purposes of the additional free
    area if they are under 18 and receiving YA

Note: Until September 2021, the pension system applied the additional
child income free area for children aged 16 to 18 without the student
code being updated on the Child Student/Income Circumstances (CHSI)
screen. Some customers may receive a debt if a reassessment occurs for a
child where the student code has not been updated and the customer had
income above the income free area. If this occurs and the child is a
full time student, updating the student code on the CHSI screen will
remove the debt.

The Resources page contains links to Rates and Thresholds and the
Services Australia website for a guide to Australian Government
payments.

Related links

Dependent child changes

Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent
child

ABSTUDY customer has, or has had, a dependent child

ABSTUDY customer who has the care of another person's child

Identifying a package of services for customers recently separated or
divorced

Foster care

Concession cards for eligible children temporarily in non-custodial
parent's care

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Rates and thresholds

Principal carer of a dependent child

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Shared care for social security payments

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Linking a child to a customer's record

Income test for single allowance customers

Exempting a job seeker for their mutual obligation requirement due to
special circumstances

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer and/or child going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
