
Assessment of income for Centrelink payments 108-05000000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines different types of income, and how they are
assessed under social security law.

Identify income source

Examine the nature, source and purpose of the payment to identify if it
should be treated as income assessable for Income Test purposes.
Questions to ask include:

-   What is the purpose of the payment (is it for services rendered or
    earned)?
-   Is the amount received periodically or is it recurring?
-   Is the amount for the customer's own use or benefit?
-   Does the amount received relate to a specific time period?
-   What is the source of the payment (such as employer, own business or
    investments)?

Social Security Income Test

Generally, the Social Security Income Test uses gross ordinary income.
However, income can be assessed in a variety of ways, depending on its
source, characteristics and purpose. For example:

-   Employment income uses the gross amount of income for assessment
-   Business income uses the net amount after allowable deductions
-   Investment income uses a deemed amount of income for assessment
    under the Income Test and ignores actual income amounts (unless the
    investment is exempt from deeming)

The Process page contains a list of different types of income and how
each is treated.

Customers can add and update personal information (including income and
assets) online.

Income affects payments

When calculating debts, income affects payments in the following order:

-   Basic rate (plus any add-ons, including Youth Disability Supplement,
    other than those below)
-   Pension Supplement basic amount
-   Pension Supplement between basic and minimum amounts ('remaining
    portion')
-   Rent Assistance
-   Energy Supplement
-   Pension Supplement minimum amount
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance

Remote Area Allowance (RAA)

RAA is not reduced by income. Regardless of income received in a
fortnight, the customer receives the full entitlement of RAA if they:

-   are qualified to receive RAA, and
-   continue to qualify for basic rate

If the Pension Supplement minimum amount is payable, the full Energy
Supplement is automatically payable.

Unidentified or undisclosed income

Bank deposits (regular or irregular), may indicate a customer is
receiving assessable income. Investigate these deposits to determine the
source, nature or purpose of the funds. Assess unexplained bank deposits
as income, (except excluded amounts) if customers are unwilling or
unable to verify their source following a full investigation. See
Process page.

Capital gains

A capital gain is generally not treated as income for social security
income support purposes. If a capital loss is made it cannot be offset
against other income amounts.

However, capital gains made by designated and controlled private trusts
or companies may be treated under the rules for assessing attribution
income.

For family assistance, capital gains are included in a family's adjusted
taxable income as assessed by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).
Estimates of taxable income should include any expected capital gains.

Income exempt or excluded from assessment

Some income amounts are excluded from assessment under legislation (for
example, emergency relief) or by policy, based on the characteristics of
the amount (monies received to cover expenses), while other amounts
receive approval for exemption upon application and approval by the
delegate under section 8 (11) - Exempt Lump Sums.

Children born or entering care:

-   on or after 1 October 2016, Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and
    Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as ordinary income for income support
    purposes
-   prior to 1 October 2016, PPL and DAP is not counted as income for
    income support purposes

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them the chance to provide more information or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights. If required, record their
    application for a formal review of the decision

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains links to a form for bank accounts held in
trust for another person, a list of Australian Defence Force allowances
and how they are treated for social security and taxation purposes, and
a link to South Australian energy bill concession information.

Contents

Income and assets options online

Using Centrelink self service

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Assessing income and assets from cooperatives

Assessing income from seasonal work

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Assessing child care business income

Assessment of other ordinary income for Centrelink payments

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Board and lodging

Deeming provisions

Exempt income and assets for Centrelink payments

Financial Investments

Income streams

Superannuation

Treatment of compensation payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
