-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the steps to take when a customer advises they
have purchased another residence or previously advised of selling a home
with the intention to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate a new
principal home with the proceeds. If they have since purchased another
residence or built a new residence, previously exempt assets and sale
details must be updated. It is important to determine whether they still
own the previous residence or if they sold it.

Exempt asset from the sale of the principal home

Once a customer sells their principal home, the portion of the sale
proceeds which they intend to use to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or
renovate a new principal home are an exempt asset.

For sales:

-   before 1 January 2023, the asset is exempt for up to 12 months, with
    the possibility of an extension up to 24 months total in some
    circumstances
-   from 1 January 2023, the asset is exempt for up to 24 months, with
    the possibility of an extension up to 36 months total in some
    circumstances. The exempt amount is also deemed at the lower deeming
    rate only, which is currently 0.25%

If a customer purchases or starts to build a new home before selling
their existing home, there are no sale proceeds to exempt until they
sell their old home. Undertake an assessment to determine which property
is their primary residence.

If the proceeds from the sale are:

held as a financial investment, including a non-grandfathered
account-based income stream, they are subject to deeming

invested in a Cat 9 deemed account-based income stream, record the
product on the SVDI screen with the Investment Type as 'OTH'. This will
enable deeming to apply to the adjusted account balance. Code the amount
used to purchase a new principal home in:

-   For sales before 1 January 2023, the Loan/Encumbrance Amt field in
    Process Direct. Once the customer has purchased the new home, or as
    they make progress payments on building a new home, update the
    Loan/Encumbrance Amt field in Process Direct
-   For sales from 1 January 2023 ongoing, the New Home Deduction Amt:
    field in Process Direct

invested elsewhere, they will be assessed according to the usual Income
Test rules

See Selling a home Table 3

Extended exemption

If a customer is eligible, an extended exemption may apply if the
property sold on or after 1 July 2007.

For sales on/after 1 January 2023, the exemption of the sale proceeds
may, in some circumstances, be extended up to a maximum of 36 months for
sales completed from 1 January 2023 onwards.

For sales before 1 January 2023, the extended exemption may be up to a
maximum of 24 months from the time of sale.

See Selling a home for eligibility for the sale proceeds exemption.

To gain an extended exemption for the principal home sale proceeds, the
customer must have a continuing intention to apply the proceeds of the
sale to purchase, build, rebuild, repair or renovate a new principal
home and provide documentary evidence to support they have:

-   made reasonable attempts to obtain a new principal home, and
-   been making those attempts within a reasonable period after selling
    the principal home (that is, 6 months for homes sold prior to 1
    January 2023 or 12 months for homes sold on/after this date), and
-   experienced delays beyond their control in obtaining a new principal
    home

If the customer cannot meet any of the above criteria, they cannot gain
an extended exemption on the principal home sale proceeds.

A customer meeting the extended exemption conditions is considered to be
a homeowner during the extended exemption period.

Land for new principal home build

Land purchased by the customer from the principal home sale proceeds, on
which they intend to build a new principal home, may be exempt from the
Assets Test. This applies whether the land is owned outright or
mortgaged. The maximum total asset value to be exempt must not exceed
the sale price of the former principal home. For example if the
principal home sells for $250,000, only assets up to the value of
$250,000 can be exempt, this includes the value of the land. The
Resources page has an example.

New property will not be used as principal residence

If a customer uses the proceeds to purchase another piece of real estate
they will not be living in, record the new property as an assessable
asset. The customer must identify the location of any real estate or
business site they own or in which they have an interest.

Temporarily moves into a house they already own

A customer may sell their principal home and seek to have the sale
proceeds Assets Test exempted for up to 24 months initially from 1
January 2023 onwards, For sales before this date, the exemption applies
for 12 months initially. This is when they temporarily move into another
property they already own while building or seeking to purchase a new
home.

The property the customer temporarily occupies in this situation
continues to be an assessable real estate asset (it is not assessed as
their principal residence). The exemption of the proceeds of the sale of
their principal home continues. The customer cannot have an exemption
for the proceeds of the sale as well as the property they already own.

Still owns former home

If, after purchasing a new principal home, a customer still owns their
previous principal home, the previous home must be assessed under the
Assets Test.

Assess the current market value of the property less any encumbrances on
that house as outlined in Section 4.6.6.30 of Guide to Social Security
Act. See the References page. This may be either a secured loan or an
unsecured loan if the customer can demonstrate the loan is an
encumbrance on that particular asset. Except for primary industry
aggregation, it is not possible to offset an encumbrance on one asset
(exempt or otherwise) against the value of another asset.

Previously owned retirement village unit for sale

In some circumstances, a customer can only sell a retirement village
unit by signing a contract to sell on the open market and/or back to the
retirement village. They have to vacate the unit as part of that
process.

Any amounts due to the customer are not subject to deeming until
received. They are considered proceeds of sale if they are to be used to
purchase a new home or unit in a retirement village. The customer is
still assessed as a homeowner and may be entitled to Rent Assistance
(RA).

Delay in moving into newly purchased home

The sale of home provisions cease once the customer has purchased their
new principal home. If the customer has purchased their new principal
home but does not move in immediately, the property becomes an
assessable asset. The customer's homeowner status will be dependent on
where they are currently living. If the customer is living in a home
they own, this will become their principal home and they are a
homeowner. If the customer is living in a home they do not own, they are
a non-homeowner.

The temporary home vacation provisions cannot apply, as the customer has
not previously resided in the new home. If a customer is unable to move
in to their new home due to unusual circumstances beyond their control
refer the case to Level 2 Helpdesk for advice. For example, customer is
unable to move to their new home due to COVID-19 border closures.

Rent Assistance (RA)

Some customers may be eligible for RA:

-   Income support recipients who have sold their former principal home
    within the last 24 months from 1 January 2023 onwards or 12 months
    before 1 January 2023 and are likely to use some or all of the
    proceeds of the sale (within 24 months from 1 January 2023, 12
    months before 1 January 2023 of the sale) to purchase, build,
    rebuild, repair or renovate another home that will become their new
    principal home, or
-   Income support recipients who have sold their principal home within
    the last 24 to 36 months from 1 January 2023, 12 to 24 months before
    1 January 2023 and have made reasonable attempts, within a
    reasonable period after selling the home to purchase, build,
    rebuild, repair or renovate another residence, but have experienced
    delays beyond their control, and
-   Living in a home they do not own, and paying rent

The Resources page contains links to the forms required for the
re-assessment after the purchase of another residence and a table of
examples relating to assessment and exemptions for sale of principal
home proceeds.

Related links

Selling a home

Assessing house and curtilage

Assessing and coding the Real Estate MOD R

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Address recording for real estate

Permanent vacation of principal home

Updating address details

Qualification for Rent Assistance (RA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
