
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how under the Income Test and Assets Test for
pensioner customers, all income and assets must be declared to Services
Australia. However there are some that may be exempt from assessment.

Tests, income thresholds and assets limits

Customers are paid under the Income Test or Assets Test, whichever
results in a lower payment rate. If certain criteria are met, a customer
may be paid under the transitional rules Income Test if entitled to a
higher payment rate under this Income Test compared to the rate
calculated under the current Income Test.

Income Tests and Assets Tests aim to provide maximum support to
customers and reduce support in line with increased capacity of
customers to provide for themselves.

From 20 September 2009, all pensioner customers with employment income
are assessed over their entitlement period. Customers on variable
employment income are required to report earnings fortnightly.

Customers with employment income and who are:

-   workforce age - may accrue Working Credits which may affect their
    payment rate (and their partners) under the Income Test during
    periods that employment income is earned, derived or received
-   Age Pension age - may be entitled to the Work Bonus which allows a
    deduction to eligible income before the Income Test is applied

In general, total ordinary income below a threshold level is considered
to be in an income free area, and does not affect the pension. Above the
threshold reduces pension payments at tapered rates.

The Income Test has different applications based on the personal
circumstances of pension recipients, that is, single, partnered,
pensioner/allowee couple, illness separated couple or pensioner with
dependent child/ren. Note: from 20 September 2009, the extra allowable
income free area for children only applies to Parenting Payment Single
or if the transitional rules for pension customers apply.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) received for a
child born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016 will be
counted as ordinary income for pensions, however the customer does not
need to declare this income as it will be automatically included for
assessment.

All assets owned by the pensioner must be declared, but some may be
treated as exempt assets. There is a distinct cut off point dependent
upon relationship status and if they are homeowners or non-homeowners.
If the value of the assets exceeds the asset limits, they do not qualify
for payment. Hardship provisions may apply if customers are in severe
financial hardship, but limits are not increased for dependent children.

Assets Test

The Assets Test presumes that people with substantial assets which
produce little or no income, should rearrange their financial affairs
before seeking financial support from the community. The intention of
any such rearrangement should be to increase their income if possible.

International Agreements and compensation

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country, may be subject to a direct deduction Income Test.

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
be subject to direct deduction from the customer's pension entitlement.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will apply if the customer was receiving a
pension payment on the 19 September 2009 and has continued to receive a
higher rate of payment under the old Income Test rules (taking into
consideration any Consumer Price Index (CPI) changes) compared to the
new Income Test rules in place from 20 September 2009. If the customer's
pension is paid under the transitional rules, the Work Bonus is not used
to determine their rate of entitlement under the pre 20 September 2009
Income Test but may still be used to calculate their partner's income
support payment entitlement if they are paid under the new income test
rules in place from 20 September 2009.

Exempt income and assets

An exempt asset is one that is disregarded under the Assets Test,
irrespective of its value. An exempt asset may however have assessable
income. For example, the proceeds from the sale of the principal home
are an exempt asset but the proceeds when invested are subject to
deeming as a financial asset.

There are four broad categories of exempt income. Although exempt income
is disregarded as income, the amount received may be an assessable asset
and if the funds are invested, deeming provisions apply.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds paid by the National
Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA), whether received periodically or as
a lump sum (including interest accrued), which are deposited into an
account specifically for the purpose of managing the customer's NDIS
plan, are exempt from income and assets tests and deeming. They are not
required to be reported or if reported should not be taken into account
in the income and asset assessment.

Contents

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years with no dependent children

Income Test for pension customers with partners on allowance

Income Test for illness separated or partner in prison customers

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Assets Test for single pension customers

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Related links

Components of the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets tests

Coding the Care Receiver Income and Assets Details (CRIA) screen

Working Credit

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Allowance income and assets tests

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) benefits and services overview

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Foreign Pension coding

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
