-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the income test, which is one of two means tests
(assets test is the other) that is used to establish the level of income
support required by a person. The income test for illness separated
pension customers establishes the level of a person's assessable income
to calculate the pensioner's entitlement.

On this Page:

Applicable rates and tests

Customers who are unable to live together due to ill health may be
entitled to payment of their pension at the single rate while they are
living separately. However, the combined income test (and if eligible
the transitional rules income test) and assets test is still applied to
both members of the couple in determining the rate payable.

If the partner is in prison, the customer maybe entitled to payment at a
higher rate until the partner's release. However, the combined income
test and assets test is still applied to both members of a couple in
determining the rate payable. Note: the Guide to Social Security Law
clarifies that a person detained in an Immigration Detention Centre is
not the same as a person in prison. See Prison admission process and
claims during incarceration for more information.

The income test has different applications for the following pension
customers:

-   single pensioners
-   partnered pensioners
-   partnered pensioners where the partner is on an allowance payment
-   pensioners separated due to ill health
-   pensioners with children - if the pensioner is paid under the
    transitional rules for pension customers at 20 September 2009 and
    the customer has children, an extra income amount per child may be
    deducted before the rate of pension payable is calculated.

A separate rate is calculated under both the income test and assets test
with the one resulting in the lowest rate of pension being applicable to
that person.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(Blind) may be exempt from the means test, but income and assets details
are required to determine the partner's entitlement to payments or if
the customer is claiming rent assistance.

International agreements and compensation

Customers who are granted a pension under an International Agreement and
are in receipt of a pension or superannuation payment from that
agreement country, may be subject to a direct dollar for dollar rate
deduction.

Certain compensation payments or New Zealand Pension payments may also
result in a direct deduction.

Employment income

If the customer or their partner has employment income, additional
deductions may apply:

-   For customers of work force age, apply the Working Credit rules
    before applying the income test
-   For pensioners of Age Pension age, if eligible, apply the Work Bonus
    before applying the income test. The Work Bonus is required to be
    applied prior to any Working Credit calculations

If the customer's, or partner's, income reduces their fortnightly rate
to nil and some of that income is employment income, the person's
payment may remain current at nil rate for up to six fortnights, known
as the employment income nil rate period. Customers also in receipt of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A will be subject to the FTB Part A income
test during this period and will be required to provide an income
estimate within 21 days of commencing the period or their FTB payment
will cancel.

The procedure, Exempt income, provides information about assessing
income that is exempt from the income test.

Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

For children born or entrusted to care on or after 1 October 2016,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) is counted as
ordinary income for pensions. PPL and DAP for children who were born or
entrusted to care prior to 1 October 2016 is treated as exempt income.

Transitional rules

A customer may have their pension rate calculated using the transitional
rules. The transitional rules will continue to apply for as long as the
customer receives a higher rate of payment under the old Income Test
(pre 20 September 2009) with no Work Bonus applied compared to the
Income Test in place from 20 September 2009 which does include the Work
Bonus. It is possible for their partner's income support payment rate to
be calculated under a different income test, that is, the customer could
receive a higher rate under the old income test and their partner may
have been granted after 20 September 2009 and therefore only eligible to
be paid under the new income test.

The Resources page contains links to rates factsheets.

Related links

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Income and assets tests for blind customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
