
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to code the income when a customer starts in
the Supported Wage System (SWS).

Advising of income

The customer must advise when they start work under SWS and any changes
to their income. Advice may be verbal or in writing.

Employment from Australia Disability Enterprise (ADE) or SWS employers
cannot be added or edited via self service channels. Advise customers to
contact Services Australia directly.

Customers are able to report income online for existing ADE or SWS
employers. They cannot add a new ADE or SWS employer.

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

A customer who joins the SWS can still get DSP, subject to the pension
income and assets tests.

The customer can access:

-   Working Credit
-   Work Bonus if Age Pension age
-   Employment income nil rate period

DSP is not to be suspended or cancelled due to the number of hours
worked, where the customer is working in the SWS.

This is because customers employed under SWS are not considered to be
working independently.

SWS and Mobility Allowance (MOB)

DSP customers can work for 15 hours or more per week at or above the
relevant minimum wage. If this happens, they receive the higher rate per
fortnight of MOB.

Customers who are receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) or Parenting Payment
(PP) and working 15 or more hours per week under SWS can qualify for the
higher rate of MOB if they also meet the base qualifications for MOB.

Related links

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

Assets Test for single pension customers

Assets Test for partnered pension customers

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Working Credit

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Employment income nil rate period

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Recording and correcting employment income details

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
