
Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction 108-08130020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document is for select staff from the National Business Gateway-
Confirmation Services helpdesk only.

It outlines information on the action to be taken when a request to vary
a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction is received by Services
Australia.

Varying Deductions

Customers who participate in the RDS can vary the amount of their
deductions. If a customer contacts the agency and requests to vary an
RDS deduction they should be advised to contact their Housing Authority
(HA) office in the first instance to discuss their circumstances. The HA
can update the RDS deduction as required.

Service officers cannot vary a customer's RDS deductions. They can
terminate an RDS deduction any time at the request of the customer. For
more information, see Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)
deduction.

Variation required immediately

Where a Housing Authority (HA) requires a deduction to be varied
immediately by the agency, they will contact the National Business
Gateway - Confirmation Services helpdesk. A limited number of staff on
the helpdesk have the security access required to make updates to an RDS
deduction.

If a service centre or smart centre receives a request from a HA to vary
a deduction immediately, service officers should contact the National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services helpdesk.

Suspended RDS deductions

A housing authority may suspend a customer’s RDS deduction for several
reasons. Where an RDS deduction has been suspended it shows on the
Payment Instruction Summary (PINS) screen as:

-   Instruction Amount P.F. = $0.00
-   Change Reason = SUE (Suspended by external request)

If a customer is no longer paying government rent to a housing authority
but there is a suspended RDS deduction on the customer’s record, it can
prevent eligible customers from receiving rent assistance entitlements.
It can also prevent service officers from making accommodation updates
on the Accommodation Details (AC) screen.

If a customer has a suspended RDS deduction tell them to contact the
relevant housing authority to either:

-   restore the deduction (if still required)
-   cancel the deduction (if not required)

Restoring a suspended RDS deduction

Only the relevant HA is able to restore a suspended RDS deduction.
Customers should contact them. Agency staff cannot restore a RDS
deduction that is suspended.

Cancelling a suspended RDS deduction

If an immediate cancellation of a suspended RDS deduction is required to
allow staff to process accommodation updates for a customer, service
officers can contact the National Business Gateway - Confirmation
Services helpdesk for assistance.

Income Management for customers with RDS deductions

When a customer has an existing RDS deduction in place, and is placed
onto Income Management, the rent amount is deducted from the customer's
discretionary funds by default, not their income managed funds. The
agency needs to ensure that customers are engaged where possible to
determine whether they want to pay their rent from their discretionary
funds, their available income managed funds or a portion from both
available funds. Variations to the existing RDS deduction may be
required to ensure that the customer has sufficient funds available to
meet their priority needs.

The Resources page contains contact details for the National Business
Gateway Confirmation Services helpdesk, and links to the Rent Deduction
Scheme (RDS), Third Party Programmes Team and National Business Gateway
home pages for relevant information and other contact details.

Related links

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deductions

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) transaction codes

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
