
Income Test for partnered allowance customers 108-01020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This process is impacted by the coronavirus (COVID-19) response. See
Coronavirus (COVID-19) response.

This document outlines information on the application of the Income Test
for partnered allowance customers. A customer's maximum fortnightly rate
of allowance may be reduced by their partner's total ordinary income as
well as their own.

The Income Test

The Income Test for partnered JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Partner
Allowance (PA) customers is designed so that it does not affect a
customer's payment if:

-   the partner is a pensioner and half the couple's combined ordinary
    income in the fortnight is below their income free area
-   the partner is not a pensioner and the customer's ordinary income in
    the fortnight is below their income free area and their partner's
    income is below the Partner Income Free Area

For ABSTUDY, Youth Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices
(apprentice or trainee), the Income Test includes a higher income free
area and is covered in a separate procedure.

Partner is a pensioner

For each dollar of half the couple's combined income between the
allowance income free area and upper income threshold, the allowance is
reduced by 50 cents in the dollar.

For each dollar of income over the upper threshold, it is reduced by 60
cents in the dollar.

Partner is not a pensioner

The customer's income reduces their allowance under the Income Test for
single allowance customers.

Then partner total income above the Partner Income Free Area further
reduces the customer's allowance by 60 cents in the dollar. The Partner
Income Free Area is the amount of the partner's income beyond which the
benefit would not be payable to the partner.

Working Credit

Allowance customers who have employment income may be able to deplete
Working Credits which can affect the rate of payment paid to them under
the Income Test and must be applied before the application of the Income
Test.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)

NDIS funds from the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) which
are deposited into an account to manage the customer's NDIS plan are
exempt from the income test.

This includes whether the funds are received periodically or as a lump
sum, and also includes any interest.

NDIS funds do not need to be reported. If they are reported, they should
not be taken into account in the income and asset assessment.

International Agreement payments

Customers granted a payment under an International Agreement may be
subject to a direct deduction Income Test if they receive income from
that agreement country.

The Resources page has scenarios showing how the partner Income Test
will affect a partnered JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer.

Related links

Income Test for single allowance customers

Assessment of employment income for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP)
customers over Age Pension age

Recording and correcting employment income details

Coding income and assets

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Working Credit

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Employment income nil rate period

New Zealand Agreement and foreign pension information

International Social Security Agreements

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Periodic compensation payments

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
