
Utilities Allowance (UA) 108-08110000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the qualification and payability of Utilities
Allowance (UA) payments.

On this Page:

Purpose of UA

Utilities Allowance (UA) payments commenced from March 2005, and are
paid to certain customers to assist in meeting the cost of regular bills
such as gas, electricity and water.

UA comprises 4 instalments per year paid to Disability Support Pension
(DSP) recipients aged under 21 without children.

Qualification for UA

Qualification is determined on the test days of 20 March, 20 June, 20
September and 20 December each year and usually issued on the customer's
first Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) after these test days.

If the customer is not in receipt of the qualifying payment on the test
day there is no entitlement to UA. UA payments can be made if a
customer's payment is granted or restored and payment is backdated to
include the test day.

Customers on zero rate are only eligible for UA if their zero rate
reason is 'DVA' (Defence Force Income Support Allowance) or 'NZP' (New
Zealand agreement direct deduction).

To qualify for UA, a person must, on the test day:

be in receipt of DSP (aged under 21 without children), and

either:

-   be in Australia, or
-   be temporarily absent from Australia where their test day is within
    the first 6 weeks of the temporary absence and the customer
    maintains eligibility. The Department of Home Affairs will advise
    Services Australia when a customer leaves Australia. However,
    customers (in some circumstances) will still be required to advise
    of absences to avoid being overpaid and to find out how their
    payments will be affected prior to departure. See Portability of
    payments for more information

Note: for customers who leave Australia permanently, payment of UA will
cease on departure.

Payments of UA

UA will be automatically paid to the same bank account as the customer's
income support payment and is normally issued on the customer's first
EPED following the relevant test day (20 March, 20 June, 20 September,
20 December). If the customer's income support payment is paid to a
nominee, the UA will also go to the nominee.

A customer can elect not to receive UA. If the customer is already
receiving UA, the payment will cease from the date of the decision was
made. The customer cannot be paid any UA payments during a period they
elected not to receive the payment.

UA will be adjusted biannually for any upward movement of the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) in March and September. Consistent with usual
practice, payment rates would not be adjusted where there is a fall in
the CPI. UA is not taxable.

Normal debt recovery and waiver provisions apply and the allowance can
be paid to nominees. If a customer dies, UA paid immediately after the
date of death to recipients of pension type qualifying payments is not
recoverable. UA is recoverable for all other social security qualifying
payments.

UA is no longer payable for customers eligible for the Pension
Supplement. This took effect from 20 September 2009.

Examples of factors that may delay issuing the UA payment until the
second EPED following the test day include, but are not limited to, EPED
changes, changes to relationship status, started or submitted activities
on the customer's record when the UA trigger is run.

Rate of Payment

The following categories of coupled customers are eligible for the
single rate:

-   illness separated couples
-   members of a respite care couple
-   members of a partnered (partner in gaol) couple

Customers with a marital status of divorced, separated, single, or
widowed are to be paid the single rate. UA is paid at the coupled rate
where only 1 member of a couple is eligible for the payment.

Related links

Pension Supplement

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
