
Exempt Funeral Investments (Funeral Bonds) 108-04080030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of funeral investments commonly
known as funeral bonds, and provides information about the purpose of
funeral bonds.

On this Page:

Individually or jointly owned bonds

Funeral bonds are individually or jointly owned and meet all the
following:

-   cannot be realised before maturity
-   matures on the death of the customer or their partner
-   amount paid on maturity must be applied to funeral expenses on whose
    death it matures

A customer's interest in up to two funeral bonds may be Means Test
exempt if:

they do not have any pre-paid funeral expenses, and

the purchase amount of the bonds does not exceed the Indexed Funeral
Bond Allowable Limit (IFBAL), currently $14,000 as at 1 July 2022 (The
Department of Social Services review this limit on 1 July each year):

-   Each member of a couple may invest up to the allowable limit in a
    funeral investment. For example if each member of a couple has an
    individual investment of $14,000 then $28,000 is an exempt asset for
    the couple
-   If a couple invest in a joint funeral bond, the amount invested must
    not exceed $14,000 for the bond to be an exempt funeral investment

The purchase cost (instead of its value including interest), even if it
is jointly owned, is compared to the IFBAL to see if it is exempt

The Resources page contains further information regarding exempt funeral
investments (funeral bonds), current and historical IFBAL amounts.

Cemetery/burial plots

These are exempt from the Assets Test and include ownership of a
specific place such as a plot in a cemetery, an interment niche or a
mausoleum, or having the right to be buried in a certain place, even if
the plot is not specified.

Pre-paid funeral expenses

These can also be exempt from the Assets Test. A pre-paid funeral is an
advance payment by a customer for funeral services agreed by contract,
with no limit to the amount a customer may invest. If the customer has a
pre-paid funeral and a funeral bond, only the pre-paid funeral is
exempt.

Some pre-paid funerals are paid for with a funeral bond assigned to a
funeral director. If it meets pre-paid funeral conditions, that is, a
contract for future services, it is treated as a pre-paid funeral, not a
funeral bond.

Funeral Insurance

This is a type of insurance policy that covers funeral expenses and is
payable upon death. It does not generally have a surrender value. Refer
to the FINS Bulletin for information and coding instructions relating to
individual policies.

The Resources page contains further information regarding exempt funeral
investments (funeral bonds), current and historical IFBAL amounts.

Related links

Exempt Income

Exempt Assets

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
