-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The document outlines the Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) and how deductions
can be made from a customer's payment to pay for government housing
payments.

On this Page:

Rent Deduction Scheme

The RDS allows Services Australia (the agency) customers to have their
government housing payments deducted from their Centrelink payment each
fortnight and sent directly to the appropriate state or territory
Housing Authority (HA). This is a free service.

Customers:

-   can participate in the RDS voluntarily if they receive an eligible
    income support payment
-   can withdraw from the RDS at any time and have their deductions
    cancelled. They do not need to give a reason
-   will get a letter when their RDS deduction starts, is varied or
    cancelled

Note: The RDS is similar to Centrepay however, RDS is only used for
government housing payments to a state or territory housing authority.
Centrepay can not be used for government housing payments.

RDS Agreements

The RDS was established to increase efficiencies for all HAs and to
improve customer service. It is governed by formal agreements between
the agency and each of the 8 state and territory housing authorities.
The agreement details the responsibilities and services available to
each party.

A list of Housing Authority Customer Reference Numbers is available.

Voluntary nature of RDS

Participation in the RDS is voluntary for customers, including those who
are income managed. However, some HAs have signing up for RDS as a
requirement in their tenancy agreement.

The voluntary nature of RDS is consistent with the 'inalienability'
provisions of the Social Security Act 1991, which protects social
security payments from being accessed by third parties (such as
creditors) against the customer's wishes. It is also consistent with the
Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) set out in schedule 1 of the
Privacy Act 1988 (Commonwealth).

RDS deduction types

RDS deductions show on the Payment Instruction Summary (PINS) screen and
can be for a customer’s:

-   payment of government rent (RNT)
-   repayment of HA loans (LON)
-   payment of HA arrears (ARR)
-   other housing payments (OHP)
-   other housing organisation payments (OHO) (Note: ‘OHO’ organisations
    are community housing organisations. These properties are not
    government housing properties or managed by a state and territory
    housing authority).

Note: Customers who pay government rent (RNT) to a state and territory
housing authority do not qualify for rent assistance unless they are an
eligible government sub-tenant. Customers who pay rent to a community
housing organisation (OHO) may qualify for rent assistance depending on
the amount of rent paid. Refer to Rent Assistance (RA) for definitions
of Community housing organisation versus state housing authority.

Starting, varying and cancelling RDS deductions

Housing Authorities (HA)

Housing Authorities start, vary and cancel RDS deductions by sending the
details to the agency electronically.

Customers must contact their local housing authority to start an RDS
deduction.

The HA calculates the amount of rent the customer needs to pay based on
the income of the household. Then the HA will ask the customer to sign a
housing deduction authority form which gives their consent for the
agency to:

-   deduct the agreed amounts from their Centrelink payment
-   transfer the deducted payment amount to the HA

Note: HAs have their own deduction authority forms which are used to
collect consent for RDS deductions. The agency does not have a form for
RDS.

HAs must make sure their staff understand their obligations for privacy
and confidentiality, under the Crimes Act 1914, Privacy Act 1988 and
Social Security Act 1991, as set out in the RDS Agreements.

Services Australia

Agency staff:

-   can cancel RDS deductions at the customer’s request. See Terminating
    a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction
-   cannot start, restart or vary RDS deductions

Program Support Managers from the Third Party Programs Team manage the
relationship between the agency and the HA.

The National Business Gateway Confirmation Services provide a helpdesk
support service to HAs for technical support and system issues regarding
the scheme.

Self-service

Customers cannot start, vary or cancel RDS deductions themselves using
self-service or online channels

Customers can use their Centrelink online account in myGov or Express
Plus mobile app to:

-   check a summary of all their deductions, including RDS deductions
-   get a deduction statement which shows all deductions coming out of
    their payment, including RDS deductions. This statement can also be
    requested through phone self-service

Service Officers should encourage customers to check their RDS
deductions regularly via self-service to ensure that they are correct.

Cancellation/suspension and nil rate (CZR) of payment

Cancellation or suspension of payment

When a customer's Centrelink payment is cancelled or suspended, the RDS
deduction instruction is kept current for the standard 'grace' period
(13 weeks for all payments). If the customer returns to payment within
that period the deduction instruction will be re-activated automatically
and pays to the HA from the customer's next pay day.

The deduction that recommences will not include any arrears that may be
owed. Customers must contact their relevant HA to organise repayment of
rent owed for any missed rent payments.

If the customer does not return to payment within the grace period of 13
weeks, the deduction will cancel. The HA will receive a termination
advice (ITI) on their next deduction report for the instruction.

Reduced or nil rate of payment (CZR)

When a customer’s Centrelink payment is reduced or nil, this may result
in part or none of their RDS deduction being paid. The amount of RDS
deduction that can be paid will be dependent on other deductions the
customer has set up and the priority order of their deductions.
Customers must contact their housing authority to organise paying any
missed rental payments.

Weekly Payments

Customers who receive Centrelink payments weekly can have RDS deductions
taken from their payment however, the deduction is made from their
payment on a fortnightly basis.

Benefit transfers and RDS deductions

When a customer transfers from one eligible income support payment to
another, all RDS deductions for the customer which exist under the
previous income support are automatically transferred to the new
payment.

There are some exceptions however where there is no automatic transfer
of RDS deduction instructions. This includes when a customer transfers
from:

-   JobSeeker to Age Pension
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) to an income support payment (or vice
    versa)

When a Service Officer processes a new claim or inter-benefit transfer
of payment for a customer with existing RDS deductions they must check
the Payment Instructions Summary screen (PINS) to check if RDS
deductions are automatically transferred to the new payment.

If an RDS deduction has not automatically transferred to the new
payment, and it is an eligible payment from which RDS deductions can be
made, the customer must be advised to contact their housing authority to
restart the deduction and arrange to pay for any missed rent amounts.

Priority order of deductions

A hierarchy is applied to all deductions from Centrelink payments. This
is as follows:

-   weekly payment shortfall
-   weekly payment carryover
-   advance payment recovery
-   overpayment
-   Financial Supplement Loan (FSL)
-   child support liability
-   voluntary tax payments
-   government housing deduction (RDS)
-   other deductions (including Centrepay)

There is also a sub-hierarchy applied to Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS)
deduction types. This is as follows:

-   Rent (RNT) or Other Housing Organisation (OHO)
-   Housing Authority Loan (LON)
-   Housing Authority Arrears (ARR)
-   Other Housing Payments (OHP)

Limits to number of deductions

The number of HA deductions a customer can have under RDS is determined
by the following:

A customer can only have one current instruction for each deduction type
(RNT, LON, ARR, OHP, OHO), per benefit group, for any one HA

There can be more than one current Arrears (ARR) or Other Housing
Payment (OHP) instruction, but these must be for different HAs or
different benefit groups. When there is more than one ARR or OHP the
following hierarchy must be applied:

-   HA in the state or territory where the customer resides
-   By date of effect, with the earliest date first

Transaction fees and invoices

Services Australia receives S74 revenue (commercial receipts) for the
Rent Deduction Scheme services from all Housing Authorities.

HAs are charged a transaction fee of $0.39 (plus GST) for each
successful RDS transaction. The HAs are not permitted to pass this fee
on to Centrelink customers residing in government housing.

HAs receive quarterly invoices from the agency for transaction fees
accumulated (billing in arrears) for RDS. Payment of invoices is
required by HAs within 30 days.

Overpayments

Occasionally, overpayments are made to HAs. RDS refunds are not to be
made by Centrelink and customers must contact their HA.

If a customer advises that an RDS deduction was taken from their payment
without their consent they will need to contact their HA to discuss a
refund.

Changes to housing authority details

Housing Authorities must notify of changes to the information it
previously provided to the agency. Some of the changes may include:

-   ABN change
-   new business or trading name
-   address and contact details
-   adding or changing Authorised/Contact Officers

An authorised officer of the HA must provide the details of the changes
in writing or verbally. The Third Party Programs Team will update the
changes on the HA’s record. (Note: there is no agency form or business
application that the HA needs to complete to change their business
details).

More information is available in Updating or adding business details for
Deduction and Confirmation programmes.

RDS file lodgement and processing rules

There are a number of rules and requirements to be followed when Housing
Authorities (HA) lodge RDS files to the agency for processing. This
includes the following:

-   Each HA must only submit one RDS file for processing each business
    day

Note: if a previous processing day is missed the HA must still only
submit one only file for the next scheduled processing. Submitting more
than one RDS file on any single day will cause all RDS processing for
all Housing Authorities to fail.

The RDS file must be lodged by 12pm AEST/AEDST.

If a Housing Authority is not going to submit an RDS file for processing
(for any reason) they must give prior notification to the National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk. Failure to notify
will cause all RDS processing for all HAs to fail

If there are no transactions for a particular day the relevant HA must:

-   ask the Helpdesk for the processing job to be cancelled, or
-   submit a ‘blank file’ with a header and trailer record with the
    correct sequence number and a transaction count of zero

There is no RDS file processing on public holidays. For national and
local public holidays, the Helpdesk will email all Housing Authorities
to confirm if they will be lodging a file on that day

The Resources page contains links to the intranet pages for the Rent
Deduction Scheme (RDS), the Third Party Programs (TPP) Team and National
Business Gateway - Confirmation Services Helpdesk.

Contents

Commencing a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Varying a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Terminating a Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction

Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) transaction codes

Updating an existing Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) deduction for a
customer who has commenced Income Management

Transitioning new Rent Deduction Scheme (RDS) instruction to Income
Management

Related links

Rent Assistance (RA)

Centrepay Business interactions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
