-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Working Credits. It includes
information on which customers can use Working Credits, the accrual and
depletion of Working Credits and the situations where a customer's
Working Credits commence at more than zero (for example, transfers
between eligible payments).

Working Credits

Customers eligible for Working Credits build up credits in each
fortnight they have little or no ordinary income. When a customer has
income from employment, they can draw on their Working Credits to reduce
the effect of that income on their payment. Only income from employment
can be used to deplete Working Credits.

A self-employed person already benefits from spreading income over a
year (therefore accessing the benefit of all income test free areas) and
allowable deductions for business income, so will not benefit from
Working Credit. Self-employed customers cannot deplete their
self-employment income against their Working Credit balance. If their
total ordinary income (including self-employment income) is less than
$48 per fortnight, they can accrue credits.

Working Credit applies from date of grant. Customers not receiving
payment due to a waiting period are eligible for Working Credit after
the waiting period ends. Working Credit balance starts at zero unless
the customer is eligible to transfer or restore their previous Working
Credit, Income Bank or Australian Apprentice income bank balance.

[] The information customers can view online includes Working Credit
balance and balance history online.

Note: income from paid leave upon cessation of employment is not
employment income. Paid Leave upon cessation of employment is included
in ordinary income and used when calculating the accrual of Working
Credits, however the customer is unable to deplete their Working
Credits.

View Working Credit balance option online

[] Customers can view their Working Credit balance online via Payments
and Claims > Manage payments > My payments in their Centrelink Online
account.

This service is available to registered customers during the self
service hours of operation.

See Resources for information about issues that may arise when a
customer wants to view their Working Credit balance online and possible
Service Officer actions.

Accrual of Working Credits

The maximum Working Credits a customer can accrue is 1000 credits, or
3500 credits for Youth Allowance (YA) (other) customers.

The maximum accrual per fortnight is 48 credits. All Total Ordinary
Income (TOI) affects accrual. Customers can accrue Working Credits each
fortnight if their total ordinary income from all sources is less than
$48. If the customer has income, they accrue the difference between
their total ordinary income and $48 each fortnight. This is calculated
based on a daily maximum possible accrual rate of 48/14 = 3.4286
credits.

Employment income is spread evenly over the entitlement period,
regardless of the days worked or the type of earnings, and is subject to
the Working Credit and income test rules for each day in the entitlement
period. Other ordinary income (non-employment income) is assessed from
the date of event of the change (change point), therefore the daily rate
of this income may change throughout the entitlement period.

Note: pensioners of Age Pension age may be entitled to a Work Bonus. The
Work Bonus is applied (where entitled) prior to calculating the
employment income component for Working Credits.

A partner's income will only affect the customer's Working Credit
balance if at least 1 member of the couple receives a pension. The
customer's circumstances must be considered when determining accrual
amounts for couples.

Depletion of Working Credits

If Working Credits can be used, it is not a choice to use them. They are
not discretionary.

If the customer's total ordinary income is greater than the Income Free
Area (IFA) applicable to their payment type, the customer may use their
Working Credits to reduce the effect of employment income on their
entitlement. This is called depletion.

Accrued Working Credits are used to reduce the impact of the customer's
income only if some or all of this income is from employment. Each
credit can be used to offset $1.00 of employment income. Working Credits
deplete on a daily basis.

Working Credits do not affect the current income test. Working Credits
are used to reduce the customer's affecting employment income first,
then the current income test for the payment type is applied to the
customer's remaining total ordinary income. For example, if a customer
has $200 income, and Working Credit depletion is calculated at 100
credits, only $100 of customer's income is used in applying the income
test.

Working Credits for customers who have transitioned from Wife Pension to JobSeeker payment (JSP)

Working Credit calculations for Wife Pension customers who transition to
JSP on 20 March 2020 are based on the same rules used to calculate the
transitional rate applicable to the payment

The Working Credit calculation that applies to the customer's current
transitional rate is to be used as follows:

-   JSP income tests and income free areas for customers on the notional
    JobSeeker Payment rate or the notional Wife Pension transitional
    rate (method 1), or
-   Wife Pension income test and income free area, frozen at 19 March
    2020 for customers on the notional Wife Pension transition rate
    (Method 2)

For these customers there will be two Working Credit balances kept at
the same time although the customer will only see the Working Credit
balance applicable to the higher rate actually being paid as JSP.

See the Resources page for a link to a summary.

Working Credits can be depleted after loss of qualification

For Working Credit purposes, customers who have lost qualification to
payment due to employment are treated as being qualified for the period
it takes to deplete all their Working Credits, before cancellation. This
is available to the following customers:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA customers who return to full-time work
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers employed for over 30
    hours a week
-   Carer Payment (CP) customers who no longer meet the constant care
    requirement

This treatment continues until 1 of the following situations occurs:

-   their Working Credit balance is reduced to nil
-   qualification (other than related to the employment) is lost
-   payability (other than related to the income test) is lost

To continue being treated as qualified until Working Credits are
depleted, the customer is required to satisfy their reporting
requirements, that is, lodge their continuation form or report their
income.

Note: a job seeker who commences employment as an Australian Apprentice
may also choose to deplete their Working Credits prior to transferring
to payment as an Australian Apprentice. However, normally a person will
receive greater benefit by having their job seeker payment suspended
from the date they commence full-time employment.

Policy contains links to the Guide to Social Security Law 1 of which is
a link leading to examples of Working Credit accrual and depletion daily
calculations.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give the customer a chance to give further details or evidence
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal review if required

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

The Resources page contains maximum transferrable credits, when zero
Working Credit balance may not occur, and helping customers with
enquiries about their Working Credit balance.

Contents

Employment income nil rate period

Related links

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Reporting overview

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Income compliance remediation

Remediation processing for income compliance debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
