
Verifying income and assets 108-04020030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when supporting documents are required to verify
income and asset details advised as part of a claim, payment transfer or
change in circumstance.

Definition of verification

Verification is checking that information provided by the customer is
true and accurate. The information provided is checked against
supporting documents.

Supporting documentation

Supporting documents may be required:

-   for verification purposes
-   to help with coding an income or asset, or
-   if the delegate has doubts about the accuracy of the information
    provided by the customer or their partner

New claims for an income support payment or service

Income and asset details supplied as part of a new claim may require
verification to ensure that the information provided by the customer is
true and accurate. This is done by checking the details provided are
accurate and supported by documentation.

The requirement to verify income and asset details is determined by the
payment status of the customer and/or their partner.

Note: verification of bank account balances is not required for Age
Pension, Carer Payment, Disability Support Payment and Parenting Payment
new claims. Verification should only be requested where a Service
Officer has doubt about the validity of the information provided.

When the customer and/or partner:

-   are currently receiving an income support payment, supporting
    documentation may be requested to help with coding, even though it
    may not be required for verification purposes
-   are not currently receiving an income support payment, but confirms
    the prepopulated income or assets in the online claim, the online
    claim may not always request this supporting documentation, however
    it may be required and may need to be requested for verification
    purposes

Service Officers can process these claims without requesting further
bank account verification, unless there is doubt about the validity of
the information provided in the claim. When in doubt, issue a request
for information to the customer. See Requesting information.

For example:

-   customer is close to the asset limit
-   customer has previously been rejected because they were over the
    asset limit
-   when there is a significant change in circumstances

For examples of when to request further bank account
information/balances, see Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims.

For new claims, where the payment type is not subject to the Liquid
Assets Waiting Period (LAWP):

-   the supporting documents do not need to include the exact balance
    declared within the claim
-   the supporting documents can be either dated before or on the date
    of the claim, and
-   the delegate must be satisfied the supporting documents provided
    reflect the overall financial position the customer has declared in
    the claim

A customer may notify of a change in income or assets after claim
submission and prior to determination. The change is treated as if the
customer and/or partner are current on an income support payment or
service.

Liquid Asset Waiting Period

For customers claiming a payment that is subject to the Liquid Asset
Waiting Period (LAWP) and when the LAWP is to be applied, details of all
investment balances should be requested from the applicable LAWP
commencement date, up to and including the claim submission date.

Evidence of bank balance(s) cannot be accepted if it is dated before the
applicable LAWP commencement date, or more than 5 days after the claim
submission date. For example, if the customer submits their online claim
on 1 November, evidence of bank account balances cannot be dated after 5
November.

Note: investment balances are not required for LAWP purposes for Youth
Allowance (Student) or Austudy (Student) claims where the
qualification/LAWP commencement date is more than 13 weeks before the
date the claim is lodged.

See Liquid Assets Waiting Period to determine the LAWP commencement
date.

Customer and/or partner are currently on an income support payment or service

Customers are required to notify Services Australia within 14 days of
any changes to their or their partner’s income and assets if in receipt
of a:

-   means tested income support payment or service (for example aged
    care recipients)
-   concession card with an income qualification limit

Any claim processed outside of 14 days that was a complete claim at
lodgement, does not need any further verification unless supporting
documentation requirements exist.

For asset changes, customers are only required to notify the agency if
the changes exceed the small change to asset value thresholds.

Income and Asset verification is only mandatory if:

-   the customer or partner are advising of new financial information
    that requires verification, see Documents Required for Centrelink
    new claims
-   the delegate has doubts about the accuracy of the information
    provided by the customer

Superannuation details of the customer and/or their partner must be
verified at Age Pension age. The partner's superannuation becomes
assessable when they reach Age Pension age, even if they are not getting
a payment.

Note: some superannuation investments may be eligible for an exemption.
See Exempting superannuation investments.

For changes in circumstances, such as an update to an existing bank
account or a new bank account, verification is:

-   not mandatory for a customer or their partner if they are currently
    receiving a payment, and
-   the change does not exceed the online asset threshold limit

Note: while the delegate may determine that verification is not required
for a circumstance update, supporting documents may be needed to help
with coding the information, for example, a Centrelink income stream
schedule or foreign pension.

For more information, see Coding income and assets for Centrelink
Payments and services.

The Resources page contains links to various forms for assessment of
assets.

Contents

Coding income and assets for Centrelink Payments and services

Related links

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
