
Mutual Client Register (MCR) for Business Support staff 108-20111659

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Business Support staff only

This document outlines the steps for Business Support staff to process
MCR investigations and manual actions.

Other Service Officers, see Mutual Client Register (MCR) process for
Service Delivery staff

MCR Overview

The Mutual Client Register (MCR) is the system the Australian Tax Office
(ATO) uses to match and register customers of interest from Services
Australia, for the purposes of sharing Single Touch Payroll (STP) data.

Where an Error response is received from ATO, one of the following
Response reasons will also be returned to explain why the person was not
added (further explanation can be found in Resources):

-   No match
-   Mismatch
-   Multi-ID person
-   Multi-match
-   Invalid value

STP data will only be shared for people recorded on the MCR and for whom
Services Australia has a legislative basis to have that information.

Services Australia will establish a link with the ATO for:

-   all current customers, any partners and other related individuals,
    and
-   non-current customers and any partners who have an outstanding debt
    with the agency

The ATO records that the person is a mutual client and advises Services
Australia of the result. Services Australia then advises ATO under what
legislative authority ATO can share that person's data. This must happen
before the ATO can send STP data to Services Australia.

There may be instances when a person is active on the MCR and has an
Active Link Authority, but no STP data is being received. This may be
because:

-   the person is not currently working
-   the person’s employer(s) does not report income to ATO using STP
-   the employer may be late submitting their payroll data to the ATO
-   there is an issue with the incoming STP data itself so has been
    quarantined, or
-   there is a technical problem

Note: not every Services Australia customer will be able to be matched
with the ATO and added to the MCR (for example, a young person who does
not have a Tax File Number).

Business Support role in relation to Mutual Client Register (MCR) Management

-   Receipt of mySupport requests relating to the information displayed
    on the MCR screens
-   Perform triage and internal analysis of MCR-related issues
-   Investigation and coordination of resolution of identified
    mismatched and intertwined records and cross-agency issues
-   Informing business partners of issues where needed (for example, if
    there seems to be an issue arising from a particular claim type
    being processed)
-   Monitoring and regular reporting of MCR performance
-   Contingency Plan execution and management

The Mutual Client Register (MCR) Management screen

Note: if a search is conducted in the MCR Management screen (in Process
Direct) using a specific CRN, the Search results will mirror the ‘View
Transactions’ screen that is accessible from the ‘Person Summary’ screen
(providing the user has the appropriate Essentials role).

Conducting a Search

If no ‘Search profile’ has been defined and set as default, the system
will automatically set the ‘Search parameters’ to find all Pending
requests created today. However, these default Search parameters can be
edited (for example, a different Created on date can be set). The
default Maximum result display value is 500 – for best results, it is
recommended to keep this below 1000.

Once the Search has been actioned, the Search results table can be
customised to best suit the Service Officer's operational requirements
or working style, through the Set columns button.

After doing a search, the results will load in the Search results tab.
The 'Search parameters used' section at the top of the screen can be
expanded to see what parameters were used for those results.

The records in view can be 'Sort'ed by column, and the complete result
set can be 'Export'ed into a spreadsheet.

Changing the Search parameters

To perform another search, return to the 'Search' tab (on the top-left
of the screen).

The original Search parameters can then be edited or deleted as needed.
New parameters can also be added by clicking on the '+ADD' button (on
the top-right of the Search parameters block).

Saving Search profiles

Once Search parameters have been configured, the search configuration
can be saved (for ease of re-use in common business functions), by
clicking on the ‘Save / Save as’ button. On the pop-up dialogue, a
meaningful 'Profile name' should be entered, and clicking on the ‘Set
profile as default’ check box will set the search profile as default.

Count records

This shows the number of results the search will bring up, before the
search is started. This feature provides the opportunity to make
refinements to the Search parameters to narrow down the number of
results (if needed).

Note: searches are capped at returning 5000 records. Some searches may
not start if the Count of records is more than 5000.

Manual actions

Reassess

Where a request has received an Error response from the ATO (for
example, a No match response received for an Add person request), and at
least one circumstance for the customer has changed (for example, a new
address added), a reattempt at adding the person onto the MCR can be
manually triggered via a Reassess action. This will trigger the system
to generate and send new request/s for the customer.

-   Single - A manual Reassess can be triggered for an individual
    Customer by clicking on the ‘Reassess’ button in the ‘View
    transactions’ screen, accessed via Customer Summary
-   Bulk - A manual Reassess can be triggered for up to 10 individuals
    at a time, by first selecting multiple records in the Search results
    table in the MCR Management tool, and then clicking on the
    ‘Reassess’ button

If the ‘Reassess’ button is not visible above the transactions table,
then it is because the user does not have the required Essentials
access. If the button is visible but disabled, then it is because the
system has determined there are no requests for a customer that can be
Reassessed.

Delete link

Where a Link authority has been incorrectly added to a Person on the
MCR, an authorised user can manually delete the link once the link has
been end-dated (via Update link request). Deleting a link is done via
the ‘View transactions’ screen (accessed via Customer Summary). The
‘Delete link’ button should be visible above the transactions table
provided the user has the required Essentials access. If the button is
visible but disabled, then it is because the system has determined there
are no links for the customer that can be deleted.

When deleting a link, the user is presented two reasons to choose from
as to why the link is being deleted:

-   Added in error - where there has been a circumstance and a link has
    been incorrectly added
-   Other - any other technical problem

Note: if a Delete link is actioned, and there is no other link recorded
on the MCR for the Person, then the Delete link action will also trigger
a ‘Delete person’ request. This will result in the removal of the person
from the MCR (when this occurs, all the transactions will still be
available on the View transactions screen and marked as deleted).

Related links

Mutual Client Register (MCR) for Service Delivery staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
