
Assessing assets at their net market value 108-04020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about all assets owned by a customer
that are treated as assessable assets and included when calculating the
rate of payment unless specifically exempted under a provision of the
Social Security Act 1991.

Exempt assets

When there is a small change to asset values, check if the customer
needs to notify.

Assets exempted from assessment are specified in section 1118 of the
Social Security Act 1991. Exempt assets include, among other things, the
customer's principal home and money held in a superannuation fund when
the customer is under Age Pension age.

Definition of an asset and how assessed

Section 11 of the Social Security Act 1991 defines an asset as
'property'. Property is not defined, but has an established common law
meaning - any possession, belongings or property owned solely or partly.
It includes beneficial interests, and debts owed to a person.

Assets are assessed at their net market value. This is the amount likely
to be received by selling the asset. On review, a revised value of the
asset will become the current market value.

Customers are not asked to get professional valuations. If considered
necessary, Services Australia will arrange for specific items to be
valued by an approved valuer.

If the asset is owned with another person, the asset value for a
customer is determined using the proportion of their interest in the
asset.

A Mortgage Saver/Loan Offset Account is a savings account which is
linked to a loan.

The Resources page contains examples of what to consider when
determining if a valuation is required. It also contains a link to the
Redbook website.

Related links

Date of receipt

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Exempt Assets

Superannuation

Assessment of asset value of Home Equity Conversion loans and Reverse
Mortgages

Financial Investments

Pensions income and assets tests

Allowance income and assets tests

Reviews and appeals

Loans and liabilities against assets

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Adding shares and securities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
