
Adding shares and securities 108-19092749

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains information about the assessment of public
company shares and listed securities either owned by a customer, or
owned by an entity such as a private trust or company.

What are shares?

Customers who own shares, own a small portion of the company they hold
shares in.

Shares are a unit of ownership in a company and they give the holder the
right to attend and vote at annual general meetings. In addition, they
give the shareholder the right to receive a portion of the profit made
by the company.

Public company shares

The asset value of shares is their net market value, not their face
value. The market value is determined by the latest available End of Day
sale price of the shares multiplied by the number of shares held. This
applies for shares listed on the Australian Securities Exchange (ASX).
The agency holds the share prices on the Securities and Investment
Reference System, also known as the SIN or shares database. The
Performance Details (SIPD) screen has historical share prices.

The value of shares in unlisted public companies is in the Financial
Industry and Network Support (FINS) Bulletin. The value is worked out
based on how long ago shares in the company sold. If the date was:

-   within the last 12 months, the sale price is used
-   more than 12 months ago, the net value of the assets in the company
    is used

Private company shares

The Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) will assess shares held in a
private company. The CAO determines the asset value of the company. In
addition, any shares in public companies that are owned by a private
company or private trust (entity) are keyed by a CAO on the entity's
record.

Credit union and building society member shares

The Corporations Act requires credit unions and building societies to
issue a member share to customers when opening a new account.

Member shares are either purchased for a nominal amount ($1 up to $10)
or the customer agrees to pay a nominal amount (up to $10) if the credit
union/building society closes. Only one member share can be purchased or
issued to an individual. These shares are completely different from any
other type of 'share' due to the following characteristics:

-   it is non-appreciative or accumulating
-   there is no possibility of income being generated by the share (that
    is, dividends)
-   it is not transferable
-   it is only redeemable on cancellation (closing) of the credit union
    account(s)
-   the details of the member share are not always available on a
    customer account statement(s)

The share value usually varies between institutions. While these member
shares are technically classed as a financial asset, their assessment
will have little or no impact on the customer's rate of payment.

If the customer advises they own a credit union or building society
member share, and the share is identified as having an asset value, it
is keyed on the customer's record using the Savings and Direct
Investment (SVDI) screen. It will then show on the Savings Summary (SVS)
screen (if previously coded on the SIS screen they must be moved to the
SVDI screen). The asset value will show as the actual cost, and assessed
as a financial asset.

Deeming provisions for income purposes will apply.

Shares in trust (including shares held on behalf of minors)

Different rules apply to assessing income from trusts. These must be
referred to a CAO. For more information about investment funds held in
trust, see Trusts.

Security categories

A security is a financial asset. They have a monetary value and can be
traded. Securities are separated into 2 distinct categories:

debt securities which are a way for companies, governments or
institutions to borrow money

equity securities (including shares) which are an investment in the
stock of a company (aka listed securities), or which tracks an index or
basket of securities. These can include:

-   Ordinary shares
-   Preference shares
-   Warrants
-   Options
-   Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs)

Income assessment from shares and listed securities

As shares and listed securities are classed as financial assets, the
deeming provisions are applied to calculate income. Therefore, customers
do not need to tell us about the cash amount of dividends they get other
than to update their bank account balance if needed. If the customer has
a dividend reinvestment plan, they will get more shares rather than
dividends. They must advise of the new number of shares or securities.

[] Customers can add and update personal information, including shares
and securities online.

For a small change to asset values, determine if the customer needs to
notify.

The Resources page has information on identifying shares and securities,
unlisted public shares, Intranet links and external websites.

Related Links

Deeming provisions

Loans and liabilities against assets

Assessing assets at their net market value

Share traders

myGov My Profile

Updating shares and securities

Revaluing managed investments, shares, securities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
