
Assessing deprivation/gifting 108-06010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment and coding when deprivation has
occurred.

Assessing deprivation/gifting and abuse of older Australians

Some older Australians may be at risk of abuse. Abuse of older
Australians is a form of family and domestic violence. It includes any
form of violence or mistreatment that causes harm or distress to an
older person. This includes physical, sexual, psychological, financial,
and social abuse and neglect. It can be unintentional or deliberate and
occurs within a relationship of trust. It is also known as elder abuse.

Older Australians may be subjected to financial abuse. This can include:

-   theft of an older person's money or assets
-   the use of physical or psychological abuse to force an older person
    to give away their money or assets
-   using or controlling an older person's money or assets improperly,
    coercively or illegally
-   For assessment of stolen assets, see Assessment of assets (CLK).

Note: deprivation should not be assessed if the customer has not
willingly deprived themselves of assets.

For information on how to identify abuse of older Australians and the
referral options available, see Abuse of older Australians. The
Resources page has an intranet link for more information on the abuse of
older Australians.

Disposal of assets and or income

Disposal of an asset (including the forgiving of a loan) and/or income
is a notifiable event, where adequate financial consideration is not
received deprivation has occurred. This includes attributed trust or
company assets distributed to non-controllers, or when the ratio of
distributed assets given to a part-controller is greater than their
attributed share. See Gifting rules for trusts and companies. Making
donations or tithing to a religious or other organisation is also
considered disposing of an asset.

Note: different rules apply to an approved Special Disability Trust
(SDT). Gifts to a SDT may be exempt from the deprivation provisions if
the contributor is an immediate family member, of Age Pension age and
the SDT concessional gifting cap is not used. See Gifting concessions to
a Special Disability Trust (SDT).

Disposal of income is maintained indefinitely.

Disposal limit

A person or a couple can dispose of assets of up to $10,000 during an
income year. This $10,000 limit applies to a single person or to the
combined amounts gifted by a couple. The term income year has the same
meaning as a financial year in the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 and is
from 1 July to 30 June. This is the same for all customers regardless of
their payment types, commencement dates and relationship status.

Additionally there is a disposal limit of $30,000 over a 5 year rolling
period. This limit applies to the gifting free area; that is, although
customers can continue to dispose of (gift) assets of up to $10,000 in
an income year without penalty, they must take care not to exceed the
gifting free limit of $30,000 in a rolling 5 year period.

Note: the 5 year rolling period is actually 5 consecutive financial
income years commencing on 1 July. It is possible to make gifts within 5
years of each other that are not in the same 5 year rolling period, for
example, 20 June 2012 and 15 July 2016.

Circumstances where gifting rules do not apply

A partnered couple are considered one unit. Where assets are transferred
between the members of a couple, the gifting rules do not apply. There
is a similar relationship where a customer is attributed with 100% of
the net assets of a private trust or company; any gift (or loan
forgiven) between themselves or their partner and the entity is not
deprivation. See Gifting rules for trusts and companies.

For Norfolk Island residents it has been determined the gifting rules
will not apply to gifts made before the announcement by the Australian
Government on 19 March 2015 that it would integrate Norfolk Island with
the mainland tax and social security systems.

Calculation of amounts to be included in assets

The system will automatically calculate the amount to be included in a
customer's assets for any one event or if the $30,000 limit is exceeded
in a 5 year period. For each gift, the amount to be included in a
customer's assets under the 5 year rule from 1 July 2002 is worked out
as follows:

-   Add the value of all gifts made by the customer in the 5 year
    rolling period (that is, counting back 5 years and including the
    most recent gift)
-   Add all of the deprived assets values included in the customer's
    assets under both the $10,000 1 year rule and the $30,000 5 year
    rule during the rolling period, including the assessable amount
    under the 1 year rule resulting from the current assessment of the
    latest gift
-   Subtract the total from Step 2, from the total of Step 1. If this
    amount exceeds the gifting free limit $30,000 then, whichever is the
    lesser of the excess and the amount of the actual disposal is to be
    included in the value of the customer's assets for 5 years from the
    date of the disposal

However, there will be occasions when customers may request an
explanation of how the rule is applied as opposed to the calculation:

Check how much of the $30,000 free area has been 'used up' in the
current and preceding 4 income years immediately prior to the latest
gift. This is the total amount of gifts made in that period less the
amount being maintained as a gift (gifts made minus the disposal limits
accessed; this can be viewed on the GIFTS screen)

If the difference is $30,000 or more, all of the 5 year free period has
been used up and the entire amount of the latest gift is maintained

If the difference is less than $30,000, the amount to be maintained is
the greater of:

-   The amount by which the latest gift exceeds the $10,000 annual free
    area that has not been used, and
-   The amount by which the whole amount of the latest gift when added
    to the previously calculated 'used up' portion of the $30,000 now
    exceeds $30,000

Amounts in excess of either the $10,000 1 year limit or the gifting free
$30,000 5 year limit are included in the value of the customer's assets
for a period of 5 years from the date of disposal. This excess amount is
defined as a financial asset and is subject to the deeming rules.

Recording instances of gifting

Although individual instances of deprivation may be less than the
allowable yearly amount, when totalled they may exceed the limit over an
income year. It is imperative all instances involving gifting are
recorded.

Assessment under deprivation provisions

Any amounts gifted in the 5 years prior to grant of payment are assessed
under the deprivation (disposal) rules. Deprivation provisions do not
apply when the customer has disposed of an asset within the 5 years
prior to grant but could not reasonably have expected to become
qualified for payment. For example, a customer makes a gift and then
qualifies for a payment due to unexpectedly losing their job or becoming
incapacitated.

Gifts made in the 4 weeks prior to claim may impact customers subject to
the Liquid Assets Waiting period (LAWP). For more information, see
Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP).

If a customer disposes of income without disposing of assets, the actual
amount of the income disposed of is assessed indefinitely. For example,
income from a superannuation pension with a fixed term would be assessed
until the term expires. Note: additional specific procedures exist if
the income is a foreign pension.

For Norfolk Island residents it has been determined the gifting rules
will not apply to gifts made before the announcement by the Australian
Government on 19 March 2015 that it would integrate Norfolk Island with
the mainland tax and social security systems.

Customers who are claiming a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) are not
able to give away income or assets so they can receive social security
entitlements including concession cards. Even though the LIC is not
asset tested, deemed income from the disposal of an asset can be
included in the claimant's assessable ordinary income.

Returned gifts

Prior to 18 October 2007, where a disposed of asset was returned to a
customer, the amount of the gift could not be disregarded. However, from
18 October 2007, policy was amended (and supporting legislation was
drafted) to allow a gift to be disregarded from the date of return.

For the period between the gift and its return, assess it under the
gifting rules, that is, for its value less the allowable threshold, and
deemed. For more information, see Assessing returned gifts.

The Resources page contains examples of a deprivation calculation,
frequently asked questions on gifting and deprivation, historical
information on previous gifting limits, a link to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) contacts, a link to Family and domestic
violence - Older Australians, and a table to show who can action and
update information for income and assets.

Related links

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Deprivation related to the transfer of a farm to a close relative

Granny flat provisions

Exempt lump sums

Deeming provisions

Actuarial valuations

Referrals for actuarial valuations

Documentation required for actuarial valuations

Foreign pensions

Gifting concessions to a Special Disability Trust (SDT)

Assessing returned gifts

Gifting rules for trusts and companies

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
