-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines characteristics of a managed investment. It
explains how to record managed investments owned by a customer, or an
entity such as a private trust or private company.

Investment changes and customer's notification requirements

Unitised managed investment prices are automatically revalued every 6
months in March and September.

Customers must be advised they need to notify changes to the:

-   number of units they own
-   value of their account-based managed investment(s)
-   balance of their margin loan(s), or
-   changes in the investments held within a Personal Investment Fund
    portfolio or Master Trust

From 6 March 2010, all listed property trusts on an Australian stock
exchange are updated. See Updating shares and securities.

From December 2015, all timeshare investments are treated as managed
investments.

If there is a small change to asset values check if the customer needs
to notify.

Funds managed by Public Trustee

A Public Trustee may be appointed as guardian or administrator to manage
the personal affairs of someone who is unable to do this for themselves.
It is similar to a power of attorney arrangement.

The person's own investments will be managed on their behalf, although
the Public Trustee may invest their funds in their own investment
trusts, similar to personal investments in other managed funds. Interest
and earnings from investments managed in this way will be declared on a
customer's personal tax return.

A Public Trustee may also be appointed as trustee of a trust fund set up
to hold assets on behalf of a beneficiary. Some examples are
testamentary trusts, statutory trusts set up by the courts and
protective trusts set up for children. In this type of arrangement,
investments are made in the name of the trust. The beneficiary may
receive income and capital distributions from the trust as determined by
the trustee within the terms of the Will, trust deed or rules.

The income received from the investments will be part the income of the
trust. It will be declared on the trust tax return, which will have
statements of distribution to beneficiaries. Distributions paid to a
beneficiary will show on their personal tax return as a trust
distribution, see Protective and statutory trusts for persons unable to
handle their own affairs. These type of cases need to be referred to a
Complex Assessment Officer.

In many cases the Public Trustee will be managing the personal funds of
a customer under an administration order. These are not a trust and the
funds need to be coded on the customer's personal record.

The Resources page contains links to the Financial Industry and Network
Support (FINS) Bulletin, and the form needed for CAO assessment of
managed investments held in trust for another person.

Related links

Managed investments - updating existing investments

Deeming provisions

Enquiries on managed investments

Revaluing managed investments, shares and securities

Updating shares and securities

Superannuation

Adding or updating an allocated income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Indexing, recording and reviewing organisations

MIN/SIN Database Maintenance and Updates

Loans and liabilities against assets

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Protective and statutory trusts for persons unable to handle their own
affairs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
