
Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments 108-04000000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess assets for social security pensions
and benefits.

Government intent

Services Australia provides easy, high quality services to people at
different stages of their lives through the Medicare, Centrelink and
Child Support programs. In order to provide income support to those in
need, assets are assessed for the purposes of obtaining a pension or
benefit. Most assets are assessed, however some are exempt.

Effect on payments

An Assets test assessment affects a customer's payment rate components
in the following order:

-   basic rate
-   Pension Supplement Basic Amount (where applicable)
-   the remaining amount (where applicable)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)
-   Pension Supplement Minimum Amount (where applicable)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) (where applicable)

Sale of assets

The cash proceeds received by a customer due to the sale of an asset are
not assessed as income, including any capital gains achieved, for
example, a garage sale, or firearms buyback scheme. The customer's
assessable assets may need adjusting due to the sale. Any proceeds of
cash or extra in financial accounts are subject to the usual deeming
provisions. Customers selling their principal home may be treated
differently.

Where there is a small change to asset values determine whether the
customer is required to notify.

The Resources page contains a link to the Income and Assets Update
(SA220m) form.

Contents

Verifying income and assets

Assessment of assets (CLK)

Assessing income and assets from cooperatives

Assessing income and assets from profit sharing

Assessing income and assets for ministers of religion

Home ownership

Exempt income and assets

Financial Investments

Home Equity Conversion loans

Actuarial valuations

Assets hardship for income support payments

Real estate

Income and assets options online

Related links

Income and assets tests for blind customers

Working Credit

Income, assets and rates of payments

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Sole Traders

Partnerships

Assets of trust and companies

Assessment of income from trusts and companies

Assessment of income and assets from trusts and companies pre 1 January
2002

Selling a home

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Assessing scholarship income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
