-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess granny flat interests or rights.

Granny flat interest or right

Granny flat interests have special residence provisions applied. It is
the same for retirement villages and sale leaseback homes.

A granny flat interest is created when a customer pays for:

-   a life interest or
-   right to accommodation for life and
-   it is in a private residence, that will be their principal home

A rented property can be a granny flat right or interest for a person if
the lessee:

-   guarantees accommodation for life, and
-   provides a different property if the lease ends

A person cannot have a granny flat right or interest in a property in
which they have legal ownership.

Granny flat rights are usually family arrangements, rarely covered by a
written contract or agreement. Lack of a written agreement does not
matter for these rules.

If the lessee of the property provides the life interest in return for a
payment, proof must be sighted that states:

-   they guarantee the life interest, and
-   if the lease ends, the granny flat right will continue, even if it
    is at a new address

Note: customers should seek financial and legal advice before entering
into a granny flat interest. Services Australia recommends the customer
gets a legal document drawn up so there is proof of the agreement. This
can help prevent problems later if things change.

Capital gains

Customers should seek advice about capital gains issues. They can seek
advice from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), a lawyer or an
accountant.

Capital gains may apply when creating a granny flat right.

Creation of granny flat interests

A customer creates a granny flat interest if they do any of the
following:

-   transfers all legal title to their home to another party and keeps a
    right to live for life in that property, or in another property
    owned by the other party
-   pays to construct and fit out a home on another person's property
    and keeps a right to live in it for life
-   provides some or all of the purchase price of a property in another
    person's name and keeps a right to live in it for life

Deprivation and the reasonableness test

There is no deprivation when a customer creates a granny flat interest
in the situations above.

There may be deprivation if a customer transfers or gifts additional
assets. A customer is considered deprived of an asset if they transfer
assets in return for a promise of future accommodation. This is because
they are not considered to have received adequate financial
consideration.

A test, known as the Reasonableness test, is applied by a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) to see if there is deprivation. This test uses
a modified table of life expectancies. For more information, the
References page links to the Guide to Social Security Law, 4.6.4.60.

Additional assets may include:

-   land that is not an exempt asset under the home and curtilage rules.
    This includes land that was previously exempt under the extended
    land use test
-   commercial properties
-   financial investments or
-   cash

Staff must apply the reasonableness test as the customer is considered
to have transferred additional assets if:

-   a customer's principal home and adjacent land was eligible for the
    extended land use test concession, and
-   this property was transferred to create a granny flat interest

A customer may give money to another person in exchange for a life
interest. A CAO must apply the Reasonableness Test in all cases when a
customer gives money in return for a granny flat interest.

A customer may wish to live with more than one family member. They will
have more than one granny flat interest. The 'Reasonableness Test' is
applied by a CAO when this occurs.

The entry contribution is the amount paid for the granny flat interest.
It determines the customer's 'homeownership' status for the assets test
and Rent Assistance.

Home ownership

To determine home ownership status, compare:

the entry contribution and

the Extra Allowable Amount (EAA)

-   the EAA is the difference between the homeowner and non-homeowner
    assets limits at the time the granny flat interest is created

If the entry contribution is:

-   more than the EAA, the customer is a homeowner. Rent Assistance (RA)
    is not payable
-   not more than the EAA, the customer is a non-homeowner. RA is based
    on the amount of maintenance fees paid. The entry contribution is
    recorded as an asset of the customer but is not deemed

Sale of principal home to set up a granny flat right

Funds from the sale of the customer's principal home may be exempt from
the asset test.

If the amount they intend to use to set up the granny flat rights is:

more than the EAA,

-   the customer is a homeowner
-   the sale amount to be used to set up the granny flat right is exempt
    from the assets test for 12 months from the date of sale for sales
    before 1 January 2023, with an extension of up to 24 months total in
    some circumstances, or 24 months from the date of sale for sales
    from 1 January 2023 onwards, with an extension of up to 36 months
    total in some circumstances

not more than the EAA,

-   the customer is a non-homeowner from the sale date
-   there is no asset test exemption

Assessing a granny flat interest for the recipient of the property

Services Australia assesses the receiver of the transferred property as
having a remainder interest. If a customer creates a granny flat
interest by:

-   transferring the legal title of their home to another person, and
-   getting a right to live there for life

The remainder interest is not an asset whilst the granny flat interest
exists. This is because the person with the remainder interest did not
create the remainder interest.

If a customer creates a granny flat interest by:

transferring funds to another person who

-   already owns a home, or
-   purchases another property, and

gets a right to live there for life

The remainder interest is an asset of the person who owns the property.
This is because they have created the remainder interest by granting a
life interest to the person with the granny flat right.

If the person with the remainder interest is also a customer and they do
not live in the property, this remainder interest is not an exempt
asset. The value of the remainder interest will be the market value of
the property, less the value of the right to occupy. For the owner, the
value of the right to occupy is determined by the Australian Government
Actuary where the person is likely to be affected under the assets test.

See scenarios on Resources page for examples on how to assess.

Vacating the granny flat interest

There may be deprivation if an income support customer stops living in a
granny flat interest:

-   less than 5 years after creating the interest and,
-   the reason they left would have been known at the time the interest
    was created

If both these criteria are met, deprivation is assessed from the date
the customer permanently vacates the home until the end of the 5-year
period from the date of transfer of the property.

For example, the customer gifts their home property on 1 July 2017
creating a granny flat interest. On 1 July 2018, they vacate the
property to move to a unit they have recently purchased. This was their
intention at the time they created the granny flat interest. The value
of their contribution was not returned when they moved to the unit.
Deprivation applies from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2022.

If the customer is partnered and their partner still lives in the granny
flat interest, no deprivation has occurred.

There is no deprivation in these cases:

-   sudden onset of illness (including moving to Aged Care)
-   family relationship breakdown
-   elder abuse or
-   damage to the property, which makes it uninhabitable

Sale of home and transfer of funds to a family member

If the property is sold, the granny flat interest is not automatically
ended. If the property is sold, the person who granted the granny flat
interest can either:

-   sell it, but make their right to live there a condition of sale
-   transfer their granny flat interest to another property
-   accept money or assets, in return for giving up their granny flat
    interest

Staff should note that deprivation may have occurred if:

-   the property is sold within 5 years of the granny flat interest
    being established, and
-   the customer's granny flat interest is ended,

If this occurs, refer the case to a Complex Assessment Officer. See the
Process page for further information.

The Resources page has examples of granny flat interest assessments.

Related links

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Home ownership

Updating address details

Exempt Assets

Accommodation rules summary for seniors and aged care

Aged Care means assessment - Residential Care pre 1 July 2014 - assets
assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
