
Real estate 108-04130000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about assessing real estate under the
Income and Assets Tests. The residence in which a customer spends the
greatest amount of time is known as their principal home and is usually
not considered an asset under the Assets Test.

On this Page:

Asset assessment for real estate

This procedure does not cover the assessment of the home property, known
as house and curtilage.

Any real estate apart from the customer's principal home or house and
curtilage, is an assessable asset under the Assets Test.

Assets are assessed at their net market value. The net market value is:

-   the expected sale amount if the asset is sold on the open market
-   less any valid debts or encumbrances for that asset

Date of effect (DOE) of new valuations

A valuation higher than a previous valuation or a customer's estimate
applies from the first payday after it is received. See References for a
definition of payday. If a new value is obtained for a property that has
already been disclosed by a customer, Centrelink does not go back and
raise a debt based on any increase in the value of the property over
time.

Exception: If there is evidence the customer deliberately misrepresented
details of the asset, then the value may be applied from a date earlier
than the valuation date.

For a valuation lower than a previous valuation or customer's estimate,
the DOE rules should be applied.

Income from real estate

Customers may receive various types of income from real estate, such as
leasing or rent. Expenses related to this income (for example, interest
payments, rates and maintenance costs) are deducted from the gross
income to work out the current net income. The customer is required to
provide their latest tax return for Centrelink to determine the net
income the customer receives from real estate.

Real estate address

Centrelink must be able to precisely define the location of a real
estate asset in a way that is understood by both customers and external
organisations to assist with assessment, for example, by verifying
nature of interest (ownership) through various State Land Title offices.

The Resources page contains information on the documentation required
for real estate valuations.

Contents

Assessment and sale of real estate and timeshare asset

Assessing income from real estate and timeshare

Assessing and coding the Real Estate Mod R

Address recording for real estate

Valuation of real estate and other assets

Maintaining the value of real estate assets on customer records

Related links

Assessing house and curtilage

Board and lodging

Selling a home

Purchasing another residence

Permanent vacation of principal home

Determining homeowners and non-homeowners

Non-homeowner purchasing a home

Assessing a life interest in a home

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
