
Manual processing of Transition to Independent Living Allowance (TILA) claims 108-08070010

-   Background
-   
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manually process Transition to Independent
Living Allowance (TILA) claims. Claims for TILA are submitted via the
Unified Government Gateway (UGG) by Third Party Organisations (TPOs).
These claims are automatically processed if an existing customer record
is matched to the details provided. If the claimant cannot be
automatically matched to a Services Australia record, manual processing
of the claim is required.

Reasons for manual processing

If there is:

-   no match
-   more than one possible match, or
-   a child record is identified

The TILA claim will require manual intervention by delegated Services
Australia processing staff.

Searching for existing customer records

Prior to commencing any claims, staff are required to undertake a
thorough search for an existing customer record and ensure an accurate
match. If a child record is identified, this will need to be converted
to a customer record and used for the claim.

If an existing record cannot be located a new Customer Reference Number
(CRN) will need to be created before the claim can processed. Note: any
further claims submitted in respect of the same claimant should be able
to be processed automatically.

Claims received from third party organisations

Claims received from third party organisations are considered to have
been approved, by the referring case worker/agency. The agency is to
process TILA claims on the understanding that, in approving the claim
the referring agency:

-   has determined the claimant's identity, and
-   eligibility, and
-   the young person is exiting formal care, and
-   has taken into account any amounts of TILA paid in respect of that
    claimant prior to 1 January 2014

Manual processing of TILA claims by the agency must ensure that the
claimant:

-   is in the TILA eligible age range, and
-   has not already received the maximum TILA entitlement

Where the amount approved to be paid by the referring case worker/agency
would cause the total TILA payments made to the claimant to exceed the
maximum entitlement of $1,500, only the difference between the maximum
and the total payments previously issued in respect of the claimant will
be paid.

Manual processing of TILA claims

Only delegated Services Australia staff with appropriate access, process
TILA claims requiring manual intervention in the Unified Government
Gateway (UGG).

The claim can be submitted for grant or rejection or not submitted for
finalisation (cancelled).

Submitting the claim - (that is, answering Yes to the question 'Do you
want to submit this claim?) means the claim will be automatically
processed and payment will be granted or rejected, with a letter issued.
Note: automatic processing can only reject a claim if the rejection
reason is that $1,500 of TILA has already been paid for this young
person.

Not submitting the claim - (that is, answering No) cancels the claim.
The claim will be finalised rather than rejected (that is, no payment
will be issued and no letter will be issued).

The Service Officer must answer No if:

-   the person is not in the TILA eligible age range, or
-   a deceased record is identified, or
-   the caseworker requests the claim be cancelled, or
-   the claim is withdrawn or cancelled on request, or
-   the Service Officer makes a determination (reasons must be noted)

Claims that are rejected or finalised (not paid) are not able to be
appealed.

Incorrect payments of TILA

No debts for TILA payments are to be raised by Services Australia. The
Department of Social Services (DSS) will follow up any incorrect
payments of TILA.

Returned Payments

TILA payments are made to the referring agency on behalf of the
customer. If a TILA payment is returned, the original claim can be
located by searching for 'processed' claims and refining the date range
search criteria on the Third Party Information Summary Organisation
(TPISO) screen. The Service Officer can then view each claim listed
until the relevant claim is found.

The case worker may need to be contacted to confirm the correct bank
account details before reissuing the payment.

Related links

Transition to Independent Living Allowance (TILA)

Unified Government Gateway (UGG)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
