-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the Assets Test is one of two Means Tests
(the Income Test is the other) used to establish the level of income
support required by a person. The Assets Test establishes the level of a
person's assessable assets and, based on those assessable assets,
calculates that person's entitlement.

Rate of pension payable

From 1 January 2017, the rate of pension payable is reduced by $3.00 per
fortnight for every $1,000 of assessable assets above the pension assets
free area. Prior to this date the taper rate was $1.50, but was
previously $3.00 prior to 20 September 2007. For the pension assets free
area, see the Pension - assets free areas and Pension - disqualifying
assets limits links on the Rates and thresholds page. For partnered
pensioners, this reduction is applied half each.

A potential pension rate is calculated under both the Income and Assets
Tests respectively, with the one resulting in the lowest rate of pension
being applicable to that couple.

Customers receiving Age Pension (Blind) or Disability Support Pension
(DSP) (Blind) may be exempt from the Means Test, but income and assets
details are required to determine the partner's entitlement to payments
or their entitlement to rent assistance.

The procedures, Exempt Income and Exempt Assets, provide information
about assessing income and assets that are exempt from the Income and
Assets Test.

The Resources page contains a link to the Guide to Australian Government
Payments and an example of using the Assets Test to work out a
customer's member of a couple pension rate. It also contains historical
rate information that existed immediately prior to 1 January 2017 and 20
September 2007.

Related links

Assessment of assets for Centrelink payments

Assets hardship provisions - Pensions

Exempt Assets

Exempt lump sums

Home ownership

Rates and thresholds

Income, assets and rates of payment

Income and assets tests for blind customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
