
Assessing salary sacrificing/salary packaging arrangements for employment income 108-07010050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how salary sacrificing arrangements are assessed
for pension and allowance Income Test purposes.

Definition of salary sacrificing

Salary sacrificing (also known as salary packaging) is a process whereby
an employee makes an arrangement with their employer, where the employee
agrees to forgo a part of their future entitlement to wages in return
for the employer providing them with benefits of a similar value. Salary
sacrificing can reduce the employee’s taxable gross income.

Salary sacrificing arrangements

Employees may enter into a salary sacrificing arrangement with their
employer:

to increase their superannuation contributions above that which their
employer is obliged to provide (Superannuation Guarantee Contribution
(SGC))

to receive other non-cash benefits, such as:

-   membership fees and subscription to a professional association
-   child care fees
-   home office expenses
-   financial counselling fees
-   disability/income protection insurance
-   personal computers and
-   vehicles

Salary sacrificing is assessed according to the type of benefit
received.

Pre and post sacrificed amounts

It’s important that the correct gross wage is taken into account when a
person has a salary sacrifice arrangement otherwise the customer’s
income may be under or overstated.

Pre-sacrificed is the gross wage before any salary sacrifice deductions.
For example, if a person’s gross wage is $50,000 a year and they have a
salary sacrifice arrangement for $10,000 a year, the pre-sacrificed
gross wage is $50,000. For salary sacrifice to personal superannuation,
the pre-sacrificed gross wage is recorded as income. This is because the
whole sacrificed amount is assessed as income for social security
purposes.

Post-sacrificed is the gross wage after any salary sacrifice deductions.
For example, if a person’s gross wage is $50,000 a year and they have a
salary sacrifice arrangement for $10,000 a year, the post-sacrificed
gross wage is $40,000. For salary sacrifice for benefits other than
personal superannuation, the post-sacrificed gross wage is recorded as
income. This is because the non-grossed-up amount is added to the
post-sacrificed amount and assessed as income for social security
purposes. If the pre-sacrificed amount is recorded, this will double up
the person’s income.

Salary sacrificing for superannuation

From 1 July 2009, any amount of salary voluntarily sacrificed into
superannuation is income for social security purposes for all income
support payments and those claiming a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

Prior to 1 July 2009, salary voluntarily sacrificed into superannuation:

-   by those under Age Pension age was not assessable as income, and
-   by those of Age Pension age was assessable as income

Salary sacrificing to a customer's personal superannuation fund is not a
reportable fringe benefit and is not subject to Fringe Benefits Tax
(FBT) rules as such they do not appear on the employee's payment summary
as a fringe benefit amount.

Verification of the salary sacrificing arrangement will be required for
an initial assessment. Once the initial assessment is complete, where a
change is only to the amount sacrificed, no verification is required.

Payslips are sufficient verification as long as they show the total
gross income, that is, the amount before any salary sacrifice
deductions. Verification should also show the name of the fund and the
member on whose behalf the payments are made.

From the 2009-10 financial year, the customer's payment summary will
include details amounts of salary sacrifice to superannuation, they will
be shown as reportable employer super contributions.

Any salary sacrifice to the benefit of their partner's or a third
party's superannuation, regardless of the age of the partner or third
party is considered a reportable fringe benefit and is counted as
income. See salary sacrifice for benefits other than personal
superannuation (below) for details of the assessment.

Superannuation Guarantee Contribution (SGC)

For all income support customers and those claiming a LIC:

Employer's contribution:

-   are not counted as income if the employer contributions are required
    as part of their SGC obligations or part of an industry award
-   may be counted as income if the contribution is in excess of the SGC
    or industry award and the employee has the capacity to influence or
    could have reasonably expected to have or have had capacity to
    influence. Only the excess amount is counted as income

Prior to 1 July 2013, when the employee was aged 70 and over, and the
SGC has ceased, all employer contributions to superannuation were
counted as income.

From 1 July 2013 the SGC rate was raised to 9.25%, the maximum age limit
for SGC was removed and only employer contributions in excess of the SGC
are counted as income.

From 1 July 2014 the SGC rate is 9.5% of the employee's salary.

From 1 July 2021 onwards, the SGC is set to increase by 0.5% each year
to 12%.

The rates of SGC are updated by the Treasury Department and can be found
on the ATO website.

Workers Compensation payments deposited into superannuation

When a customer elects to have their Workers Compensation payments
deposited into their superannuation fund by the employer, this does not
constitute a salary sacrifice if their superannuation is not normally
counted as salary sacrifice.

Contributions to superannuation by sole traders and partnerships

There is no deduction allowed for sole traders or partners in a
partnership of any age for contributions into their own superannuation
fund.

Salary sacrificing for benefits other than personal superannuation

These benefits are regarded as fringe benefits and as such, are
considered a valuable consideration. The non-grossed-up amount is
included as income for all income support payments.

For fringe benefits received in addition to a salary paid, see Assessing
fringe benefits for Social Security income test purposes.

Note: if a customer or their partner has a salary sacrifice arrangement
with their employer for child care fees, their eligibility for Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) may be affected.

Verification  

Verification of the salary sacrificing arrangement will be required for
an initial assessment. Once the initial assessment is complete, where a
change is only to the amount sacrificed, no verification is required.

Payslips are sufficient verification as long as they indicate if the
sacrificed amount is the grossed-up or non-grossed-up amount. If the
payslips do not show this, the customer, or their partner, should
provide a copy of the salary sacrificing agreement or a statement from
their employer on the employer's letterhead. This should advise the type
and amount of benefit received and whether or not the amount is grossed
up or non-grossed-up.

Calculating the non-grossed-up amount

If the evidence provided contains the grossed-up amount of fringe
benefits purchased through the salary sacrificing arrangement, use the
following formula to calculate the non-grossed-up amount:

Non-grossed-up amount = grossed-up amount x (100% - Fringe Benefit Tax
rate).

The Resources page contains examples of salary sacrificing.

Related links

Assessing fringe benefits for Social Security income test purposes

Adjusted fringe benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
