-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess superannuation investments. This
document does not cover the assessment of adjusted taxable income for
family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

What is superannuation?

Superannuation is an investment to provide financial resources during
retirement. On retirement, the money can remain in the superannuation
investment or used to start an income stream.

Employers, employees and self-employed people contribute to
superannuation funds. Sometimes the government will add to it through
co-contributions.

This procedure does not apply to the assessment of adjusted taxable
income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments.

Overseas superannuation-like investments

Overseas superannuation-like investments do not meet the definition of a
superannuation fund in Section 9(1) of the Social Security Act. This
means overseas superannuation-like investments are treated as overseas
managed investments for social security purposes, provided the person
can access the funds.

If a person cannot access the funds for example, because they do not
meet a condition of release such as reaching a certain age, the asset
value is not assessed as a managed investment.

For more information, see Foreign income and assets.

Self-managed superannuation funds (SMSFs)

Customers can set up their own superannuation funds. They are known as
self-managed superannuation funds (SMSFs) or small APRA (Australian
Prudential Regulation Authority) superannuation funds (SAFs). Most SMSFs
and SAFs can be identified by their name. Often the name of the SMSF or
SAF will include the customer's family name.

SMSF:

-   has less than 7 members
-   all members are trustees of the superannuation fund or directors of
    the trustee company if a corporate trustee exists
-   are regulated by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

SAF

-   has less than 7 members
-   has a corporate trustee who is approved by APRA
-   are regulated by APRA

Note: an SMSF or a SAF must comply with the Superannuation Industry
Supervision (SIS) Regulations. If it does not comply, it is considered a
private trust and is assessed under the trust and company rules. For
further information, see the definition of a superannuation fund in
Section 9(1) of the Social Security Act

Accessing superannuation

Following retirement from the workforce, a person is able to access
their superannuation. They can:

-   make lump sum withdrawals, or
-   convert part or all of their investment into regular ongoing
    payments from an income stream product such as a superannuation
    pension or annuity

Where superannuation assets are used to purchase or to commence an
income stream, it is assessed under the income stream rules.

Generally, accrued superannuation benefits are not accessible until the
fund member leaves the workforce and reaches preservation age. However,
the superannuation trustee does permit early release of preserved
superannuation benefits in limited circumstances.

Note: regular withdrawals from a superannuation fund are not an income
stream. See Assessing withdrawals from superannuation.

There are different types of superannuation investments. They are not to
be confused with income stream products like superannuation pensions and
annuities.

Assessment under the Income and Assets Tests

Customers and/or partners at or over Age Pension age:

-   All superannuation investments are assessed under the Income and
    Assets Tests. For members of a couple, this includes superannuation
    owned by a partner who does not get an income support payment (ISP)
-   Superannuation is assessed under deeming provisions and is coded as
    a managed investment
-   Downsizer contributions from the sale of a customer’s principle home
    are recorded as superannuation and assessed under the Income and
    Assets Tests
-   If the owner of the superannuation is prevented from accessing their
    fund as a result of the rules of the fund, the Minister for the
    Department of Social Services (DSS) has the delegation to exempt
    superannuation investments where certain conditions are met

Note: For Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) the income test does
not include deeming of superannuation investments in accumulation stage,
see Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) income test and reference
tax year.

Customers and/or partners under Age Pension age:

A superannuation pension or income stream is assessable under the income
and asset rules. For members of a couple, this includes income streams
received by a partner who does not get an ISP

Australian superannuation investments not being used to receive a
pension or income stream are exempt under the Income and Assets Tests.
Information about them is not to be obtained or recorded unless the
superannuation owner is within 13 weeks of reaching Age Pension age

If superannuation has been coded on the customer’s record prior to age
pension age, and the customer has not lodged an early claim for Age
Pension, this information must be removed from the record

If the customer advises their assessable assets are less because they
have moved money into superannuation:

-   ask to see proof but do not code any of the superannuation details
-   record on a DOC that the money has now been invested in
    superannuation

Unallocated reserves held within SMSF

SMSFs or SAFs may have reserves that are set aside within the fund. They
are 'unallocated reserves', that is, they are not part of any individual
member's superannuation interest in the fund.

The reserves have different names but the most common are investment
reserve and miscellaneous or general reserve. These are to be attributed
to each member based on the contribution each member has made towards
the accumulated reserves. That is, those members with more assets in the
fund are likely to have made a larger contribution to generating the
unallocated reserves. This may change over time where members make
contributions or withdrawals.

Where it is not possible to attribute the reserves based on each
member's interest in the fund, the unallocated reserves will be
attributed equally to each member of the fund. They are treated as
superannuation assets and the assessment will depend on whether the
person is either under Age Pension age or of Age Pension age.

Personal injury insurance schemes and disability benefits paid from superannuation

Customers may receive a range of benefits paid through different
policies as a result of sickness, injury, temporary or permanent
incapacity. These benefits may be paid through a superannuation fund, an
insurance company or their employer. See Income from personal injury
insurance schemes and disability benefits for more information.

If a member is paid a Total and Permanent Disability (TPD) benefit as a
one-off lump sum payment, it is treated as a lump sum withdrawal from
the superannuation fund. A TPD benefit may also be paid as an invalidity
lifetime pension from a defined benefit fund and is assessed as a
defined benefit income stream.

The superannuation fund may also make a superannuation contribution to
the member’s account at the same time as the regular ongoing payments,
if needed under the Superannuation Guarantee for the customer. It is not
assessed as income. It must not be included in the ongoing payment
amount. If the contribution is voluntary, it is assessed as income and
included in the ongoing payment amount.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk -
Submit an enquiry online form, and Income and Assets table.

Related links

Superannuation

Assessing withdrawals from superannuation

Early release of superannuation on financial hardship grounds

Assessing income streams paid from Self-Managed Superannuation Funds
(SMSFs) or Small APRA Superannuation Funds (SAFs)

Exempting superannuation investments

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Income streams

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Adding or updating an account based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a term income stream

Adding or updating a pooled lifetime income stream

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Income from personal injury insurance schemes and disability benefits

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
