-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process required when a customer, including a
non-Centrelink customer, wants to request an explanation or apply for a
formal review of a care decision which affects their child support
assessment and/or family assistance entitlement.

Implications of a care decision

When family assistance is received for a child who is also included in a
child support assessment, both Centrelink and Child Support use the same
care decision for their assessments.

Therefore, when Centrelink makes a care decision that affects a Child
Support customer, the customer should be encouraged to contact Child
Support to discuss any effects the care decision will have on their
child support assessment.

Centrelink internal review process

If a customer does not understand the reason/s for a decision, they can
request an explanation of the decision. A Subject Matter Expert (SME)
will provide the explanation.

If a customer does not agree with a decision, they can apply for a
formal review of the decision. An Authorised Review Officer (ARO) will
complete the formal review, and only if the customer applies for a
formal review.

A customer does not have to request an explanation before applying for a
formal review of a decision. They can apply for a formal review at any
time after a decision is made.

See Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process.

Customer requests an explanation of a care decision

If a customer requests an explanation of a care decision made by:

-   Child Support, advise them that Child Support would be the most
    appropriate program to discuss the decision. These customers can be
    transferred to Child Support with an introduction
-   Centrelink, or the impact of a care decision made by Child Support
    on their family assistance, Centrelink should provide the
    explanation

If the customer has already requested a review of the care decision by
either Centrelink or Child Support:

-   discuss the decision with the customer
-   do not record and refer to a SME a request for an explanation
-   advise the customer of the review process including timeliness
    standards, and that a detailed explanation of the decision will be
    provided as part of the review

A SME may undertake a reassessment (Secretary initiated review) as a
part of the explanation process. However, a Secretary initiated review
of a decision cannot be undertaken if the customer has applied for a
formal review of the decision.

Customer requests a review of a care decision

Centrelink uses the term 'formal review' (apply for a formal review) and
Child Support uses the term 'objection' (lodge an objection). Both mean
that the customer wants to have a care decision reviewed.

Note: A SME cannot undertake a review requested by the customer.

A customer who has their family assistance or child support assessment
affected by a care decision can request a review of the care decision.
The customer can contact Centrelink or Child Support to request a
review, even if they are not a customer of the program they requested
the review from. When a care decision has no effect under family
assistance law (none of the parties are claiming or receiving family
assistance), only Child Support may review the care decision.

If a customer contacts Centrelink to request a review of a Child Support
care decision, and Child Support has not already reviewed the decision,
suggest to the customer that Child Support would be the most appropriate
program to complete the review as they made the original decision.
However, if there is an effect on family assistance for at least one
party, and the customer wants the review to be completed by Centrelink,
Centrelink will conduct the review.

If both Centrelink and Child Support are asked to review a care
decision, the review request that was lodged first must be finalised
first. It is important that any request for review is recorded straight
away.

If a customer contacts Centrelink after Child Support finalises a review
of a care decision, a Centrelink Authorised Review Officer (ARO) may
review the care decision but cannot change the care percentage decided
by the Child Support Objections Officer. See Jurisdiction below.

The customer may request a review of the care decision at any time. This
includes when they have requested an explanation that is not finalised.

Jurisdiction

If the customer requests an explanation of a care decision that has been
reviewed by an Objections Officer, a SME can provide an explanation but
cannot change the care percentage determined by the Objections Officer.

An ARO can undertake a formal review of a care decision that has already
been reviewed by an Objections Officer. However, an ARO cannot change
the care percentage determined by the Objections Officer.

Similarly, an Objections Officer can undertake a review of a care
decision that has already been reviewed by an ARO. However, the
Objections Officer cannot change the care percentage determined by the
ARO, or the SME if the care percentage is changed as a result of a
reassessment (Secretary initiated review) as part of a SME explanation.

For example, an Objections Officer has completed a review of a care
decision and an ARO is also reviewing the decision. The ARO can review a
change in the rate of family assistance, the date of effect and any
debt, but they must apply the care percentage decided by the Objections
Officer.

Important - when discussing Centrelink internal review options for care decisions affecting family assistance and child support assessment

It is important to make sure:

the customer understands the difference between an explanation of the
decision and a formal review of the decision. This is because the
customer’s child support assessment, including their further right to
review, may be impacted differently if the decision is changed by the
SME or the ARO

the impact of any change to a care decision on a customer’s child
support assessment and their review rights are determined by the
timeframe from the original care decision date, and either the date:

-   the SME makes a Secretary initiated review decision, or
-   the customer applies for a formal review

Explanation or formal review

An explanation of a care decision may result in a reassessment
(Secretary initiated review). However, an explanation is not a formal
review. A customer can apply for a formal review of the decision without
requesting an explanation, or at any time after requesting an
explanation of the decision.

If there is sufficient reason, a SME may undertake a reassessment to
change the care decision (Secretary initiated review) as part of
providing an explanation. For example, a SME may:

-   correct an error in the recording of a care decision (the decision
    was made correctly but applied incorrectly), or
-   change the actual care decision (the decision was incorrect)

A change to the care decision following a Secretary initiated review
will affect a child support assessment differently from a change
following a formal review of the decision. Before undertaking a
Secretary initiated review, ensure the customer is aware of the possible
impact on their child support assessment.

If the customer does not agree with the original decision and would like
new information considered, confirm if they actually want to apply for a
formal review of the decision.

Child Support date of effect

Secretary initiated review

A Secretary initiated review of a care decision will change the child
support assessment from:

-   the date of the original care decision, if the Secretary initiated
    review decision was made within 28 days of the customer being
    notified of the original decision
-   the date the Secretary initiated review decision was made, if it was
    made more than 28 days after the customer was notified of the
    original decision

A Secretary initiated review decision cannot change a child support
assessment from a date earlier than the decision was made, even in
special circumstances.

Customer initiated review

A customer initiated review (a formal review by an ARO) of a care
decision will change the child support assessment from:

-   the date of the original care decision, if the application for a
    formal review was made within 28 days of the customer being notified
    of the original decision or if special circumstances apply
-   the date the customer applied for a formal review, if the
    application was made more than 28 days after they were notified of
    the original decision

The date of effect applied to a child support assessment following a
formal review of a decision may be backdated due to special
circumstances. The customer must contact Child Support if they would
like the special circumstances considered.

Further rights of review

If the care decision is changed as a result of a Secretary initiated
review, there is no right for an affected person to request a review of
the date of effect of the decision on their child support assessment.

The customer or another carer can apply for a formal review of a care
decision made by a SME as a result of a Secretary initiated review. The
date of effect of a child support assessment following a formal review
cannot be backdated to a date earlier than the date of effect determined
by the Secretary initiated review.

The customer or another carer can apply to the AAT for a review of a
decision made as the result of a formal review or an objection.

The Resources page contains a link to objection, complaint and review
information on the Services Australia website and examples of the
internal review process.

Related links

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
