
Customer compensation and act of grace payments 109-07040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers may be able to claim compensation
if they believe Services Australia has made a mistake that has caused
them financial loss or other detriment. This information helps staff
support customers who wish to make a compensation claim.

Reasons for compensation claims

Typically, compensation claims are made by customers who have suffered a
loss:

-   because they relied on incorrect or incomplete advice provided by an
    agency officer
-   (such as a personal injury) as a consequence of a wrongful act of
    the agency or one of its officers
-   because an agency officer failed to do something where the agency
    had an obligation to do something
-   because of defective administrative processes within the agency, or
-   because of a breach of privacy by the agency or one of its officers

Before making a claim

Not all mistakes made by the agency can be remedied by a compensation
payment. For example, compensation may not be payable if there is a
legislative mechanism that can remedy the mistake (a legislative right
of review).

If a customer wants to claim compensation or an act of grace payment,
encourage and help them to:

-   consider whether there is a quicker and simpler way to address their
    concern
-   make sure they have exhausted any available review and appeal
    options, including a formal review and review by the Administrative
    Appeals Tribunal if appropriate). If the review and appeal process
    is unlikely to provide an outcome for the customer, it may be
    appropriate for them to lodge a claim under the Scheme for
    Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration.
    Service Officers can contact the Customer Compensation Team for
    advice and information on 1800 995 496. Note that time limits may
    apply to lodging an appeal at the AAT
-   read the information on the Services Australia website about
    claiming compensation

Note: never discuss the possible outcome of a compensation claim.

The legal or administrative mechanism used to deal with a compensation
claim will vary depending on the nature of the claim and whether the
agency considers it may be legally liable if the matter went to court.
See below for more information.

Legal and administrative mechanisms

Legal liability

If it is reasonable to conclude that the agency would be found liable if
the matter were litigated in court, a claim must be settled in
accordance with Appendix C: Handling Monetary Claims set out in the
Legal Services Directions 2017 issued by the Attorney-General under
section 55ZF of the Judiciary Act 1903.

Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective Administration (CDDA)
Scheme

This is a discretionary mechanism which allows the agency to pay
compensation when a person or organisation has suffered detriment as a
result of the agency’s defective administration and when there is no
legal requirement to make a payment.

Compensation claims are assessed by the Customer Compensation Team per
guidelines issued by the Department of Finance.

Act of grace payments

The act of grace power is intended to ensure consistency and equity in
the impact of government activities where other legislative and
administrative provisions do not take sufficient account of the unique
circumstances of individual cases.

Act of grace decisions are made by the Department of Finance. Section 65
of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 allows
the Finance Minister or their delegate to make payments that would not
otherwise be authorised by law.

The Process page contains more detail.

The References page contains links to the relevant policy and
legislation.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and
Department of Finance websites for information for customers, links to
relevant forms, and a link to the Legal Services Division intranet page.

Related links

Commonwealth Ombudsman

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
