-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the option to pause recovery of a debt for
customers who request a reassessment, explanation, or apply for a review
of their debt.

Recovering debts

Services Australia has an obligation to recover debts under the:

-   Social Security Act
-   Family Assistance Act
-   Paid Parental Leave Act
-   Student Assistance Act, and
-   Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act debts

Pausing debt recovery

A debtor can ask that recovery of a debt be paused when they have:

-   provided new information for a reassessment of the debt
-   requested an explanation of the debt by a Subject Matter Expert
    (SME)
-   applied for a formal review of the debt by an Authorised Review
    Officer (ARO)
-   applied for an Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) first review of
    the debt

For more details, see Initial contact about a decision and the review of
decision process.

If the debt has already had an AAT first review and a customer then
lodges an application for an AAT second review, recovery can be paused
if:

-   an officer from the Legal Services Division representing Services
    Australia in proceedings makes a request to pause recovery, or
-   the agency is issued with a stay order by the AAT

Customers:

-   with multiple debts can only ask to pause recovery of the debts that
    are pending the outcome of a reassessment, explanation or review.
    Standard debt recovery processes apply to all other debts
-   can ask to pause recovery for a determined debt that is not yet due,
    pending the outcome of a reassessment, explanation or review

There is no need to revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO) where a
customer has applied for a review. If the customer meets relevant
conditions, consider a Departure Authorisation Certificate (DAC). See
Issue, vary or revoke a Departure Prohibition Order (DPO).

Adding payments to the debt

When debt recovery is paused pending a reassessment, explanation or
review of decision, transfers from over-recovered amounts of other debts
can still be applied.

Special rules apply to family assistance and child care payments, see
Transferring debt repayments.

Debts managed in Process Direct

Debts managed in Process Direct must be paused and restarted in Process
Direct.

The Resources page contains contact details.

Related links

Writing off Centrelink debts

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in Process Direct

Procedures for arranging withholdings to recover debts

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
