
Preparation of hearing papers for the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) 109-03030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For External Review of Decision (ERoD) Team and Authorised Review
Officers (ARO)

This document outlines how Authorised Review Officers (ARO) and External
Review of Decision (EROD) staff action customer appeals to the AAT for
first review of a decision.

Information to be provided to the AAT within 28 days

Services Australia must give the AAT the following hearing papers within
28 days:

a statement that includes:

-   the findings on material questions of fact referring to the
    evidence, or
-   other material on which those findings were made, giving reason for
    the decision, and

all other documents relevant to the review held or controlled by the
agency

See the References page for a link to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975.

Multi-Party reviews

Multi-Party reviews are reviews that involve more than one party.

Multi-party reviews fall under the following decision types:

-   Shared or disputed care decisions for Family Tax Benefit
-   Principal carer decisions for Parenting Payment
-   Disputed care decisions for Carer Payment

Consider releasing both customer and third party details to all involved
parties. Refer to Definitions in Resources.

ERoD team responsibilities

The ERoD team:

-   receives and registers requests for hearing papers from the AAT
-   identifies and collects all relevant information, including ARO
    decision statements, documents, screens, and letters
-   identifies sensitive or confidential documents for an application to
    the AAT for a non-disclosure order
-   compiles evidence into hearing papers in the correct format and
    order
-   marks and applies redactions to hearing documents in line with
    privacy guidelines
-   undertakes privacy and quality checks of hearing papers
-   sends hearing papers to the AAT and all parties to the review, and
-   uploads the AAT decision statement and extra documents to the
    customer record

The ERoD team manages all communication between the agency and the AAT
regarding AAT1 reviews.

Email queries requiring contact with the AAT for a first review matter
to the ERoD Appeals branch mailbox. ERoD liaise with and respond to the
AAT if needed.

Role of the ARO

AROs must:

-   identify all relevant evidence in their decision statement or ARO
    Notes
-   identify sensitive or confidential documents for an application to
    the AAT for a non-disclosure order

Confidentiality and disclosure

Providing information to customers

Do not give information to customers if disclosure is prohibited by:

-   privacy guidelines, or
-   a non-disclosure order from the AAT

Prohibited information may include statements by other parties or
details about another customer.

Do not disclose (in the statement or attachments):

-   the identity of informants who have supplied details, or
-   details given and/or received in confidence

This information is exempt under the Freedom of Information Act 1982.
Delete it from documents given to the customer.

Note: the nature of the confidential information may disclose the
identity of the source. For example, an informant's relationship with
the customer.

In this case:

-   remove it from the hearing documents, or
-   make an application for non-disclosure to the AAT

Include the substance of any confidential information in the statement.
Send the relevant document to the AAT for a non-disclosure order.

The AAT can order the agency to disclose the information:

-   in full
-   in part, or
-   not at all

Do not omit relevant statements of fact supported by appropriate
evidence because it may reflect adversely on:

-   the customer
-   other people, or
-   the agency

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms and intranet
links. There are also links to the AAT website and the Appeals Branch
intranet page.

Related links

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Actioning initial request statement from Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT)

Privacy checking and quality checking of documents for the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Actioning further information, hearing email requests and Orders to Make
Submissions for the AAT hearing

Administration requirements for Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)
hearing

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
