-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process for when a customer contacts about a
Centrelink decision that has been made and internal and external review
options.

Government intent

The right to have a decision reviewed exists for almost every decision
made by Centrelink. It is also possible for a customer to seek
compensation for financial losses or personal injury directly caused by
agency error through the Compensation for Detriment caused by Defective
Administration Scheme.

It is important that customers are aware of their review and appeal
rights if they do not understand or do not agree with a decision.

Internal review framework

The internal review framework aims to make sure that customers:

-   understand decisions that affect their entitlements
-   are given the chance to provide new information to have a decision
    reassessed
-   can exercise their right to apply for a formal review of a decision
    they disagree with

Documenting the decision discussion

Document a discussion about a decision on the customer’s record. This
will make sure that:

-   there is a record showing what was discussed with the customer
-   the contact can be acknowledged if the customer contacts again

Customer lodged new information

A customer may lodge new information about a decision that has been
made.

If the customer has not requested an explanation or applied for a formal
review of the decision, Service Officers should consider the new
information and:

-   if the decision can be reassessed and the outcome will be fully
    favourable, undertake a reassessment
-   if the new information will not change the decision, or if the
    decision can be reassessed but the outcome will not be fully
    favourable, make genuine attempts to contact the customer to discuss
    the new information and provide review and appeal options

Note: a reassessment is done under the authority of a Secretary
initiated review and must be documented on the customer’s record. These
reassessments are not recorded in the Appeals (APL) system and the
Internal Review/Explanation script is not used.

If the customer has requested an explanation or applied for a formal
review of the decision:

-   Service Officers should:
    make sure the explanation or formal review has been recorded
    document and upload the information to the customer’s record
-   the Subject Matter Expert (SME) or Authorised Review Officer (ARO)
    will consider the information

Note: the lodgement of new information is not automatically taken to be
a request for an explanation or an application for a formal review. If
in doubt, contact the customer and ask them what they want.

Review and appeal rights

After a decision has been made, the customer has the following internal
review options:

-   request an explanation
-   apply for a formal review

Note: a referral for an explanation or a formal review must be based on
what the customer wants. If there is any doubt, ask the customer.

After an internal review, the customer may have the right to a further
external review or appeal.

Options in the internal review process should not be referred to as
appeals, they are to be referred to as explanations or formal reviews.
External review options may be referred to as reviews or appeals.

Internal review process

When a customer contacts the agency to discuss a decision that has been
made:

-   Discuss the decision using information on the customer's record
-   Use the support resources available if the matter is complex, or if
    support is needed to finalise the customer's enquiry
-   Give the customer information about their options to request an
    explanation or apply for a formal review of the decision

The customer can choose to request an explanation of the decision, which
will be provided by a SME. The customer may choose this option if they
do not understand or would like more information about the decision.

The customer can choose to apply for a formal review of the decision,
which will be undertaken by an ARO. The customer may choose this option
if they do not agree with the decision.

Note: the referral for an explanation or a formal review should be based
on what the customer wants. If there is any doubt, ask the customer.

Service Officers not undertaking the SME role when discussing a decision
must still offer the customer the option to request an explanation, even
if they are recognised as a SME. For example, if they are not scheduled
as a SME at the time they are discussing the decision with the customer.

The internal review process should be straightforward for customers.
Errors should be fixed and any new information assessed as quickly as
possible. Customers do not have to provide new information to request an
explanation or apply for a formal review. If a customer wants to provide
new information, tell them to do this as soon as they can (preferably
within 7 days).

The Process page has scripting to help with conversations about the
internal review options.

Role of the decision maker

-   Try to contact the customer before finalising an unfavourable
    decision
-   Discuss the decision with the customer
-   Allow new information to be provided
-   Correct errors and undertake reassessments
-   Provide review and appeal rights

Role of the Service Officer

Discuss the decision with the customer

Document the discussion with the customer

Allow new information to be provided

Correct errors and undertake reassessments

Arrange other appropriate referrals or assistance including:

-   continuing payments pending review of the decision (for a formal
    review only)
-   debt recovery arrangements
-   referral to a social worker

Provide review and appeal rights

Role of the Subject Matter Expert (SME)

The SME is:

-   a skilled officer, independent of the original decision
-   responsible for explaining the decision when a customer has
    requested an explanation

See SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

Role of the Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

The ARO is:

-   a senior officer, independent of the original decision
-   responsible for reviewing the decision when a customer has applied
    for a formal review

See Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

External review process

After a formal review by an ARO, a customer may apply to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) for an AAT first review of the
decision. Certain decisions are excepted.

The following decisions cannot be reviewed by the AAT:

-   ABSTUDY entitlement and eligibility decisions. See Review of ABSTUDY
    and AIC decisions
-   JET Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA) decisions. See Reviews of
    JETCCFA decisions
-   Grants, formerly known as ex-gratia payments. Appeal rights
    following an ARO review depend on the guidelines for each grant. See
    Reviews of grants and ex-gratia payments

If a customer does not agree with an AAT first review decision, they may
apply for an AAT second review.

All parties to an AAT second review have a further right of appeal to
the Federal Court. Decisions of the Federal Court may be appealed, by
leave, to the High Court.

Complaints and FOI requests

A customer who requests an explanation or applies for a formal review of
a decision may also:

-   make a complaint about the service they received, or
-   request release of documents under the Freedom of Information Act
    1982

Contents

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Reviews by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

Court Appeals after an unfavourable decision by Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) (AAT second review)

Related links

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Priority explanation or formal review of a decision

Secretary initiated review of decision

Appeals (APL) system

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

Managing reviews and appeals paper files

Requests lodged under Freedom of Information Act 1982

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Customer compensation and act of grace payments

Australian Human Rights Commission

Commonwealth Ombudsman

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
