
Continuing payments pending review (PPR) 109-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for continuing payments to a customer
while an adverse decision is under review. This is called payment
pending review (PPR).

Adverse decisions - when PPR can apply

An adverse decision under:

-   social security law is one to suspend, cancel or reduce the rate of
    payment
-   family assistance law is any decision that ceases or reduces
    entitlement to family assistance

PPR can only apply:

during a review of an adverse decision by

-   an Authorised Review Officer (ARO), or
-   the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) (first review only), and

if the decision under review requires the decision maker to use
discretion or form an opinion

PPR must be applied when a customer applies for a formal review of a
decision to apply a serious failure or Unemployment Non-Payment Period
(UNPP). See PPR of decision to apply a penalty for non-compliance.

PPR cannot apply if the customer has requested an explanation of a
decision.

PPR may apply if the decision causes the customer financial hardship, or
significantly affects the customer or their family in other ways. For
example, the customer has a medical condition and cannot afford
treatment if payment stops.

PPR may still apply if the customer has been granted another payment
after a cancellation decision.

PPR should not be applied if the decision is about entitlement during a
limited period. For example, when Disability Support Pension (DSP) is
suspended for a fortnight due to non-compliance with participation
requirements,

If a customer is eligible for PPR, an application for a formal review
should not be recorded as a priority on the basis of total combined
income and assets less than the relevant maximum fortnightly payment
rate. A priority review may be recorded on other grounds.

Eligibility for PPR

For PPR to apply:

-   an application for a formal review of the decision must be made
    within 13 weeks of the customer being notified of the adverse
    decision
-   an application for a review by the AAT (first review) must be made
    within 13 weeks of the customer being notified of the outcome of the
    formal review

The decision to apply PPR is discretionary. Relevant considerations
include, but are not limited to, whether the customer:

-   will be placed in financial hardship
-   has dependent children or caring responsibilities that may be
    significantly affected
-   has a medical condition that may be significantly adversely
    affected, for example because they cannot afford treatment
-   is likely to be evicted or will be unable to pay rent or board

If PPR is applied, payment will be restored and back payment issued from
the date of the adverse decision. It is important to take into account
relevant information before this occurs. This includes income from
employment and changes in relationship circumstances.

During the PPR period, the customer must comply with all payment
requirements, such as reporting changes in circumstances. The rate of
payment must also take into account the customer's (and their partner's)
current income and assets.

Requesting PPR

A customer can make a verbal or written request for PPR.

Services Australia can decide to apply PPR without a request from the
customer.

Time limits

PPR can be considered at any time while a review is in progress.

However, PPR cannot be considered if the customer applied for a review
more than 13 weeks after being notified of the adverse decision.

Delegation

Staff at the APS4 level and above can apply PPR. Staff under APS4 level
should seek guidance from a Technical Peer Support (TPS) or equivalent.

PPR decisions are generally made by decision making teams. Authorised
Review Officers (ARO) do not make decisions to apply PPR.

Review of PPR decisions

An Authorised Review Officer (ARO) can review PPR decisions.

The Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) cannot review PPR decisions.

Ending PPR

PPR is to be ended:

When the ARO OR AAT review is completed, withdrawn or dismissed. If PPR
is not ended

-   within 13 weeks of the date of the review decision, a debt will be
    calculated from the first day after the end of the 13-week period
-   from the date the review was withdrawn or dismissed, a debt will be
    calculated from the day the review is withdrawn or dismissed

If the customer’s circumstances change and they are no longer in
financial hardship, or a new decision will result in a lower
entitlement. For example, Parenting Payment Single (PPS) is cancelled as
the customer was a member of a couple. PPR is applied while the decision
is reviewed. Before the review is completed, the customer’s last
dependent child leaves their care. PPR is ended and PPS cancelled

Note: there is no debt during the period PPR is authorised, unless there
is another issue affecting the customer’s entitlement. For example, the
customer does not declare their income from employment.

AAT (second review)

PPR cannot be applied during these reviews. However, the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT) can make a stay order to continue payment while
an AAT second review is in progress.

The customer must make a written request to the AAT for a stay order.

The AAT will instruct on terminating the AAT stay order once an AAT
second review is completed. See Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

The Resources page contains letter text and examples.

Related links

Payment pending review (PPR) of decision to cancel Disability Support
Pension (DSP) due to loss of medical qualification

Payment Pending Review (PPR) of decision to apply a penalty for
non-compliance

Payment Pending Review (PPR) of decision to apply a penalty for
non-compliance

Payment pending review (PPR) of a decision to impose a 26 week MALEP
exclusion period

Debts arising from Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) (AAT second
review) stay orders

Reviews and appeals

Reviews and appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or
cancellation decisions

Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
