[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines end of course reviews for students. These reviews
are to establish a customer’s continuing qualification for income
support payment.

Student reviews

All students will receive a course end review letter or form before
their student end date. These reviews are necessary to confirm the
student's future study intentions. That is to determine whether or not
the student will be continuing in the same course, changing course or
ceasing study altogether.

Reviews for YA, Austudy and ABSTUDY

Reviews for ABSTUDY customers will be issued 8 weeks prior to the
recorded student end date currently held on the student's record.
Reviews for YA and Austudy will be issued 4 weeks before the recorded
student end date for:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Austudy
-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) paid under Social Security Law
-   ABSTUDY PES

The exceptions to this are when:

-   the course duration is 8 weeks or less
-   the ABSTUDY claim was finalised less than 8 weeks prior to the
    recorded student end date
-   the YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY PES claim was finalised less than 4 weeks
    prior to the recorded student end date, or
-   the ABSTUDY, YA, Austudy or ABSTUDY PES was not current (that is,
    suspended) at the date the end of course review would have been
    issued

In these cases, a review will not be issued. The customer will need to
be manually issued the appropriate end of course review form or letter.
This is either:

-   ‘You need to act now Course end review' letter
-   Information required for continuation of ABSTUDY (SY075(m))

Processing help

To issue a letter or form for YA or Austudy customers, see the CED SY73
letter not sent - issue manually instructions in Processing end of
course and intention to study reviews for Austudy and Youth Allowance
(YA)

For ABSTUDY, PES or ABSTUDY PES customers, send the manual SY075(m) form
by post and create a document or note on the customer’s record. See
Resources for a link to the SY075(m) form.

The Resources page contains a link to the SY075(m) form.

Contents

Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and PES students

Processing end of course reviews for Austudy and Youth Allowance (YA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
