
Income stream customer reviews – account-based and market-linked income streams 110-20040148

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document has information on the review letters. Customers or their
partners get these letters if they have an account-based or a
market-linked income stream that did not update with the Automation of
Income Stream Reviews (AISR) process.

Purpose

Process Direct creates a customer review when the account-based or
market-linked cannot be matched to an income stream provider. This
excludes:

-   Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF)
-   Small Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)
    Superannuation Funds (SAF)

Customers, or their partner, get a review letter when their income
stream product:

-   does not auto-match the provider's information, and
-   they have not updated their product details

If there is no automated review or other update, they will get the
letter in:

-   October, for the August review, or
-   April, for the February review

For details about data matching, see:

-   Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews
-   Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews
-   Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

See Income stream reviews for more details about:

-   review cycles
-   due dates, and
-   requests for information

Requests for review information

The income stream review letter asks the customer to update their income
stream details. It tells them what details to update and the due date.

These letters may list any income streams held by their partner, where
their partner does not get an income support payment. The customer must
provide the requested information for each product listed.

If the customer gets letters from Services Australia online, they will
get an SMS or an email. This will tell them that the review letter is in
their myGov inbox.

What information to supply

The type of information the customer needs to give Service Australia
depends on the type of income stream under review. How they supply this
information will also differ.

October letter review - after the August AISR review

Category 2 account-based and market-linked income streams, must supply:

-   the 1 July balance
-   the gross annual income
-   any partial commutations in the previous financial year

Category 9 income streams only need the current or 1 July account
balance.

April letter review - after the February AISR review

Category 2 account-based and market-linked income streams must supply:

-   any partial commutations for the current financial year, and
-   the balance as at 31 December, or
-   the current balance

Category 9 income streams will only need the:

-   31 December balance, or
-   current balance

Review activity generated in Process Direct (PD) under AISR

The review activity generates in Process Direct (PD). These reviews are:

-   not on the Future Activity List (FAL) screen, and
-   must not be actioned from FAL

Reviews generated by PD differ to reviews on FAL, as they do not have to
be manually finalised. The system will:

-   periodically check for the required updates to the income stream,
    and
-   close the review when the review information is supplied or applied

The Notes section of PD shows how the customer data was supplied. For
example, the customer uploaded an income stream schedule.

Do not complete the update until:

-   all requested information has been provided, and
-   the details are complete for that product's review

For details about the various types of reviews, see Income stream
reviews.

Completing the review

Customers complete these reviews online. Activities that automatically
finalise do not create a DOC on the record.

The system may determine that some cases require a manual handoff, and
will create a Change of Circumstances (CoC) activity. The CoC Notes will
have details about why the handoff generated.

These handoffs require manual intervention by a Service Officer with the
right skill tag.

The Resources page has a link to Process Direct current issues and
questions and answers to help customers complete income stream reviews
online. There is information about how to determine if an account
balance increase or decrease is outside the threshold.

Related links

Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Income stream reviews

Income stream customer reviews - defined benefit income streams

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

Income stream indexation review

February income stream reviews

August income stream reviews

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
