
Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist staff when updating reviews
(such as Compliance and Fraud Reviews) processed in the Integrated
Review System (IRS).

Updating a review in the IRS

The IRS co-ordinates review actioning and can be used to monitor the
progress of, perform actions on, and record the result of a review.
Updating a review in the IRS may be done for the following reasons:

-   to commence customer or third party contact
-   to start the review without customer or third party contact
-   to update the review region, review method, workgroup and position,
    or keywords
-   to update the review contact details, or
-   to bulk transfer reviews to another processing site

Service Updates and Host Reviews

Service Updates and Host Reviews are not able to be manually progressed
in the IRS as all actions relating to the Service Update or Review are
performed in the Service Profiling or relevant host system.

Service Updates are usually loaded to IRS as a 'STA'rted Service Update
which will occur once the Service Component has been started in the
Service Profiling System.

Host Reviews are normally loaded as 'FUT'ure or 'REG'istered reviews and
are started once the activities in the host system are actioned.

Commencing the review

It is important that a review is started in IRS at the same time the
investigation into the review is commenced because Attribution of
activities to a review can only occur once the review has been started,
and up to the point where the review is finalised. The three exceptions
to this are:

-   for Random Sample Surveys, which can have actions attributed from
    the load of the review, through the actioning period and after the
    review has been finalised
-   where restoration processing has been applied to automatically
    attribute actions to a review within the Applicable Restoration
    Period (ARP); and
-   manually adding a debt to a finalised Service Update or Host Review

Once a review has been started, then a sub status code can be applied to
identify if the started review is 'HLD' (Held) or 'DUE' (Due).

Managing the review in IRS

The Review Status of the review will be updated from 'REG'istered to
'STA'rted after a contact has been recorded on the Review Contact
Summary (IRCS) and Review Contact Details (IRCD) screens. A review can
also be manually started if the Review Type is approved to start a
review by this method.

The Manage Reviews (IRMR) screen can also be used to update the review
data, such as amending a Review Method from 'MAI' (Mail) to 'FLD'
(Field) or to add or delete a keyword associated with a review.

Reviews can also be bulk managed using the Bulk Manage (IRBM) screen.
The IRBM screen is useful to bulk transfer a set of reviews to another
processing site, or to update a keyword on a range of reviews.

The Review Action (IRRA) screen

Actions performed over the life of a review are displayed on the IRRA
screen. This screen logs details such as how and where the review was
commenced, actioning that took place on the review, updates to work
groups and positions, reassessments, as well as some finalisation
details and any applicable restoration period that has been applied. The
logging of actions is based on what was updated during the course of the
review and when details were updated as part of the review.

Note: where the IRRA screen displays 'contact was initiated', it is
reflecting that contact details have been added to the IRCS screen
advising a contact has been made. The date captured by the IRRA screen
for this action is not the date the contact was made, but the date the
IRCD screen was updated. If the IRCS screen is not accurately updated,
then the date on the IRRA screen will not correspond to the actual date
the contacts were made.

Customer and third party contacts

All customer and third party contacts should be updated on the IRCS and
IRCD screens. The updates should be made on the date of contact rather
than back-dating information after the contact has been sent. It is not
appropriate to record non-factual details for a contact, for example,
advising the customer was contacted by phone when that contact did not
exist. The adding of a contact sets up a Review Contact Period. The
procedure, Finalising and Attributing actions to a Service Update or
Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS), contains further
information on the Review Contact Period.

Starting a Review when the customer is not current

A review should only be started on a non-current customer if information
received as part of the review supports that the customer may not have
been receiving the correct entitlement for a past period. The review
should be cancelled if the customer's entitlement for a past period is
not being questioned.

The Resources page provides a list of the Review Types which can be
manually started using the Manage Review (IRMR) screen.

Related links

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually attributing a debt to a finalised Service Update or Review in
the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
