[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a range of activities undertaken by the
Compliance Assurance and Debt Operations Division to ensure customers
receive the right payment and the right amount. They also reduce the
risk of customers incurring a debt.

Government intent

Services Australia undertakes a diverse range of compliance and
assurance activities to protect the integrity of its service delivery
and government outlays. The government's primary focus is educating
customers about their rights and obligations and giving them information
to support voluntary compliance.

Compliance and Assurance Programme

The programme helps protect Australia's welfare system. Its activities
provide assurance to government, policy departments and key stakeholders
that payment risks are managed effectively, efficiently and
appropriately.

The Compliance Programme focus is on:

-   educating customers about their reporting obligations to stop and/or
    minimise customers incurring debts
-   prevention and early intervention strategies
-   early, effective and high quality engagement with customers
-   reducing outstanding debts
-   increasing fraud detection
-   building capability to detect new and emerging risks

There is more information about the agency's compliance program on the
Services Australia website.

A separate procedure deals with reviews related to appeals.

For specific reviews and intervention processes, refer to the list
below.

Earned Income Interventions (EII)

These interventions address the risks associated with income earned
through personal exertion.

They cover all full-time, part-time and casual work for customers and
their partners. Earned income does not include income from
self-employment.

Unearned Income Interventions (UII)

These interventions address the risks associated with income from means
other than personal exertion. This includes self-employment, assets and
investments owned by customers and their partners.

The income may not be declared, or the amount received may be
understated.

Qualification Interventions

These interventions address the risks associated with a customer's
qualification requirements.

They address the risk that, due to changes in their circumstances,
customers:

-   may no longer be qualified for payments or concessions they are
    receiving, or
-   may receive an incorrect rate of payment

Relationship Status Interventions (RSI)

These interventions address the risks associated with customers who may
receive the incorrect rate of payments because of their relationship
status.

Study Load Interventions (SLI)

These interventions address the risks associated with customers who may
receive an incorrect rate of payment due to ceasing or altering their
study workload.

Data matching

All Compliance Assurance and Debt Operations Division data matching is
conducted as per the Guidelines on Data Matching in Australian
Government Administration issued by the Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner.

The Resources page has a link to the Services Australia website and
phone contact requirements.

Contents

Check and update past income (CUPI) service

Customer contact about compliance intervention decision

Earned Income Intervention (EII)

EIC online compliance interventions

Qualification Interventions

Manual Income Confirmation (MIC) interventions

Relationship Status Interventions (RSI)

Study Load Interventions

Unearned Income Intervention (UII)

Compliance intervention - assessing additional risk

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
