
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch staff only.

This document outlines the guidelines for seeking advice from the CDPP
for fraud investigations. It outlines what advice can be given, how the
request is made, and recording details on the investigation record.

The prosecution process

The CDPP is an integral part of the prosecution process. The CDPP
regards the provision of ongoing advice during investigations as a
valuable practice that is in the interest of both the CDPP and the
Intelligence and Investigations Branch.

The CDPP will ordinarily give advice at the investigative stage where
resources and priorities permit. Requests for advice at the
investigative stage need to be targeted to matters of particular
seriousness, complexity or sensitivity.

Advice that can be given

Advice on any questions of law that arise during the investigation of an
alleged offence against Commonwealth law. In particular, advice on the
identification of the elements of offence, any evidentiary issues, the
requirements of a brief of evidence and any issues arising under the
Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth.

The CDPP does not provide advice on whether the CDPP would prosecute or
whether prosecution would be in the public interest in certain
scenarios, but can recommend investigation avenues and processes.

Legal Services Division

Services Australia Legal Services Division is also available to provide
advice if it is not appropriate to consult with the CDPP. The
Operational Policy Team must be consulted before independently seeking
any advice, to check whether relevant legal advice has previously been
provided. The Operational Policy Team will coordinate all requests for
legal advice.

The Resources page contains links to Legal Services Division, CDPP and
CDPP Partner Agencies website.

Related links

Brief of evidence preparation

Prosecution charges, summons and court proceedings and result

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
