
Product Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews 110-18071729

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document outlines how to process a manual product match for income
stream products. It explains the product matching process for the
Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR) measure. A manual product
match is needed when product details sent by an income stream provider/
administrator do not fully match a product listed on a customer's
Services Australia record.

Purpose

The AISR measure requires income stream providers, other than
Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF) and Small APRA Funds (SAF), to
provide data about all of their members electronically to the agency.
This is to identify and review certain types of income streams held by
customers, concession cardholders and their partners.

The AISR measure replaced the voluntary electronic data exchange in
place with some income stream providers before 2019.

An income stream provider/ administrator needs to transfer income stream
data for all of their members at specific times of the year, depending
on the type of income stream product and the review type.

See Income stream reviews for details about the review cycles for income
streams.

Product matching process

New automated matching process

The product matching process was automated in October 2021. Before these
changes, product matching was a partially manual process.

Current process

The Identity Matching process matches an income stream provider's
customer with a customer of the agency.

The system then compares the provider's product data with the products
listed on the customer's record.

The system will determine if there is a possible match by comparing the
provider data against income stream products recorded on SUPS or managed
investments coded on MIS/MIUS.

If there is a:

full product match, where at least the product type and product
reference number (PRN) on the customer’s record match data from the
provider, an automatic update is attempted

partial match, some products with no match will generate an automatic
update manual handoff activity for investigation for a new product under
the following keywords:

-   ISRNEWAML for products purchased within the last 12 months
-   ISRNMF for products that contain a partial match on the customer’s
    record, or Account-Based products purchased on or after 1 January
    2015 and outside the last 12 months
-   ISRREV for products with no partial match that contain a
    reversionary beneficiary indicator in the provider data.

Products that do not have a partial match and do not meet additional
criteria above on the customer’s record for a manual handoff will
forward to compliance for action.

Incorrect match finalised

An incorrectly confirmed match identified by a quality check or follow
up will need undoing.

The Service Officer will need to escalate this via their local Technical
Peer Support Officer who will then escalate the matter to the Means Test
team.

Successor funds transfers

An income stream provider initiates a successor funds transfer when all
the members of a superannuation fund are transferred to another
superannuation fund under the same terms and conditions as before the
transfer.

The income stream will continue to have the same purchase date, purchase
price, relevant number and total commutations since purchase date as the
original income stream. The only change would be to the provider name
and possibly the product reference number.

In these situations, check scanned documents. If necessary, contact the
customer to confirm whether their income stream has been transferred to
a new provider.

Related links

Identity Matching - Automation of Income Stream Reviews

Income stream reviews

Process Direct

Work Optimiser for staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
