
Reviewing actuarial certificates for lifetime or life expectancy asset test exempt income streams from Self Managed or Small APRA Super Funds 110-02060050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to be followed when reviewing the
actuarial certificate provided by a customer for a lifetime or life
expectancy Asset Test Exempt (ATE) income stream paid from their Self
Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF) or Small APRA Superannuation Fund
(SAF). A request for a new actuarial certificate is part of the August
income stream reviews.

On this Page:

Actuarial certificate not required

Actuarial certificates are not required for any of the following:

-   for account-based (including market-linked) income streams paid from
    a SMSF or a SAF
-   for any other asset-tested income streams paid from a SMSF or a SAF
-   for any income streams that are purchased from the market on a
    commercial basis or acquired from large company superannuation funds
    or public sector superannuation funds

Actuarial certificate requirements

If a lifetime or life expectancy ATE income stream is paid from a SMSF
or SAF, the customer (or trustee) must provide Services Australia with
an actuarial certificate that indicates whether, for the financial year
in which the certificate is given, there is a high probability that the
fund can meet the income stream payments as specified under the fund's
trust deed or governing rules.

Actuarial certificates must be prepared in accordance with Institute of
Actuaries (IAA) Professional Standard 410 (PS410) or Guidance Note (GN)
465 (for valuations based on financial years up and including 2017-18).
If an actuarial certificate refers to professional standard other than
PS410 or guidance note GN465, the certificate should state that it is a
PS410 or GN465 that specifies requirement for high probability.
Note: for valuations on or after 1 January 2018, Guide Note 465 -
Statement of Opinion has been replaced by Professional Standard 410
(PS410) of the IAA. For the 2017-18 financial year, PS410 or GN465 can
be used to form the assessment of high probability.

The certificate must:

-   Specify an 'in force' period of 1 July to 30 June of the financial
    year in which the certification occurs
-   Be certified between 1 July and 31 December of the current financial
    year
-   Be provided to Services Australia by 21 January of the current
    financial year.
    Note: an additional three weeks from 31 December is given only for
    the provision of the certificate to take into account any delays
    during the Christmas period. The certification date cannot be after
    31 December
-   Be based on the characteristics of the income stream to which it
    relates

Multiple certificates provided during the financial year

Customers with lifetime or life expectancy ATE income streams from SMSFs
or SAFs can only provide one actuarial certificate for each financial
year. If more than one certificate is provided for a particular
financial year, only the first certificate given will have effect, not
any of the subsequent certificates.

ATE income streams paid from a SMSF or a SAF

A single actuarial certificate may be accepted if there are multiple ATE
lifetime or life expectancy income streams paid from a SMSF or SAF,
however, the actuarial certificate should state high probability opinion
for each income stream.

This is supported by Guide to Social Security Law 4.9.4.40, which states
the certificate must provide a separate statement for each income stream
to clearly differentiate between them. See the References page for
further information. Separate statements mean separate high probability
opinions for each income stream. However, in such cases, there is no
'one' particular set format in which a high probability opinion can be
given for each individual income stream.

26 week grace period for provision of certificate

Subsections 9A(1C) and 9B(1C) of the Social Security Act 1991 clarify
that the grace period in which a person must provide a new actuarial
certificate for the income stream applies from the beginning of the
particular financial year, that is, from 1 July and ends at the earlier
of the following:

-   when a new actuarial certificate is provided in relation to that
    income stream for that financial year
-   31 December of that financial year

An additional three weeks grace period from 31 December is given for the
provision of the certificate to take into account any delays during the
Christmas period. The certification date cannot be after 31 December.

Retaining the ATE status

The product retains its ATE status until a new actuarial certificate is
provided within the grace period if it continues to meet the
requirements for ATE in section 9A(2) or section 9B(2) of the Social
Security Act 1991.
Note: the addition of funds (for example, topping up the income stream)
or use of funds from outside the income stream (for example, to meet
administrative expenses) or reduction of income payments to meet the
high probability requirements is not permissible.

Once a new actuarial certificate is provided, the grace period finishes
irrespective of whether or not the certificate specifies a high
probability opinion.

ATE exemption

If the certification date of the new certificate is after 31 December or
the certificate has been provided after 21 January, the income stream
will permanently lose its asset-test exemption (ATE) from 1 January. The
loss of ATE status does not mean that it is now a new income stream. It
is still the same income stream that is reassessed as non-complying and
therefore, asset-tested instead of asset-test exempt.

The original income stream should be cancelled from 1 January and
re-coded as non-complying from the same date with the same purchase
price, purchase date, relevant number, etc. as the original cancelled
income stream. The system will then automatically deplete the purchase
price resulting in the correct assessable asset value.

The customer should be formally notified about the decision to reassess
the income stream as asset-tested from 1 January for non-provision of
the actuarial certificate by 21 January or because the actuarial
certificate provided has a certification date after 31 December.

Before 1 July 2012, the customer's entitlement was to be assessed as if
the income stream had never been ATE which may have resulted in a debt
being raised and recovered. This no longer applies from the 2012-13
financial year.

High probability opinion

Actuarial certificate provided by 21 January and certification date
before 1 January but does not specify 'high probability' opinion -
restructure period of up to 12 weeks.

Under the social security legislation, if a valid actuarial certificate
does not specify a high probability opinion, the income stream will lose
its asset-test exemption (ATE) status from the date of provision of the
new certificate to Services Australia.

Exception: Department of Social Services (DSS) will allow a restructure
period of up to 12 weeks from the date the new certificate was provided
to Services Australia. This is only if the customer intends to fully
commute and rollover the original income stream, (entire amount
including reserves), to an ATE lifetime, or life expectancy income
stream from a retail provider and retain ATE status while the transfer
is being arranged. These changes must happen within the restructure
period.

The 12 week period can be extended to 18 weeks if:

-   the customer has taken all steps to restructure their original ATE
    income stream within 12 weeks, and
-   for reasons outside their control, the new income stream has not
    commenced within the 12 weeks

Note: only certain types of income streams can be purchased if the new
income stream is to retain asset-test exemption.

Required action not taken in the restructure period

The income stream will permanently lose its ATE status where:

no action is taken, or

the new ATE lifetime or life expectancy income stream is not purchased,
or the original ATE income stream not commuted or transferred to an
asset-tested market linked income stream (MLI):

-   within the 12 week period, or
-   within the 18 week period if an extension has been granted

If the ATE status is lost, the income stream must be manually reassessed
as non-complying and asset-tested from the date the actuarial
certificate was provided to Services Australia. Any debt resulting from
the reassessment of the income stream as asset-tested has to be raised
and recovered.

Rollover after the restructure period

If ATE status is lost, and the, now asset tested income stream is
commuted and rolled over to a lifetime, or life expectancy ATE income
stream from a retail provider after the restructure period, the new
income stream cannot be treated as an ATE income stream.
Note: the restructure period is 12 weeks but can be 18 weeks if an
extension is granted.

This is because the new income stream will not meet the conditions for
retaining asset-test exemption as the original income stream has already
lost ATE status and is now an asset-tested income stream. The new income
stream is treated as an asset-tested income stream (long term).

Commutation and rollover to a new ATE income stream

Until 1 January 2006, SMSFs and SAFs were able to offer any type of
income stream, with allocated income streams being the most common type.
However, from 1 January 2006, new lifetime or life expectancy asset-test
exemption (ATE) income streams cannot be commenced from a SMSF or SAF.

Lifetime and life expectancy ATE income streams that were commenced
before 1 January 2006 can continue to make payments but, if these income
streams are commuted, the assets can only be used to purchase certain
types of income streams in order to retain asset-test exemption,
depending on the purchase date of the original income stream.
Note: the income stream must be fully commuted and the entire amount
including the reserves used to purchase the new income stream for
retaining asset-test exemption.

Purchased before 20 September 2004

Original lifetime or life expectancy ATE income stream purchased before
20 September 2004 (100% asset-test exempt income stream)

The commuted assets can only be used to purchase a lifetime or life
expectancy ATE income stream directly from a retail provider under the
conditions for retaining asset-test exemption.
Note: the commuted assets cannot be used to purchase an ATE MLI.
Alternatively, the commuted assets may be used to purchase a lifetime or
life expectancy ATE annuity (from the statutory fund or benefit fund of
a life office or friendly society) that is then used to source the
income stream payments from the SMSF or SAF.

Non-allowable commutation

If the customer commutes a 100% ATE income stream and directly rolls
over the proceeds to a MLI on or after 20 September 2007, the
commutation is treated as a non-allowable commutation. The original
income stream should be treated as if it had never been ATE and this
would result in a debt being raised and recovered under section 1223A.

The MLI must also be assessed as an asset-tested income stream as the
purchase date is on or after 20 September 2007.
Note: the debt waiver provisions are available from 25 August 2011. This
relief is not the same as the temporary (old or enhanced) debt relief
that was available in the 2009-2010 financial year. Under the debt
waiver provisions, any debt raised as a result of the non-allowable
commutation can be waived under section 1237AB of the Social Security
Act 1991.

Purchased after 20 September 2004

Original lifetime or life expectancy ATE income stream purchased on or
after 20 September 2004 and before 1 January 2006 (50% ATE income
stream).

The commuted assets may be used to purchase a MLI from the SMSF or SAF
or an ATE lifetime or life expectancy or MLI directly from a retail
provider under the conditions for retaining asset-test exemption.

Alternatively, the commuted assets may be used to purchase a lifetime or
life expectancy ATE annuity (from the statutory fund or benefit fund of
a life office or friendly society) that is then used to source the
income stream payments from the SMSF or SAF.

Related links

August income stream reviews

Adding or updating a life expectancy income stream

Adding or updating a lifetime income stream

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Income stream reviews

Debts arising from commutation of asset-test exempt income streams

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
