
Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080110

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For service centre, zone office and Review staff.

This document outlines information about the reviews in the Integrated
Review System (IRS) that may be linked.

On this Page:

Linking Reviews

A process of linking is used in the IRS to identify a common
relationship between two or more different customers. Reviews for
different customers may be linked to each other and although each review
will be processed separately the action taken on one review may require
consequential action on the other review. Some links in the IRS will be
done automatically (for example, Internal Data Match reviews for people
living at the same address and paying rent).

Linking multiple reviews

More than two reviews may be linked, so a customer may have links to
several other customers. Reviews on a customer's record cannot be linked
to other reviews on the same customer record and only IRS processed
reviews, such as Compliance or Fraud reviews will be able to be linked
manually.

Service Updates and Host Reviews are not able to be manually linked as
they cannot be processed from within IRS.

Manual linking

Examples of situations where reviews could be manually linked include:

-   more than one person living at the same address
-   a number of people working for the same employer
-   parent and sibling related investigations
-   people involved in business together
-   customers are possibly members of a couple

Examples of situations where reviews could be automatically linked
include:

-   Secondary Partner Program Reviews
-   Secondary Partner Service Updates
-   Secondary Carer Payment Program Reviews

Note: Linking of reviews in the IRS has a different meaning from linking
existing customers in the Centrelink system.

Linking may be done across different environments.

The Resources page contains information on the Link Summary (IRLS)
screen and valid Link Reason codes.

Related links

Combining a review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
