
Customer contact about compliance intervention decision 110-19061825

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting compliance interventions

This document explains the process for Compliance Officers (CO) when
customers contact Services Australia about a compliance intervention
decision.

Explaining decisions to customers

Customers are encouraged to call the agency if they want to discuss
their compliance intervention decision.

When a customer contacts a CO about a compliance intervention decision,
the CO must discuss the decision using information from the customer’s
record, and advise them of their review and appeal rights.

Customer contact must meet the agency's service commitments.

If the customer requests details about a debt decision, clarify with the
customer exactly what information or documents they need.

For documents specific to online compliance interventions, see
Information and documentation available for administrative release to
online compliance intervention customers.

For more details, see Administrative Release and Customer requests
access to their personal information.

Averaged ATO income information

Services Australia no longer raise income compliance debts based wholly
or partially on averaged ATO income information.

Pre 2015 debt calculations where averaged ATO income information was used

Where a customer contacts about an explanation of a decision or a SME
regarding a debt that was raised Pre 2015 where ATO income information
was averaged, the Subject Matter Expert (SME) should investigate the
customer’s record and get more information from the customer. The
Process page has more information.

December 2020 - Change Assessment Model (CAM)

Where a customer contacts about an explanation of a decision or a SME
regarding a debt that was raised prior to the CAM changes, the Subject
Matter Expert (SME) should investigate the customer’s record and get
more information from the customer. The Process page has more
information.

Using bank statements to verify employment income

Where a customer contacts about an explanation of a decision or a SME
regarding a debt that was raised using bank statements, the Subject
Matter Expert (SME) should investigate the customer’s record and obtain
further information from the customer.

Where it has been identified that bank statements were used in a debt
calculation, in the first instance, seek payslips or payroll information
from the customer.

The Process page has more information.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website, the
Service Desk and ECRM Image Deletion request forms, question set for use
of bank statements, DOC requirements, the net to gross income
calculation tool, approved Q053 letter text and the Administrative
Release letter template.

Related links

Customer requests access to their personal information

Recovery of debts pending a reassessment, explanation or formal review
of decision

Using ADEX to explain a system generated debt

Using the MultiCal Debt calculator

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Upload documents service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
