
Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For service centre, zone office and Review Staff.

This document outlines information to assist the user when searching for
individual or groups of Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated
Review System (IRS). IRS processes and stores information relating to
Service Updates and Reviews undertaken by Centrelink staff.

On this Page:

Using the IRS

IRS can be used to:

-   identify customer records which have had a Service Update or Review
-   monitor the progress of a Service Update or Review
-   action the review (for reviews processed within IRS)
-   identify review results for analysis
-   follow the progress by Review Status
-   identify cancelled Service Updates and Reviews

Reviews processed in IRS, such as Compliance or Fraud Reviews, are also
managed by IRS search screens to identify started, held and due review
activity. This is similar to managing activities using Activity
Management.

Service Updates and Reviews

Service Updates and Reviews can be identified in the IRS by either
searching for individual customer records or by searching for groupings
of Service Updates and Reviews.

To search for Service Updates and Reviews within the IRS, the screens to
access are the:

-   Review Enquiry (IRRE) screen
-   National Search (IRNS) screen
-   Review Totals (IRRT) screen, and
-   Review Performance (IRRP) screen

Centrelink system

In the Centrelink system, a search for individual customer records can
be actioned on the Name Search (IN) screen or by using the customer's
Customer Reference Number (CRN).

Any Service Updates or Reviews which exist for the customer will be
displayed on the Review Summary (IRRS) screen.

When deciding which review to undertake, Service Zone Compliance staff
should ensure that correct procedures for prioritising reviews are
followed.

The Resources page contains details of the layout of the search screens
for the IRS.

Related links

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Navigating in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

Extracting Service Updates and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
