[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the government intent behind Rent Assistance (RA)
reviews.

Government intent

It is the government intent that if a customer is in receipt of RA,
their RA may be reviewed to make sure that their circumstances are being
assessed accurately and they are receiving the correct entitlement.

Reviews

Reviews are conducted on a regular basis.

Customers may be selected for a RA Review if they have a rent
verification code of any of the following:

-   VEC (Verified (Rent Certificate))
-   VED (Verified (Rent Declaration))
-   VEF (Verified (Formal)), or
-   EXB (Exempt - customer in boarding style accommodation)

Customers with a rent verification code of VEE (Verified (electronic))
may also be selected if they have not verified their rent in the
previous 12 months. Note: customers with a verification code of EXB may
be asked to verify their circumstances as part of the review.

If a customer is selected, an Advice of RA Review will be issued. This
advice will be pre-populated with their current accommodation details
from their record.

Even if a customer has provided a copy of a lease or tenancy agreement,
a review may still be issued.

Responding to a review

If a customer fails to respond to a review within the specified time
frame, RA will cease.

If a customer and partner are both issued with a review, only one is
required to respond.

Customers should be encouraged to use self service to respond to the
review and can confirm or update their details via:

-   phone self service
-   online services
-   Express Plus Centrelink app, or
-   contacting the Rent Review processing team

Customers can access their Rent Assistance Profile Review online by:

-   logging into my.gov.au
-   signing in to access their Centrelink online account
-   selecting My Details from the menu
-   selecting Personal and contact details
-   then Rent Assistance reviews

The Rent Assistance Profile Review is also available from the Tasks
section on the landing page.

See Rent Assistance (RA) Profile reviews for further information.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Rent Review
processing team.

Contents

Rent Assistance (RA) Profile reviews

Accommodation Circumstance Intervention (ACI)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
