
Family assistance remediation processing 110-21011218

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to ensure family assistance payments are
correctly assessed and updated when remediating a customer record. These
payments are Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Benefit (CCB), Child
Care Rebate (CCR) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Remediation processing

In some cases, income averaging applied to income support payments had
flow on impacts to family assistance payments. Remediation activity will
address the impacts on all affected payments.

Staff will need to complete all actions relating to the customer during
remediation initial assessment. This will include:

-   determining if an income compliance remediation activity impacts
    FTB, CCB, CCR or CCS and ensuring the result is correct
-   understanding how income compliance remediation affects
    reconciliation outcomes

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

FTB is a payment intended to help customers with the cost of raising
children.

Customers can choose to receive their FTB during the year as fortnightly
instalments, or as a lump sum when their actual income is confirmed
after the end of the financial year. Families who chose to receive their
FTB fortnightly need to provide an estimate of their family income for
each financial year.

After the end of the financial year, FTB payments are reconciled by
comparing:

-   the amount the customer received based on their estimated family
    income, with
-   the amount they are entitled to receive based on their actual family
    income for the full financial year

Income support payment customers are paid FTB fortnightly and receive
FTB Part A free of the income test unless they are in an employment
income nil rate period. Single income support payment customers receive
FTB Part B free of the income test.

Child Care Formal

Child Care Formal includes CCB and CCR.

CCB was similar to FTB as it was paid during a financial year based on
an income estimate, then reconciled after the financial year based on
actual income and lodgement details. The rate of CCB a customer was
entitled to changes if they were in receipt of an income support
payment. The customer’s child care fee amount was reduced by their CCB
percentage.

CCR was paid to customers based on their out-of-pocket expenses after
the CCB reduction was applied to childcare fees. Changing how much CCB a
customer received also affected CCR. This is because the customer’s
out-of-pocket expenses changed. CCR eligibility was determined on CCB
eligibility and the CCR activity test.

Note: from 2 July 2018, CCS replaced CCB/CCR. Therefore, CCF outcomes
will only be identified before the 2018-19 financial year. This is an
important date to remember.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

This is a Process Direct (PD) native payment so staff will be unable to
identify any impacts to CCS during income compliance remediation
processing.

It is different to CCF because being on an income support payment (ISP)
does not change the percentage of fee reduction that a customer
receives. Therefore, if a customer loses ISP entitlement for any period
in the 2018-19 financial year it does not affect the CCS rate.

The number of hours a person can receive a fee reduction per fortnight
may be impacted by ISP status.

The Resources page contains Fast Note templates.

Related links

Income compliance remediation processing

Income compliance remediation initial assessment

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
