-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides an overview of reporting requirements.

Reporting requirements

A separate procedure covers updates to annual income estimates for
family assistance.

To report employment income before departure or while overseas, see
Recording and correcting employment income. To report income earned
overseas, see Foreign income and assets.

Customers are required to report any changes to their circumstances that
may affect their payment, including receiving employment income. This is
so their correct entitlement and qualification can be determined.

Customers who receive, or who have partners receiving employment income
are required to report regularly (usually fortnightly) to Services
Australia. The frequency of customer reporting is automatically
determined by service profiling. Customers have an obligation to report
on their due date. Some customers with employment income may not have to
regularly report. For example, if:

-   they are employed by an Australian Disability Enterprise (ADE) and
    their employer reports on their behalf using Electronic Employer
    Reporting (EER)
-   they are receiving Disability Support Pension (Blind) or Age Pension
    (Blind),or
-   their employment income is regular (a regular monthly salary) and an
    Pension Monthly Exception Rule is met

Customers receiving a payment with mutual obligation or participation
requirements are also required to report regularly even if they, and
their partner if they have one, are not currently receiving employment
income. This is because:

-   their mutual obligation or participation requirements mean they have
    a higher chance of commencing employment, and
-   it allows Services Australia to confirm that Centrelink managed job
    seekers are meeting their requirements and allows for a correction
    to their requirements in a timely manner if they are not

Note: statement reporting requirements that applied to ParentsNext
customers due to their participation requirements ceased in May 2023.
ParentsNext participants will, however, still be required to report if
they are receiving or commence receiving employment income.

The Resources page contains:

-   a reporting profile
-   reporting and payments for members of a couple
-   a link to the Information you need to know about reporting
-   the Earnings Worksheet (SU505(I)) booklet
-   links to Digital Support Resources

Reporting frequency

Customers generally need to report income:

-   fortnightly (statement reporter), or
-   when their circumstances change (notification reporters)

Statement reporters

-   Receiving an income support payment
-   Has mutual obligation or participation requirements or is (or has a
    partner) receiving employment income
-   Must advise of any paid employment income, hours worked (if
    required) and any other changes on the reporting day, usually the
    Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) before being paid. The customer
    may advise in advance that they will be starting work. On their
    reporting day they must give the gross amount of employment income
    paid and hours worked
-   Are required to report any other changes which might affect their
    payment on the EPED of the period the change occurred

Customers with mutual obligation requirements or participation
requirements

Customers receiving payment with mutual obligation requirements or other
participation requirements are required to report every 2 weeks:

-   employment income and the hours they have worked
-   any other changes of circumstances that may have occurred during the
    period
-   if they are a Centrelink managed job seeker, confirm they have
    complied with their mutual obligation requirements

Customers with employment income

The following customers receiving a payment without mutual obligation
requirements or participation requirements are required to report every
2 weeks if they or their partner is receiving employment income:

-   Students receiving Austudy
-   Carers
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Age Pension
-   Parenting Payment
-   YA (student)
-   ABSTUDY
-   Australian Apprentices receiving Youth Allowance, Austudy or ABSTUDY

Notification reporters

Customers with regular or no employment income

-   Receiving an eligible payment
-   No employment income or has stable employment income and an
    exception is met and Services Australia has recorded it as an
    ongoing amount
-   If they start work, they must advise within 14 days of first being
    paid
-   If the amount of pay they receive changes (customers with ongoing
    income recorded), within 14 days of the amount of employment income
    they will be paid changes
-   Does not have mutual obligations or participation requirements
-   Must report any other changes within 14 days

Notification reporters can advise of changes using self service options.

Reporting for customers on weekly payments

Customers receiving weekly payments can be placed onto any of the
available reporting regimes, including:

-   2 weekly stimulus reporting
-   variable reporting, and
-   notification reporting

See Reporting requirements for job seekers.

Reporting profiles

The Resources page contains information about a customer's reporting
profile by payment type.

See:

-   Reporting requirements for job seekers for information on reporting
    frequencies for job seekers
-   Reporting requirements for students and Australian apprentices for
    information on reporting frequencies for students and Australian
    apprentices

Customers and partners usually have the same reporting frequency and
lodgement date

Customers and partners usually have the same reporting frequency and
lodgement date where the customer has an employment income reporting
profile.

For example:

-   If the customer has an employment income profile of 2 weekly and
    their partner who has no mutual obligation requirements has no
    employment income and is profiled as an employment income
    notification reporter, both the customer and partner will be
    required to report 2 weekly. The exceptions to this are customers in
    receipt of Disability Support Pension (Blind) and Age Pension
    (Blind) who will be profiled as notification reporters (unless they
    are claiming Rent Assistance)
-   Where neither customer nor partner has employment income, and one
    has mutual obligation requirements and the other without mutual
    obligation requirements, the job seeker with mutual obligation
    requirements will be a two weekly reporter and the partner without
    mutual obligation requirements will be a notification reporter

Note: customers who are profiled as a variable reporter will not always
have the same reporting frequency as their partner.

There will be different reporting frequencies for couples if:

-   One has mutual obligation requirements (profiled as a variable
    reporter), and
-   The partner is profiled as a notification reporter

If the partner of the customer in the example above is profiled as an
employment income reporter, both customers will be employment income
reporters.

Reporting and payments for members of a couple

Partnered customers, reporting via self service (online, Express Plus
application or phone), verbally in person or in writing (SU19) may also
generate their partner's payment.

If the partner is:

-   A two weekly reporter, their payment will be generated when the
    customer reports via self-service (online, Express Plus mobile app
    or phone), in person or in writing (SU19), unless the partner has
    mutual obligation requirements or other participation requirements
    and is required to submit their own Reporting Statement.
    Alternatively, the partner can contact and submit their Reporting
    Statement on their reporting day to generate their own payment. The
    Service Officer should inform the customer that their payment is
    subject to their partner's employment income and advise that there
    may be a possible overpayment once their partner's employment income
    is reported
-   A notification reporter, their payment will be paid automatically
    regardless of whether the customer has submitted their Reporting
    Statement or not

If the partner is required to report and the customer is in receipt of
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA), the DRA recipient will be advised
their partner is required to report separately.

Customers reporting via online account, the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app, or phone self service will be advised of this requirement.

The Resources page contains a table that explains reporting and payment
for members of a couple and an attachment showing the Expanded partner
reporting matrix.

Changes to reporting frequency

Early Reporting

Customers with access to self service can enter employment information
at any time during their reporting period and save it. Early submission
of Reporting Statements is only accepted under specific circumstances.

See:

-   Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports for information on the
    acceptance and management of early reports for job seekers
-   Reporting requirements for students and Australian apprentices for
    information on reporting frequencies for Students and Australian
    Apprentices

Late reporting

Failure to report on the due date may result in delays in a customer's
payment and/or cancellation of payment..

See:

-   Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports for information on the
    acceptance and management of late reports for job seekers
-   Reporting requirements for students and Australian apprentices for
    information on reporting frequencies for Students and Australian
    Apprentices

Reporting arrangements over national public holidays

Special arrangements are put in place for national public holiday
periods (such as Easter, Christmas, Anzac Day and Australia Day). This
minimises inconvenience to those customers who would be prevented from
reporting:

-   employment income
-   mutual obligation or other participation requirements, and
-   any change of circumstances on their normal reporting date

For more information, see Payment and reporting arrangements over
national public holiday periods.

Reporting arrangements when a customer is travelling overseas

For information when a customer is travelling overseas see:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas and Youth Allowance
    (YA) customer going overseas for further information on what to do
    when a job seeker is going overseas
-   Age Pension customer going overseas for information on what to do
    when an Age Pension customer is going overseas
-   Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) overseas absences for
    information on what to do when a Carer is going overseas
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas for
    information on what to do when a DSP customer is going overseas
-   ABSTUDY student or Australian Apprentice going overseas for
    information on what to do when a DSP customer is going overseas
-   Reporting requirements for students and Australian Apprentices for
    information on what to do when a Student or Australian Apprentices
    is going overseas

Reporting methods

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
exception applies.

Reporting via Self Service

Statement reporters should be directed to report using self service
facilities. These channels are the quickest and easiest way for
customers to report. If a customer is unsuccessful, refuses or is unable
to use self service they can verbally provide their report to a Service
Officer either in a service centre or Smart Centre.

[] Customers may report through self service using:

-   their Centrelink online account or the Express Plus Centrelink
    mobile app
-   phone self service

These services have safeguards in terms of access and use. Customers
with more complex cases will be re-routed. Those cases requiring
discretionary determinations are sent to a Smart Centre, service centre
or Participation Solutions Team (PST).

Statement reporters can also correct their (and their partner's)
reported income using their Centrelink online account or the Express
Plus Centrelink mobile app if:

-   there are changes to their income, or
-   they made an error in the initial report
-   for corrections to partner earnings, if they have Partner Permitted
    to Enquire (PPE) or Partner Permitted to Update (PPU) permissions on
    their partner’s record

Customers can correct the employment income they reported in the last
six reporting periods.

Customer will not be able to amend any Single Touch Payroll (STP)
employment income they have already confirmed in the past.

Customers with mutual obligation or participation requirements will be
asked if they met their mutual obligation or participation requirements
again. The reason for the corrected income can affect their mutual
obligations or participation requirements.

Notification customers can advise of changes to ongoing or continuous
employment income using the Update employment income service if they:

-   do not have mutual obligation or participation requirements, and
-   are in receipt of an eligible payment

Self Service Access Facility

The Self Service Access Facility (SSAF) screen controls whether a
customer has access to reporting via self service reporting channels, it
does not affect the customer's ability to register online.

Verbal reporting

Customers can report verbally via:

-   Smart Centre - customers may phone Services Australia on the Income
    reporting number to use the automated phone self service line
    dedicated to reporting income. See the Resources page for contact
    details. Smart Centre staff will speak to a customer if there is an
    issue with their report and the call is transferred to them from the
    phone self service line, or if the customer is unsuccessful, unable
    or refuses to use the phone self service line
-   Attending a service centre and verbally telling a Service Officer
    what their income is for the last fortnight, as well as any other
    changes to their circumstances, mutual obligation requirements or
    other participation requirements

Note: when a face-to-face (for example, customer speaks to a Service
Officer) report is provided, the Service Officer must also ask the
customer if any other changes in circumstances occurred during the
fortnight, or if they have met their mutual obligation/participation
requirements.

Paper Reporting Statement (SU19) by exception only

Reporting via self service options is the preferred channel choice for
Services Australia, verbal is the next preferred channel, with paper
reporting by exception only.

A Reporting Statement (SU19) or 'SU19' is the Application for Payment
form historically issued to customers with mutual obligation
requirements or other participation requirements.

In the first instance, a customer should be directed to report via self
service. If a customer is unsuccessful, refuses or is unable to use self
service, they can verbally report to a Service Officer either in a
service centre or a Smart Centre.

If a customer is unable or unwilling to use self service ongoing; staff
can place them on paper reporting. This form can be issued manually in
exceptional circumstances and needs to be completed and lodged (either
in person, via fax, or post). Where a customer reports by fax or mail,
the Reporting Statement must be completed in pen and signed and dated on
the due to report date. All questions must be answered and the customer
must provide details of any other changes in circumstances.

Reporting Statement

The Reporting Statement also known as the Multi Attachment Template
(MAT) is a summary of reporting dates issued to customers who are
required to report. Reporting Statements are issued:

at grant or payment transfer if:

-   the customer’s new payment has mutual obligation or participation
    requirements
-   the person or their partner is receiving employment income

whilst in receipt of payment, if

-   mutual obligation or participation requirements are applied to the
    payment for example the youngest child of a customer receiving
    Parenting Payment Single (PPS) turns 6 years, and / or
-   the customer or their partner commences earning employment income
    and is placed on statement reporting by the system or a Service
    Officer

Note: the above statement reporters will also receive the Reporting
Statement if they have Restricted Access or have a Correspondence
Nominee.

The purpose of the Reporting Statement is to provide the customer with
relevant information about their reporting requirements, including:

-   list of reporting dates
-   how to report
-   what customers have to report

Customers subscribed to Online Letters will receive a copy of their
Reporting Statement in their myGov Inbox. Customers who are subscribed
to Electronic Messaging will receive an Electronic Message (EM) advising
them of the next 6 fortnights and the dates they are due to report,
instead of a paper Reporting Statement.

A new Reporting Statement is issued automatically 12 weeks after the
last one, providing the last Reporting Statement was processed.

A live version of the Reporting Statement is available to customers in
their online account. It will display their reporting periods within the
next 12 weeks. This is generated at the time the summary is viewed so
the customer can see more reporting periods online.

Change in payment type

A new Reporting Statement is automatically issued to the customer for a
period of up to 6 fortnights if:

-   a customer transfers to a new payment type, and
-   the customer is still required to report for the new payment type

They also have the ability to view the reporting periods via self
service options.

Customer separates from their partner or commences to live with a new
partner

If a customer separates from their partner, the customer no longer has
to provide their partner's employment income.

If a customer becomes partnered, they must provide details of their
partner's employment income.

A new Reporting Statement is issued automatically when a link or unlink
is performed on a customer's record so the customer is aware of their
reporting requirements.

Reissuing a Reporting Statement

The preferred option is to issue a duplicate Reporting Statement is via
the Reissue Report Workflow. This will reissue via local or central
print, local or central fax or online.

If the workflow is unavailable, a duplicate Reporting Statement can be
sent by reissuing the Multi Attachment Template via the Reporting Types
Issued (RPTI) screen. See Reporting screens for further information.

Centrelink customers can view the most updated reporting periods via:

-   Online account
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app
-   Phone self service (next reporting date only)

[]

Reporting Statements by Payment Type

See Reporting statements for job seekers and Reporting requirements for
students and Australian Apprentices.

Reporting tools and screens

If a customer does not use self service to report, Service Officers can
code a customer's reporting results and employment income, see Recording
and correcting employment income details

A Service Officer can locate a customer's Report Next Due date, view the
history of a customer's reporting regime and update their reporting
requirements via the screens contained in the Reporting assignment block
if required.

Go to the Employment Income and Reporting assignment block in Customer
First, or Search: Reporting, to view:

-   Earnings & Reporting
-   Reissue report
-   Reporting summary

Service Officers should always advise the customer of new reporting
requirements and notification obligations.

For more information on the reporting screens including updating the
details of a customer's reporting requirement or removing a customer
from reporting, see Reporting screens.

The Resources page contains links to forms, information on types of
report statements and reporting profiles and digital support resources.

Contents

Reporting Screens

Employment Service Provider reports customer commenced employment but
income not declared

Notification provisions

Related links

Reporting employment income self service troubleshooting

Reporting statements for job seekers

Recording and correcting employment income details

Foreign income and assets

Self Service Access Facility (SSAF) for reporting employment income,
participation and change of circumstance details

Reporting employment income online

Reporting using phone self service

Employing income options online

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Assessment of employment income for Centrelink payments

Working Credit

Weekly payments

Lodgement and processing arrangements for Reporting Statements when self
service reporting is unavailable

Reporting requirements when a job seeker compliance investigation is
outstanding

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

Disability notification issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
