
Prioritising interventions 110-06010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for Compliance Officers (CO) when
deciding the order of priority for taking action on interventions.
Interventions to be cancelled or combined are to be actioned by the
Compliance Management Centre (CMC).

Compliance Interventions with the same Review Type

Generally the intervention which is first loaded to the Integrated
Review System (IRS) is the intervention to be actioned, and the second
intervention loaded is the intervention to be cancelled and combined.
However, if the first intervention is near finalisation, or is over 12
months old, combining the interventions may not be the best action.

If a decision is made to combine the interventions the customer must be
advised that further information has been provided and will be
considered when actioning the current intervention.

Compliance Interventions with different Review Types

Interventions with different Review Types may be manually combined after
they are loaded to the IRS if the reason for selecting the customer for
an intervention is similar.

Manually combining the interventions is subject to the prioritising
guidelines below.

Determining the priority of the intervention

When considering manually cancelling and combining interventions of
different Review Types, first apply the guidelines to prioritise the
intervention.

-   Intelligence and Investigations Branch reviews take precedence over
    any other interventions. If a Compliance Officer (CO) is contacted
    by a Branch officer to combine a compliance intervention with an
    Intelligence and Investigations Branch review, the compliance
    intervention will be cancelled. The Branch officer will then action
    the information which triggered the compliance intervention
-   Random Sample Surveys (RSS) reviews take precedence over any other
    interventions (except Tertiary Collection of Student Information and
    Intelligence and Investigations Branch Reviews). RSS reviews are
    independent of other program and compliance interventions therefore
    should not be cancelled and combined with another review type
-   Interventions which are investigating Member of a Couple (MOC)
    circumstances should not be combined with an intervention for any
    other reason. However, other reasons can be combined with an MOC
    intervention as actioning these interventions is more specialised

Determining which intervention to cancel

If there are still 2 actionable interventions outstanding after applying
the above rules, use common sense to decide whether to combine the
interventions.

Compliance Officers should take into account:

-   How long the interventions have been outstanding. For example, it is
    not appropriate to combine a newly loaded intervention with a TIP
    intervention which had been outstanding for 12 months
-   Whether one intervention is near finalisation and should not be
    combined. The Review Status of each intervention. For example, if
    one intervention has already been started and actions are attributed
    to the intervention, then this intervention should be continued
    (particularly if rate variations are attributed to the intervention)
-   Whether there is ongoing contact with the customer for one of the
    interventions
-   If the reasons for each intervention are compatible so that they can
    be combined

Note: all interventions that need to be cancelled and combined must be
referred to the Customer Compliance Service Desk for action.

Related links

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review system (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
