
Emergency payments - preventing fraud 110-21120238

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document highlights key areas of concern about fraud and emergency
payments. Staff must continue to follow processes, including fraud
processes, in the Operational Blueprint for the relevant payment.

Purpose of emergency payments

Emergency payments may become available after an emergency event (for
example, a major disaster, pandemic or overseas terrorist attack). This
is only after a determination has been made by the relevant Minister
(for a major disaster) or by the Prime Minister (for an overseas
terrorist attack).

Services Australia receives a large volume of claims for emergency
payments. Some of these claims are fraudulent.

Emergency payment fraud

Under the Commonwealth Fraud Control Framework 2017, fraud is
'dishonestly obtaining a benefit, or causing a loss by deception or
other means'.

It is a responsibility of all Service Australia staff to report
suspected fraud and corruption.

Important points about fraud:

-   Fraud always needs intent. It is never an accident or a mistake
-   The losses from fraud can include money, property, information or a
    person's identity
-   The benefit can be gained by the offender, or a third party, or both

Fraud against the agency can be committed by:

-   members of the public (external fraud), or
-   by staff or contractors either intentionally or by exploitation by
    an outsider (internal fraud)

It can also be a combination of internal and external threats.

External fraud examples include:

-   Compromises the pre-existing identity of another person, with or
    without consent to make a claim for payment
-   Creates a fabricated identity to make a claim for payment
-   Submits multiple claims in compromised or fabricated identities for
    the same event
-   Makes an unauthorised payment destination change to a legitimate
    customer's record to obtain their payment
-   Deliberately provides false or incomplete information about the
    adverse effect they have experienced to claim payment
-   Falsely declares they reside in a qualifying Local Government Area
    (LGA) or location
-   Falsely claims to have one or more dependent children to claim a
    higher rate of payment
-   A NZ DRP customer falsely claims payment for a secondary claimant

If the customer is a victim of a scam or identity fraud, see Identity
fraud.

Internal fraud examples include:

-   Staff or contractors using their agency system access to make false
    claims, redirect customer payments, or code a larger payment than
    what the customer is entitled to
-   Colludes with, or coerced by another staff member, customer or third
    party to process fraudulent claims
-   Unauthorised access and/or disclosure of customer or agency
    information
-   As a customer of the agency, falsely claims a payment they are not
    entitled to

See the Fraud and Corruption Awareness Hub for more details, resources
and activities about fraud and corruption.

Pre-payment integrity checks

The Real Time Analysis section undertakes pre-payment analysis on high
risk claims and transactions before payments are issued to identify and
prevent fraud attempts from being realised and analyses potentially
fraudulent Centrelink online activity.

When a claim has been selected for a pre-payment integrity check, a
Display on Access (DOA) DOC is placed on the customer’s record with
important instructions for all staff accessing the customer’s record.

Thoroughly review all these DOCs/Notes to decide what action can be
taken before making any updates or actioning any work items

When a pre-payment integrity check is in progress, the claim must not be
actioned. Leave the claim status ‘In Progress’, this will make sure that
the claim is allocated to our specialist fraud staff

When the analysis has been completed, Real Time Analysis will document
the record with the outcome of the analysis:

-   the claim is not valid and recommends the claim to be rejected
-   the claim has been cleared of detected risk. Staff can resume
    processing the claim and assessing all qualification criteria to
    determine if the claim meets eligibility

Related links

Emergency management events

Claiming emergency payments

New claim for Crisis Payment - National Health Emergency

Fraud

Identity fraud

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
