
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the PAR programme. The PAR
programme measures the accuracy of welfare payments. PAR are a point in
time analysis of customer circumstances, designed to establish whether
the customer is correctly paid.

PAR selection

Customers are randomly selected from, and representative of, the general
population for each payment type. A standard sampling methodology
applied to the case selection provides a statistically representative
sample for analysis.

Payments reviewed by the PAR programme include:

-   ABSTUDY
-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)

Payment accuracy

The Department of Social Services (DSS) uses PAR data to calculate
payment accuracy results. DSS publishes the results in their annual
report.

Administrative correctness

The Department of Social Services (DSS) uses PAR data to calculate
administrative correctness. The measure of administrative correctness is
the percentage of surveys that identify no administrative errors
affecting a customer’s payment.

The department has an administrative correctness target of 95 per cent.

PAR results inform decision makers about possible improvements to policy
and administration.

The Resources page contains a link to the Appeals and Reviews Branch
intranet page.

Contents

Arranging access to the Integrated Review System (IRS) and the Random
Review Results System (RRRS) for Payment Accuracy Reviews (PAR)

Tasks to be undertaken prior to commencement of a new Trimester for
Payment Accuracy Reviews (PAR) interviews

Payment Accuracy Reviews (PAR) interviews and Intensive Desktop Reviews
(IDRs)

Post interview verification and finalising Payment Accuracy Reviews
(PAR)

The Quality Process for Payment Accuracy Reviews (PAR)

Related links

Quality standards in service delivery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
