
Dealing with ABSTUDY customer enquiries about annual Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews 110-07060050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of dealing with enquiries in relation
to ABSTUDY annual Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews.

Annual reviews

The rate of payment for a dependent ABSTUDY customer is based on their
parent(s)/guardian(s) financial situation. The Parental Income Test
(PIT) assesses the combined parental income in the base tax year. As the
base tax year changes each calendar year, parental income details must
be updated annually. This information is usually collected in the annual
PIT review, however in some cases, the customer's record may be
automatically updated by use of data available on the parent/guardian's
family assistance record via a process known as PIT Copy.

Every dependent ABSTUDY customer will require this reassessment. If the
required information is not coded into the system by 31 December, the
customer's Living Allowance rate will be reduced to zero from 1 January.

Dependent ABSTUDY customers whose parent(s)/guardian(s) are exempt from
the PIT, or whose income details have already been obtained via the PIT
Copy process, will not receive the annual PIT review letter.

The annual PIT review requests information about the combined parental
income for the most recently completed financial year.

The PIT review letter will be automatically issued to customers the
Monday after the September systems release (usually the first Saturday
in September). However, sometimes it may be necessary to issue a manual
SY012 (A) when a parent/guardian is unable to use the [] Advise Parental
Income option online. See Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for
the Base Tax Year and Current Tax Year (MOD JY) for information.

Customer or parent/guardian enquiries

Customer or parent/guardian enquiries may include:

-   lost or misplaced letters
-   when parents/guardians do not have proof of taxable income
-   request for an extension or provide an estimate of parental income
-   explanation of annual PIT review process

The Resources page contains links to information on the Services
Australia Website about annual parental income test reassessment and the
Parental Income Assessment (single year) (SY012A) form.

Related links

Completing Parent(s)/Guardian(s) details for the Base Tax Year and
Current Tax Year (MOD JY)

Assessing Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY annual Parental Income Test
(PIT) reviews

ABSTUDY annual Parental Income Test (PIT) reviews

Archive and Culling Engine (ACE) to access archived letters

Restoration of ABSTUDY payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
