-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to action a DSLD online review.

DSLD online reviews

The DSLD is an interactive online workflow that enables selected
students to confirm or update their study details and accept an online
declaration. In most cases, this will assess the customer’s student
payment qualification straight away and notify the customer of the
outcome.

The DSLD enables:

-   customers to supply documents to confirm their circumstances
-   immediate payment cancellation and referral to the Payment Finder on
    the Services Australia website
-   immediate application of a debt and referral to Money You Owe
    service
-   no change to student payment qualification

Customers with an active Centrelink online account who receive the
following payments must confirm their study loads at keytimes like
semester changes or enrolment periods:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Austudy
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance

Excluded customers

Customers who receive the following payments are excluded from the DSLD
review process:

ABSTUDY Living Allowance students:

-   under 16 years of age, or
-   undertaking secondary level study and who are boarding at a boarding
    school or hostel

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC)

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

DSLD review notification

Customers may receive an online letter requesting they complete the DSLD
online review.This may be followed up by an electronic message reminder.
The customer will need to confirm or update their study details via
their online account. The letter initiates the DSLD review process.

View online letters and electronic messages in Workspace > Customer
Communication > Search Outbound Correspondence.

Managing customer enquiries

A customer may respond to the request for a DSLD online review by
contacting Services Australia for:

an explanation of the letter

Service Officer help to action the response on their behalf as they are:

-   unable to self-manage the online transaction, or
-   having technical issues. Note: customers must download the latest
    version of the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app for the DSLD
    review link to display/work correctly

Encourage customers to use self service channels wherever possible.

If a customer is unable to self-manage, Service Officers can submit the
DSLD review on the customer’s behalf if the review status is Open. This
service cannot be accessed if the payment has been cancelled for reason
DDI as the review period has ended.

When the customer's DSLD review status is Open, Service Officers will
see exactly what the customer sees and can submit the response on their
behalf.

Locate the DSLD workflow in:

-   Customer First > Workspace > Customer Online Account > Student
    Digital Study Load Dec, or
-   Search field > key Student Digital Study Load Dec

The DSLD review will not be finalised by:

manually coding the

-   Customer Study Details (EDC) screen in Process Direct, or
-   Education Course Details (EDC) screen in Customer First, and/or

manually changing the Integration Review status to completed/cancelled

Attempting to do either of these actions will not prevent the customer
from being suspended for failing to respond to the DSLD review on their
next Entitlement Period Start Date (EPSD).

Customer self service access to the DSLD review

Customers can access the DSLD review using their Centrelink online
account through myGov and the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Customers can update their study details via:

-   Online services > Tasks
-   Payments and Claims > Update circumstances > Digital study load
    declaration
-   the Express Plus app > view outstanding Task

Customers can save updates and complete the DSLD review later. A
reminder message displays until they complete it. The message includes
the date they need to complete it by, and what will happen if they do
not complete it.

Service Officers can view the DSLD online letter via Workspace >
Customer Communication > Search Outbound Correspondence.

Confirm or change study details displayed

Once the DSLD review has been accessed, the customer's current study
details held on their record will be displayed, including:

-   educational institution name
-   student ID
-   course name
-   study load
-   start date
-   end date

Customers can confirm or change their existing study details.

If the customer has advised of a change of study details and the
customer is no longer entitled to receive a student payment, an
overpayment may occur.

DSLD review manual processing

The DSLD online review is an automated tool with end-to-end capability.
Some manual processing will be required for activities. All manual
activities will be actioned by the Compliance Study Load processing team
The Resources page explains how to identify a DSLD online review
activity.

Service Officers may respond to enquiries but must not finalise the
Change of Circumstances interaction or manually update study details.
The processing team will action these activities.

Note: usual processes apply for customers who have an outstanding
Student Payment Circumstance Updates (Student Payment Reviews), Youth
Enrolment Check (YEC), or Study Load Interventions (SLI) review.

DSLD suspension and cancellation of payment

Customers who do not complete the DSLD review within 14 days will have
their payment suspended with reason code DDI. This suspension reason
cannot be manually restored via the Benefit Action (BA) screen.

If customers remain eligible for a student payment and:

-   complete the DSLD review between day 15 to 28 inclusive, their
    payment will automatically be restored
-   no action is taken before day 29, their payment will cancel with
    reason code DDI. This cancellation reason can be restored manually
    via the BA screen

Once the customer's payment has been cancelled, the DSLD review can no
longer be accessed by Service Officers or customers.

The Resources page contains how to identify a DSLD online review
activity, valid Work Items and a link to Approved Courses and
Educational Institutions.

Related links

How users create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Assessing study load requirements

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Restoration of Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy for full-time students
and Australian Apprentices

Restoration of ABSTUDY payments

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Raising debts for students and Australian Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
