
Using the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for service centre, zone office and
review staff about using the IRS.

Information obtained from the IRS

The Integrated Review System (IRS) is a single repository for service
updates and reviews developed to replace the National Selective Review
System (NSRS). It was implemented in June 2002 as a result calculation
and reporting system, with an element of workflow processing for some
types of reviews. It also provides a history of the Service Update and
Review activity which has occurred on individual customer records.

IRS is a fully integrated review system which allows Service Updates and
Reviews to be accessed directly from any payment system, for example
Newstart System (NSS) or the Pension System (PEN). There is also a
direct relationship with other systems, such as the Service Profiling
System and the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS).

Service Updates

Service Updates and Reviews captured by IRS have review results and
outcomes automatically calculated based on the actions undertaken in
relation to the review during the review period. IRS captures savings,
debts and numbers of reviews. It can also capture other outcomes that
are not necessarily payment related, but which have been actioned as
part of a review, such as a student moving to job seeker status.

Management information

Management Information extracted from IRS is collated for the annual
reports and is provided to internal and external stakeholders. It is
used for data-mining, bench marking and for tracking how teams are
travelling against targets. A suite of reporting screens can be used to
provide current management information, both on-line and through printed
reports.

IRS has 14 different categories of review, the largest numbers being
generated from Compliance Reviews, Service Updates and Program Reviews.
It captures approximately four million reviews each financial year.

Role of IRS in Service Updates and reviews

For all Service Updates and Reviews (including IRS processed reviews)
IRS will:

-   provide a history of review activity
-   identify past, current and future review activity
-   log actions which occur as part of the Service Update or Review
-   capture rate variations, debts, arrears and other outcomes actioned
    as a result of the review
-   calculate a review result
-   undertake restoration processing
-   provide management information on Service Update and Review activity

Service Updates and Host Reviews

Service Updates and Host Reviews are processed in the Service Profiling
and respective Host Systems with the information relating to the Service
Update or Review passed automatically to the IRS.

Reviews processed in IRS

An IRS processed review is a review which is processed directly from
within the IRS, such as compliance or fraud reviews.

These reviews are usually initiated to ascertain whether a customer is
receiving their correct entitlement. The trigger for the review may be
information received from an outside source or it may be an internal
procedure initiated automatically or by a staff member.

For these reviews, IRS is used to:

-   load a new review
-   cancel a review
-   start a review
-   record contact details
-   update details of the review
-   combine reviews
-   link a review to another customer review
-   manually attribute actions to a review, and
-   finalise a review

It is important that reviews are processed correctly so that the
activities associated with the review are also correctly attributed to
the review.

Deciding which compliance review to action

When deciding which compliance review to action, review staff must also
ensure that the correct procedures for prioritising reviews are
followed.

The Resources page contains a list of Review Categories for Service
Updates and Reviews in IRS, and where they are processed.

Contents

Navigating in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Extracting Service Update and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Linking reviews in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

Manually attributing a debt to a finalised Service Update or Review in
the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
