
Member of a couple reviews - Separated Under One Roof (SUOR) 110-19111344

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before processing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process for conducting a review for a
customer who is recorded as separated and living under the same roof as
their ex-partner.

Initial assessment of a couple

A couple may be separated but continue to live under the same roof. This
may be a temporary or permanent arrangement. There must be a genuine
separation with no plans to resume the relationship.

Family and domestic violence

Before conducting a review, check the customer’s record for any
indications of the customer being at risk of family and domestic
violence. Do not issue forms to, or contact the ex-partner in these
circumstances.

The presence of family and domestic violence may indicate the customer
is not a member of a couple, even if they continue to live under the
same roof. This must be considered when conducting the review.

Family and domestic violence is not just the presence of violence in a
relationship. It can be any conduct that is violent, threatening,
coercive or controlling.

Evidence of family and domestic violence can be identified in a number
of ways:

-   A customer discloses family and domestic violence during contact
-   ‘Family violence indicated’ messaging on the Customer Overview
    screen
-   The customer has identified safety concerns in the Living
    Arrangements question set, the MOD S or update relationship details
    online service (against the person for whom the assessment is being
    conducted)
-   DOCs on a customer’s record (including social worker DOCs)
-   Current or previous claims for Crisis Payment for extreme
    circumstances family and domestic violence (EXV)
-   Documents lodged by a customer (uploaded or scanned). For example,
    copy of a restraining order (for example, AVO, ADVO, DVO), legal
    documentation, relevant medical evidence

There may be times when both parties have identified family and domestic
concerns against each other:

-   If one party is getting Centrelink payments but the other is not,
    only issue forms to the person on payments
-   If both parties are getting Centrelink payments, only issue forms
    directly to each person and do not contact the other party in
    relation to the person’s assessment

Reviews

Customers assessed as being SUOR must have their payments reviewed
regularly to confirm if their separation status continues. As part of
the review, the customer may need to give more evidence to support their
continued circumstances.

Member of a Couple (MoC) processing Service Officers set the first
review after finalisation of the initial determination to assess a
customer as SUOR:

-   the first review must occur 13 weeks after the initial SUOR
    determination, and
-   13 or 26 weeks or 12 months thereafter, depending on the customer's
    circumstances as per SUOR review guide

To conduct a review, both parties need to complete a Relationship
details - separated under one roof (SS293) form. There are exceptions if
family and domestic violence issues are identified. They may also be
interviewed to clarify information provided in the form.

The customer or ex-partner’s nominated referee may be contacted if
there’s still concerns with their statements about their relationship.

When a SUOR review may not be required

A review may not be needed if:

-   the customer and their ex-partner are no longer living together
-   the customer has reconciled with their ex-partner
-   the customer and their ex-partner are no longer getting Centrelink
    payments or services and the payment has been cancelled for 13 weeks
    or longer
-   the customer has become partnered to a new person
-   the ex-partner has become partnered with another person
-   there has been no change of circumstances within 13 weeks of their
    previous SUOR assessment/review

Conducting checks and actioning reviews

A SUOR review work item is allocated to Service Officers with the
required skill tag. These Service Officers conduct initial checks to
confirm a review is needed. At any point where a Service Officer has
determined during contact with a customer a SUOR review is required,
they are able to conduct these checks.

The review is then referred to a MoC processing staff member for action,
see the Process page.

The Resources page contains forms, contact details, MoC Decision Support
Aid and questions for MoC interviews. It also has approved text for
letters to ex-partners when family and domestic violence concerns have
been identified.

Related links

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
