
Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the finalisation process and Attribution of
actions, debts, and arrears to a Service Update or Review in the IRS.

Excluded activities

Generally, activities are only available for attribution if the activity
is created after the start and before the finalisation of the Service
Update or Review.

Some activities are excluded from attribution as the activity is deemed
to be an activity which should never be attributed to a Service Update
or Review. See the Resources page for more information. Examples of
excluded actions are:

-   actions to apply income for one entitlement period where the action
    is required to stimulate the customer's payment, and that action
    impacts the customer's next payment
-   one off payments, such as Advance Payments, Fare Allowance or
    Telephone Allowance
-   actions and debts which are identified as reconciliation related

Reviews processed in the Service Profiling System or Host System

The actions performed to progress the Service Update or Host Review are
identified as relating to that Service Update or Host Review and this
information is passed to IRS for the activity to be attributed
accordingly. Where an action is identified as part of a Service Update
or Host Review it will not be available to be attributed to any other
review as an activity is only attributable to one Service Update or
Review.

Suspension action attributed to a Service Update or Host Review

Generally a suspension action will not be auto attributed to a Service
Update or Host Review unless it was processed as part of the Service
Update or Review. Actions to update the relationship status (linking
action) which are not processed as part of any review may be captured by
a Host (Program) Review, as the action of updating the relationship
status is a trigger some host reviews are interested in identifying.

Cancellation action attributed to a Service Update

Cancellation actions which are not processed as part of any review can
be attributed to a Service Update 42 days after the date the
cancellation action was processed. This allows 42 days for the
cancellation action to be manually attributed by a Compliance/Service
Officer to a review which is subject to manual attribution, such as a
Compliance or Fraud review.

Service Update or Host Review ended

IRS is advised when a Service Update or Host Review is ended, and the
Service Update or Review is finalised and a review result calculated.

Debts can be manually attributed to finalised Service Update or Host Review

Debts can be manually attributed to a finalised Service Update or Host
Review if the debt is attributable to the review, and is attributed
within 56 days from the date the Service Update or Host Review was
finalised.

Finalising Reviews processed in IRS

Reviews processed in IRS, such as Compliance or Fraud Reviews should
only be finalised in the IRS when all the information/documentation has
been obtained to make an accurate assessment about continuation of
payment and the existence of any debt.

A decision to finalise the review cannot be made based solely on a VEDA,
HIC or OLS check, or combinations of these checks. These checks will
only support a decision to cancel or continue a review as they do not
provide enough information to assess whether the customer is receiving
the correct rate. A review can only be finalised if:

-   the customer has been contacted as part of the review
-   additional third party check or checks have been conducted, and
-   there is enough information to assess that the customer is receiving
    correct entitlement based on those checks

Review not to be finalised same day as payment is suspended

Reviews should not be finalised on the same day the customer's payment
is suspended as part of the review, particularly if the suspension
relates to failure to provide information. The review has not ended at
this point as the customer has not had an opportunity to respond to the
suspension and provide the information required to make an accurate
assessment of entitlement.

Amendments of review once finalised

Once a review is finalised it cannot be amended unless it is a Random
Sample Surveys (RSS), so it is important that all customer circumstances
and updates to a customer's record are actioned correctly and all
possible debts are considered before finalisation. Any attributable rate
variation, cancellation or debt amount which occurs as a result of the
review should be attributed to the review during the finalisation
process. Note: a review cannot be finalised in IRS if any outstanding
debts are attributed.

Notify customer when review has been finalised

All customers who have been contacted during the course of a review, or
are aware that a review is in progress, must be contacted when the
review is finalised to advise of the outcome of the review. This
includes cases where there is no change in rate identified and a debt
has not been raised.

Manual attribution of reviews processed in IRS

Reviews processed in IRS are subject to manual Attribution. This means
that an activity can be selected to be attributed to a review or can be
unattributed from a review based on the Compliance/Service Officer's
knowledge of which actions were triggered by the review and which
actions are attributable to the review. The claiming of activities as
part of the review must be in accordance with the Compliance and Fraud
attribution rules located on the Resources page

The correct process for reviews subject to manual attribution is to
create the activity from within the review image by selecting the review
before creating the activity. Compliance/Service Officer should ensure
that they follow this process. If activities are not created as part of
the review, they will be available to be incorrectly auto attributed or
manually attributed to another review.

Compliance/Service Officer responsibility - to ensure actions are attributed to a review are correct

It is the responsibility of Compliance/Service Officer to ensure that
the actions attributed to a review are correct and that the savings
associated with the calculated result are an accurate reflection of the
review outcome. Attributing and unattributing actions in order to obtain
a 'close to expected' savings figure is not acceptable. Review Results
will not be corrected where Service Officer have not followed the
correct process.

Compliance/Service Officer to report if system fault prevents correct savings calculation

Where there is a system fault preventing the correct amount of savings
from being calculated, Compliance/Service Officers should report the
problem to a Quality Development Officer (QDO) or Team Leader.
Compliance/Service Officers must ensure that all the relevant activities
are attributed to the review before reporting the problem.

National validation exercises/review of manual attributions made

National validation exercises are conducted on the accuracy of reviews
subject to manual attribution. These exercises specifically identify
incorrect results due to manual attribution. Reviews which are
identified are forwarded to the respective Service Zone for action.
There is an audit trail to identify when an activity is incorrectly
unattributed from a review.

The Resources page contains the Compliance and Fraud attribution rules
with information on which actions are attributable to a review and which
actions should never be attributed to a review and a workflow document
to assist in determining if a suspension or cancellation is attributable
to a review.

Related links

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Manually loading a Partner Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually attributing a debt to a finalised Service Update or Review in
the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

Extracting Service Update and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Attributing Service Profiling Debts to Integrated Review System (IRS)
Service Updates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
