
Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For service centre, zone office, Review and Compliance staff

This document outlines information about Restoration Processing and the
calculation of a Review Result for a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS).

Reviews processed in IRS

Reviews (such as Compliance or Fraud reviews) which are processed in IRS
must be manually finalised in order for IRS to calculate a Review
Result.

The savings associated with the review should be an accurate reflection
of the rate variation the review has caused to the customer's rate. It
is the responsibility of Service Officers to ensure the actions manually
attributed to a review are correct and the savings associated with the
calculated savings are an accurate reflection of the review outcome.
Attributing and unattributing actions in order to obtain a 'close to
expected' savings figure is not acceptable.

The Review Result and Review Result Reason should correctly reflect the
outcome and reason for the review. Regardless of the result of the
review, reasons for the outcome must be fully documented.

Finalising a Service Update or Review

Once a Service Update or Review has been finalised a Review Result is
calculated by IRS.

IRS calculates the rate variation for every attributable activity
processed on a customer's record between the start and finalisation of a
review. Each payment component updated within an activity that is
attributable to a review has a rate variation calculated. IRS will
determine the previous rate for each component before the activity was
processed, and calculate the new rate for each component after the
activity was processed. The result for the activity is the difference
between these two rates. The overall result for the review is the sum of
each result calculated for each activity attributed to the review.

Restoration Processing

The Applicable Restoration Period (ARP) is a period of 42 days from the
date the customer's payment is 'SUS'pended, 'CAN'celled, 'REJ'ected or
stopped that IRS will continue to check whether the payment has been
restored, re-granted or an alternative primary payment is granted. If a
payment is restored, re-granted or granted within this period, the
result will be amended to reflect this action.

A separate ARP is applied to each payment component that was impacted by
the 'SUS'pension, 'CAN'cellation, 'REJ'ection or stopping action. Thus,
the ARP end dates for each component may be different depending on the
date of effect the action had on each payment component.

The end of an ARP period is either 42 days from the date the
'SUS'pension, 'CAN'cellation, 'REJ'ection or stopping action was
processed, or from a future date of effect if a future date of effect
was applied. An ARP can be ended early if the payment component has been
restored or re-granted, or an alternative primary payment has been
granted.

Completing a Service Update or Review

A Service Update or Review cannot be 'COM'pleted until the ARP period
has passed for each payment component being reviewed. For example, a
finalised review has claimed a Review Result for cancelling the
customer's entitlement to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Rent Assistance
(RA). JSP is restored and the restoration is auto attributed to the
review. The ARP for the JSP component ended at the time the restoration
was processed. The review is still in ARP because the RA payment
component has not been restored. IRS will continue to check for the
restoration of the RA payment component until the full ARP period has
been reached, or that payment component is also restored.

The only actions which can be attributed to a Service Update or Review
which is in ARP (the review has been finalised) are:

-   the restoration or re-grant of the payment which has been
    'SUS'pended, 'CAN'celled, 'REJ'ected or stopped, or the grant of an
    alternative primary payment, or
-   a cancellation action which follows a cancellation action (two
    consecutive cancellation actions)

Calculating a Review Result

A 'FIN'alised (gross) result is calculated as soon as the Service Update
or Review is finalised. If a 'SUS'pension or 'CAN'cellation is not
attributed to the Service Update or Review then an ARP is not
applicable. The 'COM'pleted (net) result is calculated which will mirror
the finalised result.

If a 'SUS'pension or 'CAN'cellation is attributed to the review then an
ARP is applied. The completed result will:

-   Be the same as the finalised result if the ARP period had ended by
    the time the Service Update or Review was finalised, or
-   Take into account the restoration, re-grant or grant of another
    primary payment which occurred after the Service Update or Review
    was finalised while the review was still in ARP
-   Report the gross result as the completed result if the customer's
    payment is not restored, granted or re-granted by the end of the ARP
    period. (The gross and net results will be the same but the date the
    Service Update or Review was completed will be different.)

Department of Home Affairs 'NCA' reviews do not have a standard result
calculated as the purpose of the review is to capture preventative
savings based on automatic updates from the Department of Home Affairs
system. These reviews will have a Review Result calculated of 'ORO'
(Other Review Outcome) which identifies the review does not have a
standard result but outcomes for the review are captured on the Other
Review Outcomes (IRRO) screen.

Service Updates or Host Reviews

IRS is advised by the Service Profiling or Host System when a review has
ended and should be finalised. A Review Result is then calculated based
on the activities which have been identified as being traceable back to
the Service Update or Host Review.

Once a Review Result has been calculated the only actioning which can
occur on a Service Update or Host Review is to manually attribute a debt
to a finalised Service Update or Review.

Service Updates and Host Reviews are subject to the same restoration
processing and result calculation rules as reviews which are processed
from within IRS.

The Resources page contains a list of Review Result codes and Result
Reason codes used in IRS.

Related links

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually attributing a debt to a finalised Service Update or Review in
the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Extracting Service Update and Review data in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
