
Extracting Service Update and Review data in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080080

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Service Update and Review data
available from the IRS. This includes Compliance Interventions or
Intelligence and Investigations Branch Reviews.

Reporting facilities

There are a number of reporting facilities within IRS which provide
performance management information as to the number and results of
Service Updates and Reviews, in addition to workload management for
analysis of work on hand.

The Review Performance (IRRP) screen is an environment based screen
which provides numbers and results of finalised and completed Service
Updates and Reviews for the search criteria entered. The Review Totals
(IRRT) screen is an environment based screen which provides numbers of
reviews, and the National Search (IRNS) screen provides numbers of
reviews based on a search conducted across all environments. All of
these screens run from on-line, current, information.

IRS Management Information Database

An IRS Management Information Database has also been developed which
stores relevant IRS data that is required for Management Information
purposes. This database is used as source data for the production of:

-   regular and adhoc reports
-   the IRS SAS VA Database, and
-   the IRS Stripfile

IRS also provides information for the National Review Performance Report
(IRNPR) which is a batch report detailing a set output of performance
information based on finalised, completed and current workloads. This
report is currently run from the IRS Stripfile and the data provided is
based on review activity up to the close of business the previous day
(yesterday).

In addition, an interim SuperCross is available which provides a
flexible reporting facility for a range of review data that can be
analysed for targets, trends and comparison purposes.

The Resources page contains information on output calculations used when
extracting Service Update or Review data.

Related links

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Navigating in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Finalising and attributing actions to a Service Update or Review in the
Integrated Review System (IRS)

Attributing Other Review Outcomes in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Manually attributing a debt to a finalised Service Update or Review in
the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Calculating a Review Result and Restoration Processing in the Integrated
Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
