
Combining a Review in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080100

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For zone office and review staff.

This document outlines how certain reviews processed in IRS such as
Compliance Interventions or Intelligence and Investigations Branch
reviews may be combined. This allows for a single set of review actions
and result. It reduces independent and unnecessary contact with a
customer.

Reviews that cannot be combined

Service Updates and Host Reviews cannot be combined in IRS.

IRS processed reviews, such as Compliance or Fraud Reviews of the same
Review Type may be automatically combined when they are loaded to IRS.
This is the result of new information or match data being received for
the same customer and which can be actioned by the same process as the
current review. For example, a tip-off review with a Review Reason MOC
(Member of a Couple) and a tip-off review with a Review Reason PTW
(Part-time Work).

Automatically combining reviews

IRS will automatically combine reviews if they are for the same customer
and they meet the following criteria:

-   Review Type is the same
-   Review Type is not Internal Data Match (IDM)
-   Review Type is Tax File Number Declaration Form (TDF) and the Review
    Reason is not Debtor Matching (DBM)
-   load date is within 183 days of the load of the first review
-   Review Status is Future (FUT), Registered (REG) or Started (STA)
    (including sub status of 'DUE', HeLD, but not SUBmitted)
-   Cycle Number is the same, and
-   Review Category is not SVU (Service Update) or HST (Host)

These reviews IRS combines will have the match data of the most recently
loaded review copied to the Match Data (IRMD) screen of the first review
loaded. The most recent review to be loaded is then cancelled with a
reason of CMB (Combined).

The automatic combining of reviews in IRS only occurs when a review is
automatically loaded (therefore manually loading a new review will not
be included in the auto combine process).

Manually combining reviews

IRS reviews with the same or similar Review Reason but differing Review
Types may be manually combined after they are loaded to the IRS if the
reason for selecting the customer for a review is similar (for example,
two employment related reviews which have been loaded separately under
Review Types of TIP and DEW).

The most recent review loaded to IRS is the review which should be
cancelled as a combined review, and the first review to be loaded is the
review which is actioned unless prioritisation rules apply. This first
review should then take over the actioning of the review information or
match data provided in the review which was manually cancelled/combined.
Any match data from the cancelled/combined review will not copy to the
actionable review as the combining action is a manual process rather
than generated automatically.

Cancelling combined reviews

Any review which is cancelled/combined must be cancelled with a Cancel
Review Reason of 'CMB' (Combined).

A review should only be cancelled by the Review Officer (RO) responsible
for processing that particular Review Type. For example, it is
appropriate for a TDF Review to be cancelled by an RO responsible for
processing TDF reviews, but not appropriate for the TDF RO to cancel a
Suspected Tip-off review.

When considering manually cancelling and combining reviews, apply the
following business rules:

If there are 2 REGistered reviews of the same Review Type

-   the first review loaded is the review to be actioned
-   the second review loaded should be cancelled and combined

If there are 2 STArted reviews of the same ReviewTtype:

-   the first review loaded is the review to be actioned
-   the second review loaded should be cancelled and combined. Note:
    normally IRS will cancel and combine the reviews, so this scenario
    should be rare

Cancelling and combining 2 reviews with different review types must be
in accordance with the prioritisation rules.

Related links

Cancelling a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
