
Navigating in the Integrated Review System (IRS) 110-06080010

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines for staff how to navigate the IRS.

For Service Centre, Zone Office and Review Staff

This procedure is to help service centre, zone office and Review Staff
(RO) navigate through the IRS screens to identify, select, conduct and
manage reviews.

To navigate through the IRS the user will need to have the appropriate
security access in the Centrelink system to view, amend or record review
details. When access has been granted, the IRS can be accessed directly
in the Centrelink system. Some Review Types (such as Random Sample
Surveys (RSS), Identity Fraud Reviews (IDF) and other Fraud Reviews)
have extra security applied in order for staff to view the review in
IRS.

Some screens in IRS will need to be accessed from within a customer
review and/or a customer record to display information.

Service Updates and Host Reviews

A Service Update is selected by Risk Profiling which is initiated by the
Service Profiler and actioned in the host system. Service Updates
replaced some program reviews, and are identified in the IRS by the
Review Category of 'SVU' (Service Updates).

Program Reviews are also processed from within the respective host
system, such as PEN or NSS, and are identified by a Review Category of
'HST' (Host System).

Although Service Updates and Host Reviews are not actioned from within
IRS, the review data is passed by the Service Profiler or Host System to
IRS so that a review result can be calculated.

Accessing the IRS

To access the IRS in the Income Security System (ISS), code a customer
payment environment (for example, NSS, PEN, FAO) in the Sys: field and:

-   go to the Reviews Main Menu (IRMM) screen. The IRMM screen displays
    screens used in the IRS, or
-   other IRS screens can be opened directly by entering the appropriate
    screen name

Navigating in the IRS

If unfamiliar with the IRS screens, access the IRS Main Menu by coding
'IRMM' in the Nxt: field.

A number of screens will be presented. To go to any screen, code the
screen literal into the Nxt: field and press [Enter].

-   For details about any screen listed, navigate to that screen and use
    F1 (Screen Help)
-   Most IRS screen details can only be accessed when a customer's
    record and/or review is being viewed

The Resources page contains a list of IRS screens, Review Status codes
and a navigation aid for the Centrelink system and IRS.

Related links

Searching for Service Updates and Reviews in the Integrated Review
System (IRS)

Review Types and Review Reasons in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
