
Initiation and customer contact for Relationship Status Intervention (RSI) 110-13080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the process for initiating RSIs and customer
contact, including the action to take if the customer fails to respond.

Relationship Status Interventions

The relationship risk is defined as customers who are at risk of
receiving the incorrect rate of payment as a result of their
relationship status. This document outlines the process for undertaking
compliance activity relating to the relationship risk.

Customers claiming or receiving a payment or concession card are
required to inform Services Australia of their relationship status.

Compliance triggers

Relationship Interventions are triggered from a number of sources,
including:

-   internal data matching and profiling of data held by Centrelink
-   external data matching with other government departments such as
    Department of Home Affairs, Department of Defence (DHA) and the
    Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
-   information from the public and office referral/s via online
    reporting fraud forms or the Australian Government Services Fraud
    Tip-off Line

Initiating interventions

Interventions are loaded to the Integrated Review System (IRS). They are
initiated by an indirect intervention letter sent to the customer(s).

If the customer does not update their marital status following this
letter, a Compliance Officer will:

-   try to call the customer, or
-   send the Request for Information (IRSRFI) letter through Payments
    and Integrity Operations Strategy (PIOS)

Customer verification

When the customer responds to a request to contact, trusting the
information they give over the phone is appropriate, unless discussions
indicate the need for documented verification.

The Compliance Officer must be satisfied the compliance triggers can be
explained and the verbal updates will result in an accurate record of
the customer's circumstances.

If the customer cannot provide the information verbally, they must be
given the chance to provide suitable documents for verification. If the
customer is unwilling or unable to provide verification, third party
verification may be sought.

Third party verification

Contact with third parties may be necessary when the customer:

-   fails to respond to a request to contact letter
-   fails to provide suitable verification documents
-   cannot provide information and asks Services Australia to obtain
    verification from third parties

Third parties have an obligation to provide information under section
192 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999.

Attribution of results

Before making any payment affecting updates, the Compliance Officer must
make sure they have selected the IRS review. For example, before
updating marital status or suspension action on the customer's record.

This is also known as accessing the Review Image. This will make sure
that any results from those updates automatically attribute to the
review. For example, debt outcomes.

The Resources page contains links to the Service Desk referral form,
contact details, intranet pages, myGov, DOC templates, user guides, and
suggested questions.

Related links

Assessing and finalising Relationship Status Interventions (RSI)

Appointing nominees

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Call and screen recording - information and access

Calling a customer or returning a customer's call

Customer requests access to their personal information

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Family and domestic violence

Family assistance customer becomes partnered

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Types of Centrelink debts and how they are generated

Notification provisions (CLK)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Using myGov accounts

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Using the MultiCal debt calculator

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
