
Suspected Medicare fraud and Business Integrity (BI) flags 110-15030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how staff identify and handle suspected fraud,
address myGov linking restrictions, process claims and issue replacement
Medicare cards when a BI flag is in place.

Identifying suspected fraud

Fraud in the Medicare program may include a customer or member of the
public:

-   making Medicare claims for services not provided
-   making alterations on an account or receipt presented for payment
-   using someone else’s Medicare card
-   claiming a Medicare benefit using a false identity or the identity
    of another person using an invalid concession card
-   forging prescriptions for Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS)
    medicines
-   taking or sending PBS medicines overseas that aren't for their
    personal use or the personal use of someone travelling with them

These issues are addressed via the Report Suspected Fraud system. The
Resources page contains a link to this system.

If the suspected fraud is committed by providers or practice staff this
is managed by the Department of Health and Aged Care.

See Fraud - health for internal and external contact details for
reporting possible fraud.

Addressing myGov linking restrictions, processing claims and issuing replacement Medicare cards when a BI flag is in place

A BI flag can indicate possible fraudulent activity linked to a Medicare
card and prevents further fraudulent activity on records when it has
been identified that:

-   claims may not be legitimate, or
-   customer details may have been compromised

The BI flag restricts customers from using all Medicare claiming
channels without further intervention by a Service Officer.

BI flags may be lifted temporarily to allow for the processing of
legitimate Medicare claims.

The Intelligence and Investigations Branch is responsible for the
application and removal of BI flags.

The details of the BI flag contact officer are recorded on Consumer
Directory Maintenance System (CDMS). To locate the contact details
navigate to CDMS > Group > Comments tab.

The Process page contains information about dealing with suspected
fraud, for example when alterations may have been made on an account or
receipt, and actions on a Medicare card when a BI flag is in place.

The Resources page contains information about handling enquires about
suspected fraud, contact details, Services Australia intranet links and
a link to the Report Suspected Fraud System page.

Contents

Medicare Business Integrity (BI) flag

Related links

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Process digital self service claims

Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
