
Processing class action settlements for customers with manual exceptions 110-21092142

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for contacting customers and
processing class action settlements.

For staff trained in class action settlements only.

Deceased customers

Auto registration occurs for customers that were paid an Income
Compliance refund. Services Australia (the agency) sends a
categorisation letter to the person the Income Compliance Refund was
issued to.

If the person contacts, they will be confirmed as the appropriate person
before progressing the settlement task or lodging a dispute.

When no contact is made, the settlement payment is paid using the
payment destination details given for the Income Compliance refund.

When the letter is returned to sender, attempts to contact the person
recorded as the executor or administrator will be made. When these
details are not recorded, staff attempt to locate and contact the
executor or administrator, solicitor or beneficiaries.

International customers

A tailored servicing approach is required for customers that are
eligible to receive a settlement payment who are residing overseas and
have a payment destination outside of Australia.

Auto registration will occur for those customers who have received an
Income Compliance refund.

Services Australia may not be able to send a categorisation letter to
customers residing in some specific countries due to international mail
service suspension. Compliance Officers (CO) will try to contact these
customers to:

-   advise them of their categorisation
-   confirm an appropriate payment destination
-   give assistance in registering for the settlement class action if
    not already registered, and
-   give assistance in lodging a query if required

Customer’s residing in New Zealand who have a New Zealand Agreement
Special Banking Options Account on their record will be contacted by a
CO to get the details of an alternate payment destination. The agency is
unable to process a settlement payment to these Special Banking Option
Accounts.

International customers may contact the agency:

-   for assistance in registering for the class action settlement
-   for assistance in lodging a query
-   regarding the reimbursement of servicing fees. These cases will be
    escalated for reimbursement

The Resources page contains:

-   Contact details
-   DOC templates
-   External websites
-   Social work referral

Related links

Processing class action settlements

Income Compliance Programme class action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
