
Initial compliance checks for Registrar-General’s Office Interventions (RGO) 110-13050030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting RGO interventions

This document outlines the steps to take before the initiation of RGO
interventions for adult, child and care giver death matching.

Aim

Data matching with State and Territory RGOs aims to identify cases when
the death of a Centrelink customer has not been reported to Centrelink.

The main objective of matching RGO death data, is to detect the death,
stop payment(s) and recover monies which may have been incorrectly paid
to Centrelink customers. Data matching occurs as soon as practicable
after the State or Territory RGO reports the death.

Matching is also conducted on customers receiving payments for caring
for a person, after the death of a care receiver. These matches are
loaded on to the care giver record, not the deceased person record.

Data matching

Death data is received daily and monthly.

The daily death data is received from State or Territory Registrars of
Birth, Deaths and Marriages (RBDMs) via the Queensland Registrars
General Office, who consolidate all the information into one file.

The monthly death data is provided by the Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare (AIHW), co-ordinated by the Tasmanian RBDM and is supplied
to Services Australia.

Data is matched using personal identity details; surname, first name,
middle initial, date of birth and gender. Tight matching processes
ensure it is highly unlikely the wrong customer will be matched, but the
possibility will always be considered.

Matched cases with a date of death after the date of grant of the
Centrelink payment are selected. Note: matched cases with a date of
death before the date of grant of the Centrelink payment are referred to
the Intelligence and Investigations Branch.

Automated processing

Automated processing occurs when a deceased customer is clearly
identified.

Manual death action may be required, for example for non-customer
partners of Centrelink customers, or if the customer fails the automated
death process.

If manual death action is required, an Integrated Review System (IRS)
intervention is set up for processing through a Customer Compliance
team. It is set up on the customer's record, or the parent/guardian's
record if the customer is a child.

The Resources page contains links to Service Desk, the Ryerson Index
website and Information Commissioner guidelines for using data matching.

Related links

Initiating and assessing Registrar-General's Office Interventions (RGO)

Finalising Registrar-General's Office Interventions (RGO)

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Parenting Payment (PP) and bereavement

Procedures for non-Compliance staff in Compliance Risk Branch (CRB)
interventions

Requesting refunds and raising debts for deceased customer

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
