
Creating or reviewing the investigation plan 110-11010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Intelligence and Investigations Branch only.

This document outlines the process of planning an Intelligence and
Investigations Branch investigation. It explains how to record and
maintain the investigation plan and evidence matrix.

Definition of an investigation

The Australian Government Investigations Standards (AGIS) states that an
investigation is a process of seeking information relevant to an
alleged, apparent or potential breach of the law, involving possible
judicial proceedings.

The primary purpose is to gather admissible evidence for any subsequent
action.

The AGIS also states that investigations should commence with an overall
planning process and where possible, result in a written investigation
plan.

Purpose of investigation plan

The preparation of an investigation plan enables the consolidation and
communication of an allegation, objectives, avenues of inquiry, risks,
sensitivities and costs associated with a proposed investigation.

The investigation plan provides the Senior Investigator/Approvers (who
are responsible for approval of the plan) with an outline of the
proposed investigative process, including the risks and costs likely to
be associated with this action.

Investigation Plan Template

The Investigation Plan Template has been developed by the Intelligence
and Investigations Branch Operational Policy Team as a tool for the
investigator to plan and document the enquiries that are required to
prove the elements of the identified criminal offence. The template
enables risks and sensitivities, and associated mitigation strategies to
be documented.

The investigation plan template and evidence matrix are to be completed
and uploaded to the investigation record.

These are living documents and should be maintained as the investigation
progresses. They should be reviewed, and amended if appropriate, at
critical decision points during the investigation. If they are amended
during the investigation, all previous versions must be retained.

Related links

Receipt of investigation case

Critical case reporting

Critical decision recording

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
