
Assessing an overseas Income and Assets Review (AUS220) 110-02010040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Centrelink International Services (CIS) staff only.

This document outlines information about the Income and Assets Review
(AUS220) issued to overseas customers to review their income and assets
details to ensure that they receive their correct pension entitlement.

On this Page:

Issuing the AUS220

The AUS220 is issued automatically to selected customers residing
overseas. A Service Officer in Centrelink International Services (CIS)
may send the form manually to an overseas customer if there is a need to
review the customer's income and assets.

English and bilingual versions of the form are available on the Services
Australia website to CIS staff only.

If a customer has other language needs, a bilingual Income and Assets
Mod(iA) can be manually issued in place of the AUS220.

If issued manually, the CIS Service Officer must create a manual review
to fall due 28 days after the form is issued and record a DOC on the
customer's record providing details of the action taken.

Returning the AUS220

The customer is required to return the form to CIS within 28 days of its
receipt. If a system generated AUS220 is not registered as returned
within 42 days, a reminder form is automatically issued. If the form is
not returned within 42 days of the reminder, the customer's payment will
be automatically suspended, reason PER (Failure to return Income and
Assets Update). If the form is still not returned, within 28 days of
suspension, a work item is created.

If a customer requests an extension of time to lodge the AUS220, they
should be advised to return the form immediately with a notation that
they are awaiting further information.

When the form is returned and scanned, a work item is created for
allocation to CIS. The Service Officer must register the form as
returned, to ensure the automated review and suspension does not occur.

Registering the form will create an activity on the customer record. The
CIS Service Officer should check the form for completion and update
details on the customer's record as required.

Note: if already suspended, the customer's payment must be restored and
any other work item that may have been created must be completed.

Once the update is completed, all work items must be finalised and
actions and results recorded in a closed DOC.

Note: updating income and assets may result in an overpayment to be
investigated.

The Resources page contains links to the International Programme
Homepage, links to different versions of the AUS220, and relevant
modules.

Related links

Foreign Pension coding

Foreign income and assets

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Assessing an Income and Assets Update (SA220) form

Assessing and coding the Income and Assets Mod iA

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
