
Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing - defined benefit products 110-19082252

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document explains how to action a manual automated income stream
review for defined benefit products.

Purposes

The automatic update process checks different fields before
automatically applying an income stream provider's data. Some of these
handoffs are unique to defined benefit income streams.

Differences for defined benefit income streams

Defined benefit income streams can have handoffs due to the following
differences in the provider data compared to the customer’s record:

-   Start date
-   Product type
-   Provider name
-   Tax-free component method

A handoff may also be generated when the defined benefit income stream
is suspended.

Suspended defined benefit income streams

An income stream provider may suspend the customer's income stream:

-   for failure to confirm proof of life, or
-   because of returned correspondence

If a provider has suspended a customer's income stream, the customer
must contact the provider to:

-   restart the payment and
-   get paid any arrears

The customer's income stream is not zeroed off on the system when a
suspension occurs.

When the provider pays the arrears to the customer, no coding is needed
on the customer's record.

Customer's past fortnightly payments are already adjusted to account for
the income from their defined benefit income stream.

Changes in tax-free component method

The provider data may have a different tax-free component method to what
is coded on the customer's record.

Apply the tax-free component (TFC) method in the provider data to the
customer's record.

Do not change the TFC method to I or F if:

-   the customer's record has a method of S (saved), and
-   the provider data has a method of New with a TFC amount lower than
    the TFC under the saved method

For more details about TFC methods, see Adding or updating a defined
benefit income stream.

The Resources page has links to the website, Process Direct current
issues, the Level 2 Policy Help Desk and the Relevant Number Calculator
tool. It outlines what to consider when actioning handoffs and when
recoding defined benefit income streams.

Related links

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing -
account-based and market-linked

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
