
Actioning return of an Income and Assets Review (SA220 and AUS220) 110-02010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to actioning Income and
Assets Review (SA220m and AUS220).

Purpose of the review

Customers are issued an SA220 or AUS220 form so that their and their
partner's income and asset details can be updated.

There are a number of Income and Assets reviews that use this form:

-   The SA220 may be issued if there have been numerous changes in the
    customer's circumstances
-   The SA220 is issued by the system as part of a bereavement review.
    It helps the customer update their income and assets that may have
    been transferred from the estate of their late partner
-   The AUS220 is issued automatically to selected customers living
    overseas. These are processed by International Services (CIS). Note:
    this form is not available in service centres and Smart Centres as
    an online form

Returning the SA220

If a customer is unable to complete the form by the due date, they
should return the form with a notation stating they are awaiting further
information. If the form was sent as part of a bereavement review, but
the customer cannot complete it because their late partner’s estate has
not yet been finalised, the review can be extended.

When the form has been returned, all details for the customer (and
partner if applicable) are checked and updated. Supporting documents
will be sighted, recorded and returned to the customer.

[]The customer can also upload the document online.

The customer's local service centre can process an SA220 that was issued
by service centre or Smart Centre staff.

Smart Centre staff can process the SA220 if there is a scanned image and
staff can complete all the required updates. Staff must ensure the
scanned image activity (SCN) is cancelled after completing updates.

The Resources page contains links to the Income and Assets Review form
(SA220m).

Related links

Assessing an Income and Assets Update (SA220) form

Assessing transfers to Age Pension

Assessing an overseas Income and Assets Review (AUS220)

Bereavement reviews

Income and asset options online

Transfer to Age Pension

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
