
Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing - account-based and market-linked products 110-19082246

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document explains how to action an automated income stream review
manual handoff for account-based and market-linked products.

Purpose

The automatic update process checks various fields before it applies an
income stream provider's data.

Differences for account-based and market-linked income streams

Account-based and market-linked income streams can have handoffs due to
the following differences in the provider data compared to the
customer's record:

-   Commutations
-   Product type
-   Purchase date
-   Purchase price

Relevant number changes over life of a product

The relevant number for account-based income streams products will be
the life expectancy of the customer (or their partner if they are a
reversionary beneficiary and auto-reversion applies). It depends on who
has the longest life expectancy.

If a customer separates or becomes re-partnered, this can change the
relevant number for the product.

Market-linked income streams are assessed based on their term number.
For example, the lifespan of the product. The term number must be a
whole number. It will not change for market-linked income streams.

Commutation differences

These occur when the total commutations since commencement in the
provider data does not match the total commutations on the customer’s
record.

This can occur for various reasons, including but not limited to:

-   the customer not declaring partial commutations for previous review
    periods over the life of the product
-   Services Australia recording excess commutations on the customer’s
    record. For example, if the customer elected to reverse a partial
    commutation

Any partial commutations from a market-linked income (MLI) stream must
be investigated to determine if the commutation is allowable or not.

Note: MLIs are non-commutable except in extremely limited circumstances.

Reversionary beneficiaries

Purchase price and purchase date differences for reversionary
beneficiaries can occur when an income stream has been incorrectly coded
from the date the customer started receiving payments. The purchase
price and purchase date should be for the original income stream
product.

If the customer's partner has died, an income stream schedule on the
deceased partner’s record may help with fixing these differences.

The Resources page contains links to Process Direct current issues, the
Level 2 Policy Help Desk, Services Australia website, relevant number
calculator, and information to help action these handoffs.

Related links

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing - defined
benefit

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Commutation of asset-tested income streams

Commutation of asset-test exempt (ATE) income streams

Income stream reviews

Income stream customer reviews – account-based and market-linked income
streams

Income stream customer reviews - defined benefit income streams

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
