
Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing 110-18100838

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Automation of Income Stream Reviews (AISR).

This document explains how to process an automated income stream review
manual handoff.

Purpose

Income stream providers send data about their members to the agency for
an Automatic Income Stream Review (AISR).

This does not include:

-   Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF), or
-   Small APRA Funds (SAF)

AISR identifies and reviews income streams held by customers, concession
card holders and their partners.

The system updates the relevant income streams for all full product
matches from the identity and product matching processes. If the system
cannot update the product, it creates a manual handoff for action by a
Service Officer.

Types of handoffs created by the system

The system creates a handoff when:

provider data and data on the customer's record are different

provider data states that a customer's defined benefit income stream was
suspended and then restored. The provider restores income stream
payments when:

-   the customer contacts the provider, and
-   the provider pays arrears for the period of suspension

an update returns a 'check assessment' edit for AISR and creates an
ISRDBT handoff. For example, when the auto-update process results in:

-   an undetermined debt shell Manual Follow Up (MFU) greater than $100
    on the customer and/or partner record
-   a change to the customer's benefit status, or
-   a change to the rate of payment that exceeds the maximum weekly
    variation (currently $300)

The Resources page has links to Process Direct current issues, Level 2
Policy Help Desk, and the Services Australia website. It also covers
what to consider for historical requests and when actioning income
stream review handoffs.

Related links

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing - account
based and market-linked products

Automated income stream review handoffs for manual processing - defined
benefit products

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

Income stream reviews - coding accuracy

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
