
Income compliance program class action 110-20050703

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to respond to customer queries about the
Income Compliance Program class action.

What is the class action

A class action is a court proceeding that is started on behalf of a
group of people. Gordon Legal filed a class action lawsuit against the
Commonwealth of Australia on behalf of 6 named applicants and other
group members. Customers who meet the definition of a group member are
part of the class action unless they have opted out.

This relates to Centrelink debts raised by income compliance reviews
since July 2015. It includes people with debts that did not use averaged
ATO income information. Note: group members can be current Centrelink
customers or former customers (no longer receiving a Centrelink
payment).

Income compliance class action settlement

The Federal Court of Australia (the court) on approved the Income
Compliance class action settlement on 11 June 2021. This was agreed
between the Commonwealth of Australia and Gordon Legal.

The approved settlement amount is $112 million. Gordon Legal's court
approved costs will be deducted from this amount.

The Settlement Distribution Scheme is the method Services Australia (the
agency) will distribute the approved class action settlement to eligible
group members. The scheme will be implemented in line with the Deed of
Settlement and approved Implementation Plan.

The Implementation Plan for the scheme explains the settlement for the
Income compliance program class action.

Customer record and class action notices

Group members were notified of their debt/s category and eligibility for
a settlement payment between 29 October 2021 and 19 November 2021.

Not all group members had a debt categorised as eligible for a
settlement payment.

Ineligible group members who were expecting to be eligible for a
settlement payment may have contacted the agency because they were
dissatisfied with the categorisation letter.

Based on the categorisation, eligible group members may need to update
bank account details:

-   registration closed for settlement payments 11 February 2022
-   registered eligible group members had until 14 March 2022 to update
    payment destination online
-   registered group members can still update bank account details if
    required by contacting Income Compliance staff who will update
    payment destination within the class action settlement transaction
-   eligible group members who receive a Centrelink payment, or who
    received a refund did not need to do anything to receive a
    settlement payment as they were auto registered. The settlement will
    be paid directly into the bank account recorded on the group
    member's Centrelink record

Queries or disputes

Deceased estates

Deceased group members had until 7 January 2022 to lodge a dispute.

If a next of kin, executor or administrator calls, warm transfer using
Softphone to Compliance-ClassActionSettlement-Executor.

General group members

Group members had until 10 December 2021 to request a query or dispute
if they thought:

-   the agency had not included all of their eligible debts, or
-   the agency had not taken into account repayments the group member
    made on a debt, or
-   the debt was based on averaged ATO income information

If the query or dispute was not requested by this date, the
categorisation of their debt/s cannot be reviewed and their debt/s
remain in the same category.

Queries and disputes for this class action were handled differently to
other complaints. These were not lodged via the ARO/Appeals workflow or
as an escalated complaint.

Payment outcome

Eligible registered group members will be issued a payment outcome
letter by mid-2022. This confirms the settlement payment amount and the
calculation method. It shows how to request a review of the amount if
the group member thinks it is not correct.

Child Support and Medicare staff will not be able to see the DOC as it
is on the customer's Centrelink record. See the Process and Resources
page for help with customer enquiries about the class action.

The Resources page contains:

-   the Implementation Plan
-   contact details
-   links to the Services Australia and Gordon Legal websites
-   a DOC template for recording customer interactions about the class
    action
-   FAQ tables to help staff respond to enquiries
-   media protocols
-   Refund Operations Helpdesk form

Contents

Processing class action settlements

Processing class action settlements for customers with manual exceptions

Processing class action settlements for incarcerated customers

Related links

Income compliance refunds

Income compliance remediation initial assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
