
EIC online compliance interventions 110-13090000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Employment Income Confirmation (EIC) and Check and Update Past Income
(CUPI) Operational Blueprint pages are under review. Compliance Officers
must seek advice from the Policy Engagement Team before actioning an EIC
or CUPI. Contact the team by the CADO Service Desk page.

This document outlines how customers complete an Employment Income
Confirmation (EIC).

Overview of EIC online compliance interventions

Pay-As-You-Go (PAYG) interventions have transitioned to an online
platform and are now known as an Employment Income Confirmation (EIC)
interventions.

EIC interventions are triggered by external data-matching with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

The EIC gives the customer the opportunity, through an interactive
online workflow, to confirm or update employment income information
provided to Centrelink by the ATO.

[] Customers can complete the intervention online at any time without
first visiting or calling Centrelink. Customers can access the details
directly by accessing their Centrelink online account via myGov, or by
using a URL and confirmation code provided to them in their initial
letter.

Customers will receive a letter advising them to access the EIC and
confirm or update their employment income. The letter will include the
information received from the ATO, a URL and confirmation code and will
outline the consequences for failing to complete the intervention by the
due date.

The letter advises that if they are not able to register or they need
help updating their employment income they can contact Compliance on
1800 086 400.

If the customer updates the information provided by the ATO they may be
required to provide documents to validate this update.

All manual activities will be actioned by the Customer Compliance
Division.

Roles and responsibilities of service centre and Smart Centre staff

-   [] Service delivery staff should refer customers online to undertake
    the intervention where possible
-   Customers who are seeking further information or are having
    difficulties must be referred to the Customer Compliance Division on
    1800 086 400
-   Service delivery staff must not process activities in relation to
    the EIC
-   Customers seeking assistance on registration for myGov and/or
    Centrelink online services should be assisted at the first point of
    contact
-   The online letter issued to the customer can be viewed through
    Customer First > Workspace > Search Outbound Correspondence
-   Do not cancel the activity under any circumstances. If service
    delivery staff need assistance with an outstanding EIC activity they
    should call 1800 086 400

General assistance (self-managed) for all staff

If a customer contacts about an EIC, staff should if possible:

answer any queries the customer may have

explain the help text available

[] encourage the customer to complete the EIC online

[] Customers with an active Centrelink online account can access the EIC
through myGov by either:

-   Selecting the Menu icon > Compliance > Employment Income
    Confirmation, or
-   Selecting the Employment Income Confirmation from the To Do tab on
    the landing page

Customers who do not have an active Centrelink online account or do not
wish to use their Centrelink online account, can access the EIC by
registering via the URL and Confirmation Code provided in the letter.
The registration process requires customers to verify their identity
online. Upon verification, the customer is sent a security code. The
customer accesses the EIC using their Customer Reference Number (CRN)
and the security code. The security code does not provide access to
other online services

Customers will be able to provide payslips and bank statements to
support the new gross income/net earnings workflow

If a customer does not confirm or update their employment income details
online by the due date specified in the reminder letter, the information
received from the ATO will be used to update their Centrelink record.
This may result in a debt that the customer will need to repay.
Customers will be advised of any debt via an employment income review
outcome letter and a further Accounts Payable Advice

Assisted compliance

Rather than actioning the EIC online, a customer can opt to have a CO
help them confirm or update their employment income over the telephone.
Assisted Compliance is also intended for vulnerable customers and those
with extenuating circumstances. Where Assisted Compliance occurs, the CO
is taking responsibility for ensuring any updates made to the customer
record reflect the responses provided by the customer during the EIC
conversation.

Customer support

The EIC will be referred for manual handoff in the following situations:

-   customer is unable to confirm their identity online
-   a possible anomaly or mismatch is identified
-   customer received allowances, lump sums or other income
-   customer does not have access to payslips and bank statements
-   net employment income is inconsistent with the PAYG information
-   customer disagrees with estimated gross amount
-   document validation is required
-   an assessment edit is preventing automatic assessment
-   manual debt calculation

Unearned income

If undisclosed unearned income is identified during the EIC, a manual
assessment will need to be undertaken. For example, information from the
customer indicates that the income is compensation rather than earned
income.

The assessment of unearned income is undertaken after the online EIC is
taken offline due to manual handoff.

Contents

Registered mail processing for compliance interventions

Using Assessment Assist

Using Earnings Apportion

Using the Generate Outcome Letter workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
