[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines details about the annual indexation review
letters.

On this Page:

Types of Income streams

An income stream is a regular series of payments, which may be made to a
person (or their partner) over their life time or for a fixed term.
Income stream payments may be subject to indexation, which is the
percentage increase in the gross income each year. Types of income
streams where payments may be indexed include:

-   Lifetime income stream (LIS)
-   Life Expectancy income stream (LIE)
-   Term income stream (TIS)
-   Lifetime pooled income stream - superannuation (LPS)
-   Lifetime pooled income stream - non superannuation (LPO)
-   Defined Benefit income stream

The following non-defined benefit income stream products are obsolete.
They can no longer be coded from 20 September 2004. These products were
never converted to the new types. Customer records with these product
types still exist on the system and may be indexed:

-   Ordinary Money Annuity Life (ANL)
-   Ordinary Money Annuity Term (ANN)
-   Rollover Money Annuity Life (ARL)
-   ETP Superannuation Pension Life (ARP)
-   Rollover Money Annuity Term (ARS)
-   ETP Superannuation Pension Term (ART)

Non-defined benefit income streams

Non-defined benefit income streams include:

-   lifetime
-   lifetime pooled
-   life expectancy, and
-   term income streams

The indexation may be a fixed rate such as 3% per annum or linked to the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) or based on any other method.

-   The indexation date is usually the anniversary of the purchase date
-   The indexation method and date will be stated on the income stream
    schedule
-   Indexation fields display when recording the income stream
-   It is important for Service Officers to make sure that the
    indexation details are recorded if the income stream is indexed

If the indexation method is 'CPI', 'SAL' or 'OTH', the system will
automatically issue a letter to the customer or their partner requesting
the new gross income amount and frequency of payment. The product
details are listed on the letter:

-   product type
-   product provider name, and
-   product reference number

This will be based on product details available on the customer's or
their partner's Centrelink record.

It is important that Service Officers make sure the indexation date is
also advanced by one year when the new gross income is updated:

-   care should be taken when advancing the date as it is based on the
    anniversary of the start date
-   it is not one year from the event date or the date the customer
    advises the new gross income amount or the date the income is
    updated

Note: if the indexation method is 'FIX', the system will automatically
increase the gross income amount by the indexation percentage on the
indexation date. Staff must not update the gross income even if the
customer contacts to advise the new income amount. Service Officers
should tell the customer that their income stream will be updated
automatically by the Centrelink system.

A letter is sent to the customer and/or their partner on the indexation
date, if a customers has:

-   an asset-test exempt lifetime or life expectancy income stream paid
    from a Self Managed Superannuation Fund (SMSF), or
-   Small Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)
    Superannuation Funds (SAF), and
-   the payments are subject to fixed indexation (Indexation Method is
    'FIX')

This letter tells the customer about:

-   the indexation rate used
-   the adjusted gross annual income from the product, and
-   informing Services Australia if the indexation rate has changed

Defined benefit income streams

The indexation fields will not display for defined benefit income
streams. The CPI indexation date for each provider will be held in the
system.

In the case of defined benefit superannuation fund, providers
participate in the bulk electronic update, income is auto updated by
using data supplied by them.

In the case of defined benefit superannuation fund, providers that do
not participate in the bulk electronic update:

-   the system will automatically issue a letter, and
-   a defined benefit income stream schedule to the customer or their
    partner on the indexation date

The letter requests the customer to get the schedule completed by their
income stream provider and to return it in the enclosed reply paid
envelope. If the provider/super fund issues their own schedule, the
customer is asked to attach this schedule to the covering letter and
return both in the reply paid envelope.

The schedule will be pre-populated with the product details, that is,
product provider name and product reference number and will be based on
product details available on the customer's or their partner's record.

Review cycle

Customers and/or their partners have 21 days from the date of issue of
the letter to provide Centrelink with the details. A reminder letter
will automatically be sent after 28 days if there has been no response.
If the customer or their partner does not respond to the reminder letter
within 28 days, their payments will be automatically suspended. Their
payment will cancel after 13 weeks from the suspension where there has
been no reply or updates made.

When the requested details are updated on the system, the date of event
(DOV) will be the date of receipt of the details.

Related links

February income stream reviews

August income stream reviews

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a defined benefit income stream

Adding or updating a pooled lifetime income stream

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
