
Income compliance refunds 110-20070738

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff trained in Income Compliance Refunds.

This document outlines information about income compliance refunds.

Refunds

On 19 November 2019, the Minister announced changes to the income
compliance program, including that Services Australia would no longer
raise income compliance review debts based wholly or partially on
averaged information from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).

On 29 May 2020, the Minister announced that from July this year,
Services Australia will refund all repayments made on debts raised
wholly or partially using income averaging of ATO data. Refunds will
also be made for any interest charges and/or recovery fees paid on
related debts.

Any debts previously raised wholly or partially using averaged income
information from the ATO will be:

-   reduced to a $0 balance, and
-   any amounts recovered for these debt/s will be refunded to the
    customer

Responding to customer contact

When a customer is on the phone, Compliance Officers:

must provide first contact resolution for outstanding issues

who are trained in Income Compliance Refunds (regardless of the line
they are servicing), must check the customer’s record for the following
activities and help customers with:

-   actioning failed updates
-   updating the record of non-current customers

Lodging an income compliance refund query on behalf of a customer

If a customer contacts about an income compliance refund, submit an
income compliance refund query on the customer’s behalf.

This will create and allocate an activity to a Compliance Officer
trained in income compliance refunds. They will contact the customer to
resolve their query.

Manual processing

If the system is unable to complete the refund process, a Compliance
Officer will manually:

-   amend the debt to zero
-   progress the refund, and
-   if applicable, refund any repayments made on the debt/s to the
    customer

Customer is bankrupt or in a debt agreement

When a person cannot pay their debts, they can either enter into a debt
agreement or declare bankruptcy. If a Centrelink debt is included in the
arrangement, the agency may receive payments in the form of 'dividends'
from an administrator or trustee. The Resources page has more on
bankruptcy and debt agreements.

If the customer has a debt that is part of a bankruptcy or debt
agreement, the administrators and trustees will be engaged before a
refund can be issued. Engagement will be managed through a specialist
processing team.

Actioning failed updates

If failed customer updates occur during system processing, progress
using the Income Compliance Refunds workflow in Process Direct.

Returned funds processing

If the customer’s payment destination is incorrect, the funds may be
returned from the financial institution.

If the refund is returned, update the customer’s payment destination and
reissue the refund.

Reissue funds processing

If a customer advises they did not receive their refund, confirm or
update the customer’s details and reissue the refund.

A request to return the funds is sent to the financial institution where
the initial refund was paid. If the funds are not returned, an
investigation will be undertaken to determine who received the funds and
a debt/s raised.

Customer is deceased

Services Australia will try to locate the executor or administrator of
the deceased estate and contact them to advise:

-   the refund reason
-   the process
-   the value of the refund

Refund payments can be made to them via direct credit or cheque.

A third party, executor or administrator of the estate may also contact
to advise Services Australia that the customer is deceased, or to advise
their executor status and enquire about the refund.

The executor or administrator of the estate, or the solicitor acting as
an intermediary, may contact in response to the agency’s contact.

Non-current customers

Update the contact and payment destination details for non-current
customers and progress the refund on the customer's behalf.

Tailored servicing and processing

Some current and former customers may need a tailored servicing approach
due to their circumstances. This includes:

-   some current customers who will get a refund via instalments due to
    the value of the refund, and
-   customers with a BasicsCard (Income Management) or Cashless Debit
    Card

Services Australia will try to call these customers to offer support and
services to help them manage their money. This includes financial
information and social worker support. The outbound contact will also
explain when a customer may receive their refund over a number of days.

These arrangements relate to:

-   current customers who will get a refund via instalments as the
    refund is more than $20,000
-   Income Managed and customers subject to Cashless Debit Card if they
    receive a refund greater than $1,000

The Resources page contains DOC requirements, FAQs, the script for
refund enquiries, issuing Q888 letters and letter text. There are also
links to contact details, forms, the Services Australia website and
external probate websites.

Contents

Processing income compliance refunds for customers with manual
exceptions

Customer contact and processing income compliance refunds for
incarcerated customers

Related links

Income compliance program class action

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
