
Fraud 110-16000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides an introduction for staff about fraud and a link
to reporting suspected fraud. It also connects staff to fraud prevention
resources and contacts.

Government intent

Under the Commonwealth Fraud Control Framework 2017, fraud is
‘dishonestly obtaining a benefit, or causing a loss by deception or
other means’. Fraud can be committed by an external and/or internal
party.

It is a responsibility of all Service Australia staff to report
suspected fraud and corruption.

External fraud

External fraud is fraud committed by the agency’s customers, third
parties, or members of the general public. Examples of external include:

-   claiming a payment or service based on false information
-   deliberately failing to update personal details, resulting in a
    financial or other gain

All staff play an important role in detecting customer and third party
fraud. See Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption to report any suspected
fraud, or assist a member of the public to report suspected fraud.

Internal fraud

Internal fraud is fraud committed by staff, either intentionally or as a
result of exploitation by an outsider.

Examples of internal fraud include:

an employee accessing agency systems to claim payments or services for
themselves

disclosing customer details to a person or business outside the agency
for a financial gain or other benefit

disclosing other official information without authority, such as
procurement details

dishonestly claiming annual or personal leave (such as falsifying a
medical certificate), overtime or flex, or travel allowances

claiming false qualifications or job experience

sending official information outside the agency without authority

dishonestly claiming payments and services, or helping another person do
this

using a Cabcharge or corporate credit card for personal expenses

manipulating customer information:

-   for a personal benefit
-   for someone else, or
-   to cause a loss

stealing or inappropriately using agency equipment for personal use

fraudulent or unethical recruitment practices, including employment
fraud

Report suspected fraud and corruption of any type being committed by, or
in connection with, a Services Australia staff member.

Identity fraud

Identity fraud involves a person using an identity other than their own
for a financial or other advantage.

Identity crime describes a range of activities where personal
information is fabricated, manipulated, stolen, assumed, lent,
'borrowed' or purchased in order to facilitate a crime.

Fraud and Corruption Control Plan

Services Australia has a strategy in place to prevent, control and
detect fraud. See Fraud and Corruption Control Plan.

The Resources page contains relevant intranet links.

Contents

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Customer contacts non-investigation staff about an investigation

Planning, commencement and critical decision recording for fraud
investigations

Prosecutions

Gathering information and evidence for fraud investigations

Optical surveillance

Fraud and Corruption Control Plan

Related links

Identity fraud

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Privacy, sharing and storage of customer information

Advice of a scam or theft or loss of personal information

Third party Data Breach

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
