
Initiation and customer contact for Automation of Income Stream (AoIS) interventions 110-19021337

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for AoIS interventions including
initiation, customer contact and updates, both verbal and documented.

AoIS interventions

It is mandatory for all income stream product providers to supply
information electronically to complete interventions for the following
income stream product types:

-   account-based income streams
-   market-linked income streams
-   defined benefit income streams
-   life-time expectancy income streams

This excludes:

-   Self-managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF)
-   Small Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA)
    Superannuation Funds (SAF)

Initiation

All AoIS interventions are loaded into Process Direct as
non-discretionary intervention. They are centrally initiated from the
Compliance Management Centre (CMC) via Selection Intervention Management
System (SIMS).

Initiated interventions will have:

-   a request to contact letter sent to the customer (and their nominee
    if applicable)
-   an intervention Note created to record all AoIS intervention actions
-   an IRS review set to held for 28 days in the future

Customer contact

A letter is sent to the customer asking them to contact within 28 days
on the phone number provided to discuss income stream details.

If the customer fails to respond to the contact letter:

-   the income stream details will be updated from the last date paid
    to + 1 using the information received from providers
-   a request to third parties will be sent to get historical
    information

Verbal updates

If the customer can give the information to enable an update, this can
be done over the phone. If there is enough information from the data
match and from the customer to fully address the discrepancy, they can
accept this information.

If the customer cannot give the information, check what type of extra
information is needed.

Documented evidence

If information cannot be accepted verbally, the customer must be given
the opportunity to provide suitable evidence to support an update. If
the customer is unable to give this evidence, extra information can be
sought from relevant third parties and applied to the customer's record.

The Resources page contains links to the online service desk form,
review and appeals information on the Services Australia website, and
DOC templates.

Related links

Income streams

Income stream reviews

Assessing and finalising Automation of Income Stream (AoIS)
interventions

Upload documents service

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
