
February income stream reviews 110-02060010

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the February review of certain
types of income streams.

On this Page:

Income streams reviewed in February

The following income stream product types are reviewed in February:

-   account-based income stream (AIS)
-   allocated annuities (ALA)
-   allocated pensions (ALP)
-   market-linked income stream (MLI)

Income streams paid from Self-Managed Superannuation Funds (SMSF) and
Small APRA Funds (SAF) are not reviewed in February.

Review type

This is an automated review using the Automation of income stream
reviews (AISR) process.

All income stream product providers must supply information
electronically to Services Australia for completing reviews for:

-   Account-based income streams (including allocated pensions and
    allocated annuities)
-   Market-linked income streams

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) holders and their partners are
included.

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) holders and their partners are
included for account-based income streams only.

If a customer was unable to be matched with information from their
income stream provider, the system will generate a customer review
letter in April. See Income stream customer reviews – account-based and
market-linked income streams.

Customers and/or their partners have 21 days from the date of issue of
the letter to provide Centrelink with the details. The system will send
a reminder letter after 28 days if there has been no response. If the
customer or their partner does not respond to the reminder letter within
28 days, the system will suspend their payments. Their payment will
cancel after 13 weeks from the suspension where there has been no reply
or updates made.

Related links

Income stream reviews

August income stream reviews

Income stream customer reviews – account-based and market-linked income
streams

Adding or updating an account-based income stream

Adding or updating a market-linked income stream

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
