
Initiation and customer contact for Earned Income Interventions (phone based) (EIIP) 110-13010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting Earned Income Interventions - Phone (EIIP)

This document outlines the process for initiating EIIPs and customer
contact, including action to take if the customer does not contact.

EIIP aim and triggers

The aim of these interventions is to contact the customer as close as
possible to the change in circumstances to:

-   educate them on their obligations
-   avoid overpayments, and
-   ensure they receive the correct entitlement

The customer provides all of the information. No verification is sought
from third parties.

Triggers for these interventions:

-   TDF
    Tax File Number Declaration Forms are signed by employees when
    starting with a new employer. The employer is required to send this
    form to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). This information is
    then provided to Centrelink
-   DE
    When customers registered with Workforce Australia gain employment,
    Workforce Australia advises the Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment. This information is then provided to Centrelink
-   EUD
    Earnings Under Declaration Interventions identify customers at risk
    of incorrectly declaring employment income. These customers are
    identified via internal data matching and profiling of data held by
    Centrelink

Initiation

An intervention is loaded to the Integrated Review System (IRS).

Interventions are initiated by:

-   Compliance Officers after the intervention has been loaded to the
    Outbound Dialler (OBD) telephony technology, or
-   Payments and Integrity Operations Strategy

Customer contact

Customer contact is initiated by a call through the Outbound Dialler, or
by sending a request for information (IRSRFI) letter to the customer.

When a customer is not contacted during the outbound call strategy, the
intervention will be initiated by letter:

-   an IRSRFI letter sent to the customer (and their nominee if
    applicable)
-   an intervention DOC created
-   an IRS review set to held for 21 days

Customer fails to contact

If a current customer:

fails to respond to the Request for information (IRSRFI) letter, another
indirect letter may be issued to them. This advises their obligation and
to update their details via their normal channels for reporting

responds to the IRSRFI letter, is given the educational message, needs
more time to get their employment income details but then fails to call
back by the due date, make one attempt to contact them

-   If successful, progress the intervention
-   If unsuccessful, the intervention can be finalised as the
    educational message was given at the initial contact

If the customer is no longer current and fails to respond to the IRSRFI
letter, the intervention can be finalised.

Attribution of results

Before updating employment income details on the customer's record, the
Compliance Officer must make sure they have selected the IRS review.

This is also known as accessing the Review Image. This will make sure
that any results from those updates attribute to the review. For
example, debt outcomes.

The Resources page contains links to the Service Desk enquiry form, DOC
templates and questioning techniques.

Related links

Assessing and finalising Earned Income Interventions (Phone based)
(EIIP)

Adding a Manual Partner Intervention

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Call and screen recording - information and access

Calling a customer or returning a customer’s call

Coding the Contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Compliance intervention referral for Case Selection or escalation

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Earnings Apportionment Tool (EAT)

Family and domestic violence

Getting it Right (GIR) Minimum Standards

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Interpreter Services

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering

Social workers role in Payments and Integrity

Recording and correcting employment income details

Recovery Fee Workload Management for Compliance Interventions

Referral for Anomalies and Mismatches for Compliance Interventions

Types of Centrelink debts and how they are generated

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Using the MultiCal debt calculator

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
