
Unauthorised Medicare activity 110-15130000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to manage customer enquiries and system
messages about unauthorised Medicare activity using customer records.

Unauthorised Medicare activity

In cases where a customer's Medicare details has been updated without
consent, and unauthorised Medicare claims have been made using the
customer's Medicare number:

-   action is taken to correct any compromised records associated with
    the customer, and
-   to stop any further misuse of the customer's Medicare details

Services Australia as part of the process to correct the unauthorised
Medicare activity may contact customers. Alternatively, customers may
notice changes to their details, and/or their ability to receive
Medicare payments, before any contact has been made by Services
Australia. As a result, customers may contact Services Australia for
more details.

Customer concerned about receiving the 'Your new Medicare card is on its way' letter

A customer may contact Services Australia if they are concerned about
the 'Your new Medicare card is on its way' letter they received as part
of the action taken to correct the unauthorised Medicare activity.

See the Process page for advice on managing these enquiries.

Medicare Payment Integrity (MPI) restrictions

MPI restrictions are associated with customers who have been affected by
unauthorised Medicare activity. Error and warning messages have been
created in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS) and
Mainframe to indicate the presence of these restrictions. These messages
will appear on various CDMS screens used to display and change consumer
details. In the Mainframe, the messages will appear when attempting to
process a claim associated with a Medicare number or consumer who has an
MPI restriction.

Restriction MPI-1 is applied to the Medicare number. It prevents all
customer detail updates and claims using the affected Medicare number on
both CDMS and Mainframe. When an attempt to use the invalid Medicare
number is identified, an error message will appear.

Restriction MPI-2 is applied to the consumer affected by unauthorised
Medicare activity. An MPI-2 flag is recorded on the Customer Restriction
tab in CDMS and Mainframe if there are concerns for potential identity
compromise or unauthorised access. Escalation is not required as it is
only an internal warning message for staff.

An MPI-2 flag does not affect a customer’s access to online services.
Further attempts of unauthorised updates and claiming to this consumer's
record may occur. Check that no other customer restrictions are in place
and CDMS is updated with the correct customer data. For example, the
address displayed is in the customer's current residential state.

Cancel and prevent Medicare online accounts via the Consumer Directory Maintenance System (CDMS)

Medicare online account customers who want to cancel their account, and
customers without a Medicare online account, have an additional security
option to prevent creation of an account in the future. Any existing
Medicare online account must be cancelled before a prevent restriction
can be applied.

Customers with an existing Medicare online account can cancel, or cancel
and prevent (if desired), via self-service. See Access to Medicare self
service - set up, checking, cancelling and enabling.

Service Officers can apply a prevent restriction to consumer records
without an existing Medicare online account via CDMS. See the Process
page.

Unauthorised bank accounts

If a bank account has been updated without the customer's consent:

-   that account is registered in CDMS as invalid, and
-   is end-dated in CDMS against the known customer record

This stops any payments by EFT into this account. In addition, an
overnight update of CDMS will end-date this bank account wherever it is
found to be active against any other consumer record.

Before the overnight CDMS update occurring, a Mainframe abend error
message 9-CAP10010 may appear when processing a Medicare claim for a
consumer whose active bank account matches the invalid bank account.
When presented with this error message, go to the Process page and
follow the instructions.

Alternatively, when a Service Officer attempts to add banking details on
a consumer record, and those bank details have previously been
registered as invalid, an error message will return. When presented with
this error message, go to the Process page and follow the instructions.

The Resources page has samples of letters and scripting about action
taken to correct unauthorised Medicare activity. It also has links to
external websites myGov and Australian Federal Police, and the Intranet
page for Identity Security and Verifications.

Related links

Authenticating a Medicare customer

Child Protection Agency – Medicare card number requests for children and
young people in out-of-home care (OOHC)

Amend customer details in the Consumer Directory Maintenance System
(CDMS) for Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
