
Assessing and finalising JobKeeper compliance interventions 110-20052106

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For staff conducting JobKeeper compliance interventions only.

This document contains how to assess and finalise JobKeeper compliance
interventions.

Assessment of income

For employment income before 7 December 2020, amount received =
JobKeeper Tier Rate

The assessment of JobKeeper Payment is based on the relevant payslip
periods as determined by the customer’s employer, not the ATO
fortnights.

-   If the customer did not physically work, obtain the JobKeeper
    Payment amount paid to the customer in their payslip period.
    Apportion this to the customer’s Centrelink entitlement periods
-   If the customer physically worked in the payslip period and the
    dates worked are available, the JobKeeper top-up amount is applied
    to the actual dates worked. This includes days the customer was
    absent from work (for example, received sick leave)
-   If unable to determine the actual days worked in the payslip period,
    add the earned employment income to the JobKeeper top-up amount, up
    to $750 a week. Apportion this to the customer’s Centrelink
    entitlement period

In general

After obtaining the relevant employment information, update the
customer's record to assess the earnings.

If the update results in a debt:

-   Fully explain this to the customer. This includes telling them what
    information was used to calculate the outcome. This could include
    verification obtained from the customer or third party (employer)
-   Give the customer the chance to give more information before
    finalising the outcome
-   If unable to contact the customer, send a Pre-adverse decision
    (Q888) letter to advise the customer and/or their partner how the
    outcome was calculated

Coronavirus Supplement debts

The customer will incur a Coronavirus Supplement debt if they:

-   have a change in circumstances (other than a benefit transfer)
    backdated, and
-   no longer qualify or receive at least $1 of benefit that attracts
    the supplement

Do not bundle Coronavirus Supplement debts with other debts. Raise them
separately.

Recovery Fee

Customers receiving a working age payment (other than Carer Payment and
some Special Benefit categories) who incur a debt due to income from
personal exertion may have a Recovery Fee applied if:

-   they failed or refused to declare their income from personal
    exertion without a reasonable excuse, or
-   they 'knowingly' or 'recklessly' provided incorrect information when
    required to do so under social security law

Finalising JobKeeper compliance interventions

First check that all activities completed as part of the JobKeeper
Compliance Intervention are correctly attributed to the review in IRS.

Finalise the intervention after:

-   the conversation with the customer (and partner if applicable)
-   delivering the education message, and
-   calculating any changes to the customer's and/or their partner's
    entitlement

If the customer (or partner if applicable) does not respond to the pre
adverse decision letter or fails to give more information, finalise the
outcome.

The Resources page contains DOC and letter templates, user guides,
internet links and links to the Services Australia website.

Related links

Initiation and customer contact for Job Keeper compliance interventions

Using the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Coding the contact screen in the Integrated Review System (IRS)

Earnings Apportionment Tool (EAT)

Using the MultiCal debt calculator

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
