
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to prepare and scan Centrelink customer
medical/sensitive documents on a Multi Function Device (MFD). All
medical/sensitive information lodged by customers is held as an
electronic Medical Information File Envelope (eMIFE). It is accessed for
decisions about new claims, reviews, exemptions from mutual obligation
requirements, and work capacity assessments.

Scanning medical/sensitive documents

When medical/sensitive documents are lodged at a Service Centre or
Assessment Services appointment, scan them at the point of receipt if
they are:

-   determined to be suitable for scanning, and
-   not listed as scannable document exceptions

Scan documents on the same day they are received, unless a scanning
contingency process has been invoked. If a document is not scanned on
the day it was received, the date of receipt must be changed on the MFD.

Sensitive documents are those that contain information that would be
considered especially sensitive to the customer. These would mostly be
medical documents. However, apply judgement to other documents that may
be sensitive. For example, unreasonable to live at home statements or
court documents.

Note: take care in cases where the customer may have changes to their
relationship status:

-   If updates are made to the record before the record is de-linked
    from the other person, the customer's personal information is at
    risk of being disclosed to the other party, which triggers a privacy
    incident
-   Consider the steps needed to keep the customer's personal
    information safe if relationship or living circumstances have
    changed. See Separating safely - protecting personal details

Centrelink medical certificates

Customers may provide a Medical Certificate (SU415) form or their
treating doctor/health professional may submit an online Medical
Certificate (SU683). If the customer's eMIFE contains the relevant
medical certificate of good enough quality to read and process, it does
not need to be scanned again.

Medical certificates processed at the point of receipt do not require
further action. Use the Store Only function on the MFD to scan them to
store.

Medical information for international agreement claims

International Services (CIS) manages documents and forms lodged by
customers for a Foreign Pension Invalidity claim. The documents are not
scanned. They are registered at the Service Centre, then forwarded to
CIS for action.

The Records Management Unit (RMU) scans all medical/sensitive documents
lodged by customers living outside Australia for a Disability Support
Pension (DSP) claim. This is done once CIS finalises the claim.

Access to historical information

Historical information held in a MIFE may be back scanned by a Records
Management Unit. This may be required to inform:

-   Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
-   Disability Medical Assessment (DMA), or
-   medical review

The Resources page contains links to a list of medical/sensitive forms
and documents that are scanned, forms and Austrac access and disclosure.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Access to scanned medical information for Assessment Services

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Locating digital images via Document Tools in Customer First

Processing a foreign pension claim

Restricted Access and eligibility

Role of staff outside Compensation Teams

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
