
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) quality checking 111-22030000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking processes for the Australian
Organ Donor Register (AODR).

On this Page:

Objectives of AODR quality checking

The objective of the quality checking procedure is to:

-   give checkers the tools to be able to identify strengths and
    weaknesses in the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) business
    process, highlighting opportunities for continuous business
    improvement, using effective quality checking processes
-   make sure quality checkers have the same understanding of the
    process
-   ensure quality checkers complete the checks in a consistent manner,
    by documenting the quality checking process

Roles and responsibilities

Managers are responsible for making sure:

-   checkers have completed the appropriate training
-   quality checks are undertaken as outlined in this procedure
-   results of quality checks are recorded appropriately
-   issues are addressed and corrections are made immediately (refer to
    Feedback)

Quality checkers must make sure that:

-   Australian Organ Donor Register business rules have been applied
    correctly
-   quality checking is performed on the specified sample size
-   feedback is given to the processing Service Officer
-   quality checking results are recorded and reported using the
    Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Quality Reporting form

Quality check of own work

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been trained
to conduct quality checks.

See Resources for a link to Quality Checking Own Work Policy

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff members selected to undertake quality checking must:

complete the mandatory prerequisite Quality Checker overview eLearning
training 'Quality Checking-Driving Quality'

successfully complete the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Quality
Checker training available on the Learning Management System

-   AODR Quality Checking, and
-   AODR Quality Checking Online Test

have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where to
find them

undergo refresher training every 12 months

Training & Support contains the course numbers for the above courses and
a link to the Learning Management System

Resources and access required by Quality Checkers

Quality checkers will require access to:

-   CDMS
-   Operational Blueprint
-   Work And Distribution Automation (WANDA)- in AODR Hobart Capital
    City Office only
-   AODR business rules and policy

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters will have 100 per cent of their work checked on the day the
work is performed until considered proficient in processing.

See Resources for a link to Quality Checking New Starters Policy

Post-checks

Post-checks involve checking a statistically valid, random selection of
work processed the previous day. The results are provided to management
and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks provide an
opportunity to look at other areas of the process which are not part of
pre and post-checking.

Targeted checks for AODR may be:

-   staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy

Sampling plan

Post-checks

Australian Organ Donor Register quality checking is a post-check
conducted on an endorsed minimum sample each month. The sample is
calculated based on:

-   95 per cent confidence level
-   2 per cent error rate,
-   ±0.5 per cent precision

The sample to be checked depends on where the work was processed and the
volumes processed in each area. AODR work items are processed in the
Zones and by two teams in the AODR Hobart Capital City Office.

The AODR sample size in each processing area is:

-   AODR Hobart Capital City Office (sample must include at least two
    from KMBC if processed under this source office code in the month):
    12 per day
-   Zones and other processing teams (excluding KMAO and KMBC): 2 per
    month

Service Officers in the AODR Hobart Capital City Office (KMAO and KMBC)
must have their work sampled once a month.

It is important that the random selection of items for quality checking
rotates among Service Officers in the team where possible (e.g.
transactions from the same Service Officer are not selected for quality
checking over consecutive months).

If AODR work items have been processed for the month, but the total
number processed is equal to or less than the sample size, all work
items must be quality checked.

Sample selection

Quality checks for the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) program
may be conducted on several different types of source documents daily or
monthly (depending on the processing area).

There are three types of Organ Donor records:

-   Donor Only Entitlement (not linked to a Consumer record)
-   AODR Entitlement without a Medicare number supplied (linked to a
    Consumer record)
-   AODR Entitlement with a Medicare number supplied (linked to a
    Consumer record)

The quality checker from each processing area randomly selects the
volume to be checked from work of the previous day. This work could be
new or amend registrations.

-   New registration - a person who has never previously been registered
-   Amend registration - a person with an existing registration with a
    new form submitted

AODR registrations or amendments selected for quality checking can be
taken from several different types of source documentation. These
include but are not limited to:

-   AODR Brochure
-   AODR Licence Renewal Inserts
-   AODR Multiple Registrations
-   Medicare Claim (PC1) form
-   AODR Confirmation Letter
-   AODR Downloadable form.

Error categories

An error is defined for the purposes of quality checking as:

-   information processed/keyed into the system which does not match the
    documentation provided
-   information on a document received that has not been keyed when it
    should have been

Error codes are applied when Service Officers have not keyed information
as per supporting documentation.

Error classification - critical and non-critical

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to the:

-   process affecting the accuracy of payments and/or information of
    Services Australia and its customers
-   integrity of the reputation of the agency

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the above.

Non-critical errors will be recorded as feedback and any action needed
is sent to the Service Officer for correction (where applicable).

Note: only critical errors are used to calculate the accuracy of
processing results.

Error documentation

Error documentation for quality checking conducted using batched work is
stored in the staff member’s folder for coaching and development.

For AODR quality checking conducted in WANDA, all AODR scanned documents
are stored according to the WANDA National File Structure.

Analysing errors

Analysis of errors is the responsibility of the program. Underlying
factors (reasons) for errors are identified at the time of quality
checking and are reported using the online form.

The Team Leaders (TL5 or TL6) and/or managers will conduct root cause
analysis to determine strategies to prevent/resolve any future
occurrences.

The program is responsible for ongoing analysis on systemic errors.

Correcting errors

If errors are identified, Service Officers must be given feedback and
appropriate action must be taken to correct the error. For example,
history adjusted, escalation to the appropriate areas where necessary.

The Team Leaders and the staff member concerned must be made aware of
repeatedly occurring errors. Together, they can work out a plan of
action to make sure this does not recur. Action can be in the form of
training and must be made a priority.

Recording results

Results of quality checks for the program are recorded and reported
using the online Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Quality
Reporting form. Checkers must make sure that all quality checking
results are submitted using the online quality reporting form:

-   immediately after completing the check, or
-   by close of business of the first (1st) working day of the new month

Post-check results are used to report accuracy of processing, and for
exception reporting, root cause analysis investigation and improvement
suggestions.

Feedback

After checking the selected transactions, and before entering results in
the Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) Quality Reporting form,
feedback must be given to the Service Officer. This includes positive
feedback for transactions identified as error-free.

Feedback is given the same day the quality check is done or as soon as
possible after the check has been completed. If an error has been
identified, determine the reasons for the error (underlying factors)
with the Service Officer.

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback for quality checking conducted using batched work is normally
given face to face by the quality checker. The quality checker notifies
the Team Leader of the feedback and the results which are stored in the
Service Officer’s folder for coaching and development.

For quality checks conducted using WANDA, feedback is given through an
email that is automatically generated after the checker has added a
comment and clicked 'Ok' in the QC Comments field. This email is
directed to the quality checker's email and sent to the Service Officer.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
program, in consultation with the Quality Management Section. The review
ensures that the error codes are current and applicable and that
approved changes to program business policies and procedures are
included.

It is the responsibility of the business area to ensure that issues with
the Quality Checking Procedure are escalated to the Quality Management
Section for recording and analysis using the applicable Quality Checking
contacts on the Quality Processes page. See Resources for a link.

Any changes that need immediate action will be updated accordingly.
Changes that are not critical to quality will be included in the review
of the procedure.

Quality checks enquiries

Enquiries that cannot be resolved on site are directed to the:

-   AODR Hobart Capital City Office for procedural enquiries
-   Quality Management Section for quality checking business rules or
    issues with submitted checking results using the applicable Quality
    Checking contacts on the Quality Processes page. See Resources for a
    link

The Resources page contains a list of Australian Order Donor Register
(AODR) Entitlement types, information on what to quality check for each
type, error status codes and the error-free code.

Related links

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
