
Provider Registration quality checking in QST 111-22160000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for Provider
Registration.

Objectives

The Provider Registration quality checking process aligns Services
Australia's Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers identify process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

This procedure will guide staff to complete quality checking for the
Provider Registration program.

Out of scope

The following work types are not captured within these procedures:

-   Location-Specific Practice Number (LSPN)
-   Pathology
-   Sonographers

Role of Program Support Officers

Program Support Officers (PSO) ensure that quality checking is
performed:

-   randomly from a selection of Service Officers' processing
-   on each Service Officer selected for the minimum sample
-   and completed by the end of the month
-   on a daily basis (where practicable)

At the end of each month, quality checks must be completed by close of
business (COB) on the first working day of the new month.

Role of Managers/Team Leaders

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for:

-   Ensuring Quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality
    and Support Tool by sending an email to the Services Delivery
    Quality and Support Team
-   Ensuring feedback is provided to the staff member and that errors
    are rectified
-   Timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of
    the coaching conversation to support any learning and development
    opportunities
-   Analysis of errors. If errors occurred due to factors such as
    limited training, understanding the business rules, environmental or
    system based issues
-   Positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service
    Officer
-   Analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Role of Quality Checkers

Quality Checkers (Program Support Officer - PSOs) are responsible for:

-   Carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   Updating and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   Maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   Identifying root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   Reporting and escalating trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   Providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   Explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (where applicable) when providing feedback
-   Examination of the documentation to ensure the accuracy of the
    Provider Registration and Eligibility processing
-   Ensuring adherence to the business rules of the programme and that
    the data entered into the system is accurate
-   Recording the quality checks in the Provider Registration Quality
    Checking Register

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If a quality
checker's own work is selected, it must be passed to another staff
member who has been accredited to conduct quality checks.

See also: Quality Checking Own Work Policy

Role of Quality Team

The Quality Team is responsible for:

-   Providing support for quality checking in the Quality and Support
    Tool (QST)
-   Providing relevant reports as required
-   Arranging QST training for quality checkers
-   Supporting the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality checkers

Before undertaking quality checking, selected staff members must have:

-   subject matter expertise - a knowledge of relevant policies and
    procedures, and understands the business rules and/or knows where to
    source them
-   been deemed capable, for example a Program Support Officer or senior
    Service Officer
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   completed the Provider Registration Quality Checker training package
    (to be developed)

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks apply to new starters

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
Results are used to support ongoing training.

New starters will have their work checked on the day the work is
performed until deemed proficient. Any errors identified for a new
starter in transactions selected for quality checking must be recorded
as errors.

A spreadsheet is maintained by the Program Support Officers (PSO) and
viewed by PSOs and Team Leaders (TL5 and TL6). This is locked so
operators cannot browse. However, information can be released to a staff
member when requested. The results are not included in the accuracy of
processing results.

19AB Spreadsheet

The Team Leader (TL5) needs to ensure the 19AB spreadsheet is correct
when collated by checking.

-   applicant matches the personal details on spreadsheet
-   all applicable locations are requested
-   dates requested match application or business rules

Programme/ Post-checks

These check randomly select work completed the previous business day in
Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The results are
provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

These checks apply:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified
-   to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) completed every 12
    months. This is to confirm the accuracy of quality checking results.
    The process involves rechecking a representative sample of
    previously checked work to determine if quality checking procedures
    have been followed correctly.

Sampling plan

Pre-check

Capability Standard

The following details the level of checking for new starters. These can
be reviewed on a case by case basis and extended accordingly.

-   Level of pre-check: Time Period - Condition
-   100%:4 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   50%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   25%: 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days

19AB spreadsheet

Every 19AB application needs to be checked against the 19AB spreadsheet.

Programme/ Post check

Based on processing volumes obtained from the Rostering Scheduling and
Workload Management, it was determined that a statistically valid sample
size of 6 applications should be selected for each staff member per
month.

The skill level of the service officer and the work types processed will
determine what transactions are selected for quality checking. It is
recommended that a Service Officer's work be selected randomly over the
month, to ensure greater integrity in both the sampling process and
reported results.

A risk-based approach will determine the bias in the sample. The
following outlines the risk level of the work type:

High risk work types

-   Overseas-trained doctors/ temporarily-resident doctors
-   19AB

Medium risk work types

-   Allied
-   EFT
-   Medical

The following lists the sample to be captured in the post check sample
for the month, based on the highest risk of processed work. The sample
must be biased towards the highest risk type of work processed. If only
one type of work has been processed, only that type will be subject to
quality checking.

High risk work processed

-   4 high risk,1 medium, 1 low, or
-   4 high and 2 medium

Medium risk work processed

-   4 medium, 2 low

Low risk work processed

-   6 applications

Provider Registration processing has peak periods between November and
March every year with the number of applications increasing
significantly. During this time the amount of quality checking may be
reviewed to help the prompt processing measures and workloads. Help may
be provided by the eHealth branch to meet the sample. This will need to
be raised and approved by the Program area and the Quality Management
Section when this period is approaching each year.

Targeted check

The sample for Provider Registration Program targeted checks are for:

-   staff members with identified quality issues (see proficiency
    standards measures)
-   Aim for Accuracy

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

Quality checking is allocated to the Program Support Officers and is
undertaken on work processed in previous days.

All post check results for the reporting month must be completed and
submitted by close of business on the first working day of each new
month.

Resources

Provider registration source documentation

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Provider registrations or amendments selected for quality checking can
be actioned from several different types of sources. This includes but
is not limited to:

scanned application forms or letters for:

-   provider number
-   prescriber number
-   19AB exemption
-   3GA placements
-   Recognition as General Practitioner (RACGP Fellow)
-   capsule endoscopy applications and letters

19AB spreadsheet

letters, emails or other correspondence received

visas and passports/Australian Citizenship Certificate

all registration/s and membership certificate/s

Errors

For quality checking, an error is information processed/keyed into the
system which does not match the documentation submitted or the
supporting documents uploaded to the systems.

Critical errors

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to the:

-   process affecting payments and/or information to Services Australia
    and its customers
-   Services Australia's reputation

Non-critical errors

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (payment and registration) and does not impact
on Services Australia's reputation.

Non-critical errors are recorded as feedback and any action required is
sent to the Service Officer for correction.

While non-critical errors are recorded as part of the quality checking
process, they do not impact the quality result reported to stakeholders.
Only critical errors are used to calculate the accuracy of processing
results.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool(QST).

A system-generated email is sent in real time to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader advising the quality check outcome.

Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Feedback is emailed to the Service Officer and their Team Leader. It
gives details about the:

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

Managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool. Discussion
notes about the feedback should be detailed in coaching sessions.

Correcting errors

For critical and non-critical errors, Quality Checkers provide
instruction in the feedback email.

Service Officers correct critical and non-critical errors.

Correcting errors

If errors have been identified, action must be taken to correct the
error.

Errors are to be corrected by the original processing Service Officer.
If they cannot correct the error, the Team Leader will be responsible
for ensuring the corrections are undertaken.

Change Management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to the Service Delivery Quality and Support
Team. The review ensures error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that need immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains internet links, contact details and tables
listing error status codes (critical and non-critical).

Related links

Provider number registrations in PDS for health professionals in
Medicare

Quality checking using the Quality Support Tool (QST)

Quality Checker accreditation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
