
Provider Registration Location Specific Practice Number (LSPN) quality checking in QST 111-22042821

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for the provider registration Location Specific
Practice Number (LSPN) in Medicare.

Objectives

The Provider Registration LSPN quality checking process aligns with
Services Australia's Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality
principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify process
    improvements
-   makes sure that there is consistency in quality checking

In Scope

LSPN application

Out of scope

LSPN accreditation is not covered by this procedure

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team leaders are responsible for making sure that:

Quality Checkers complete the process for quality checker accreditation

Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and Support
Tool by sending an email to Quality Operations & Technical Support

timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officers as part of the
coaching conversation, to support any learning and development
opportunities

analysis of errors. That is, if errors occurred due to factors such as:

-   limited training
-   understanding the business rules
-   environmental or system based issues

positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service Officer

analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
opportunities

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

-   carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   updating and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   identifying root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   reporting and escalating trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (where applicable) when providing feedback

Quality Checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected for checking, it must be given to another staff member who has
been trained to conduct quality checks.

Quality team is responsible for:

-   providing support for quality checking in the Quality and Support
    Tool (QST)
-   providing relevant reports as needed
-   arranging QST training for Quality Checkers
-   supporting the business with flexible and 'fit for purpose' quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To attain accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   meet accreditation standards annually

Quality Checking accreditation must be renewed annually.

See Quality checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division
for more information.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
These results are used to support ongoing training.

Programme/Post-checks

Programme/Post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks apply:

in response to business triggers

when there is a consistent/long-term quality issue identified

to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which:

-   is completed every 12 months
-   confirms the accuracy of quality checking results
-   rechecks a representative sample of previously checked work to
    determine if quality checking procedures have been followed
    correctly

Sampling Plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work reviewed until deemed proficient. The
Learning and Development training and consolidation plan provides more
information.

Programme Post-checks

An agreed percentage of the monthly total of LSPN work types is randomly
selected for quality checking. This percentage may be adjusted during
peak periods and/or when an increased level of quality assurance is
needed.

Targeted checks

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders email a request to Quality
Operations & Technical Support with:

-   the staff member’s details, and
-   the reason and the length of time needed for the targeted check

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work. Quality
checks are completed within 1-2 business days to make sure timely
feedback. All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 4
calendar days of the following month. After this time, remaining work is
abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

For the purpose of quality checking, an error is information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match:

-   the documentation submitted, or
-   the supporting documents uploaded to the systems

It is also an error when information is not processed/keyed from the:

-   the documentation submitted, or
-   the supporting documents uploaded to the systems

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST). A system-generated email
is sent in real time to the Service Officer and their Team Leader
advising them of the quality check outcome. Individual results are
captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the check, the
result (including any errors identified) and the quality checking
dispute process.

Managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded and stored in the Quality & Support Tool

Correcting errors

-   Critical errors
    Quality Checkers must correct critical errors immediately, as they
    are identified.
-   Non-critical errors
    Quality Checkers provide instruction in the feedback email. Service
    Officers correct non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must consult their subject matter experts for questions
about LSPN.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to Quality Operations
& Technical Support by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with Quality Operations & Technical Support. The
review makes sure that error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that need immediate action are advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality are incorporated in the
review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains tables listing error status codes (critical
and non-critical) for quality checking and a list of links to the
intranet.

Related links

Quality checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
