-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the Quality Call Framework. It includes details
about the sampling policy for evaluating phone calls.

Strategic intent

The Quality Call Framework establishes a single set of quality
expectations to make sure phone services delivered by Services
Australia:

-   are of a high quality, and
-   meet the expectations of customers and government

It is an integrated approach to quality checking through the consistent
assessment of national Quality Call Standards.

Embedded in the Quality Call Framework is the guiding principle that
will enhance customers' experience and achieve the right outcome for
customers and government. The 2 key Quality Call Measures are:

-   Quality Customer Experience, and
-   Quality Customer and Government Outcomes

Focusing on these measures helps the agency understand what is working
well and identify areas for improvement.

Evaluation model

The Quality Call Framework’s evaluation model sets out a specific set of
requirements that define the components of a quality call. These
components are used to measure the quality of the interaction between
the agency and its customers. A standardised process and evaluation form
gives accredited Quality Checkers the ability to evaluate each phone
call objectively and consistently.

The evaluation model, against which calls are evaluated, include:

2 Quality Call Measures:

-   Quality Call Quality Customer Experience, and
-   Quality Customer and Government Outcomes

5 Quality Call Standards

Within each of the 5 standards, there are elements and criteria that
help define that standard and support the evaluation of the call. All 5
of the Quality Call Standards form part of every quality check.

See also Quality Call Standards.

Sampling policy

All staff who undertake inbound or outbound phone calls across Services
Australia will have their call work evaluated within the framework,
regardless of:

-   classification
-   employment status (such as ongoing, non-ongoing, casual), or
-   work type

Quality checking can be undertaken by listening side-by-side/remotely or
by recordings.

The number of calls to be evaluated is 9 calls per quarter per staff
member. The sampling policy can be reduced to no less than 3 calls per
staff member per quarter with National Manager approval.

The Process page has details about Sampling Policy business rules.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff seeking to become Quality Checkers must undertake an accreditation
program to make sure they have the right skills, attributes and
knowledge. Quality Checkers are selected by their business team based on
operational need.

Calibration

Calibration measures the variation in the application of the Quality
Call Standards. Calibration exercises and activities provide business
teams with information to facilitate continuous improvement and drive
consistent outcomes.

All Quality Checkers must complete a calibration activity (minimum 1
calibration call) within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual
reaccreditation. If calibration has not been completed within the
required timeframe, accreditation/reaccreditation will be revoked and
access to online forms will not be available.

Business teams can complete additional targeted calibration exercises as
needed.

Aim for Accuracy

Aim for Accuracy provides assurance of the integrity and reliability of
quality checking results. Business teams facilitate an Aim for Accuracy
exercise where it is possible to re-evaluate an end-to-end call that has
been previously quality checked.

Roles and responsibilities

Business teams are responsible for:

coordinating the national accreditation program for Quality Checkers

making sure only accredited Quality Checkers undertake quality checking

facilitating Calibration and Aim for Accuracy activities and exercises

facilitating business process improvement suggestions

using management information and quality reports to:

-   identify, assess and evaluate the impact of errors
-   ensure corrective action is taken as needed

adhering to the sampling policy

maintaining records of variations to the sampling policy, including
approvals

engaging with the business owner of Smart Tools as needed

making sure all staff are aware of the Operational Blueprint messaging,
which advises that their calls may be monitored for quality assurance

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

evaluating the call against the Quality Call Standards

identifying business improvement opportunities

complying with the Quality Checking Feedback Policy by:

-   providing feedback that focuses on aspects of the call that were
    done well, and
-   identifying areas for improvement

capturing the results of the evaluation in the system

making sure the results of the evaluation are provided to the staff
member

maintaining privacy and secrecy when handling customer and staff
information, in accordance with the Privacy Act 1988

not completing checks on their own call work

undertaking a calibration activity (minimum of 1 calibration call)
within 3 months of completing accreditation or annual reaccreditation

participating in Aim for Accuracy as needed

Call monitoring for all staff making or receiving customer calls

As per Part H, Clause H15.2 of the Department of Human Services
Enterprise Agreement 2017-2020, staff phone calls may be monitored for
quality evaluation.

Staff can expect to have 9 calls evaluated each quarter. However, the
National Manager can vary this number.

The Quality Call Framework (QCF) requires Services Australia to evaluate
the calls of staff to:

-   ensure quality of service
-   identify areas for improvement
-   inform business decisions

Staff who take inbound and/or make outbound phone calls will have their
call work evaluated within the QCF regardless of:

-   classification
-   employment status (for example, ongoing, non-ongoing, casual)
-   work type

Contents

Quality Call Standards

Quality Call Framework accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Call Framework quality checking

Quality standards in service delivery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
