
Staff Feedback Tool 111-24000000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains an overview of the Staff Feedback Tool and its
role in providing internal feedback.

About the Staff Feedback Tool

The Staff Feedback Tool is designed to record and manage internal
feedback for all staff. The feedback can be for individual staff or
specific business areas. The tool is used to:

-   recognise high quality work
-   build capability, by identifying and addressing learning and
    development needs
-   identify and address process and communication gaps
-   achieve greater consistency
-   improve quality of service

When to use the Staff Feedback Tool

Sending feedback

There are two types of feedback that can be captured in the Staff
Feedback Tool. They are:

-   Feedback: advice or recommendations to improve the quality of
    service delivered
-   Compliment: recognition of high quality service provided by a staff
    member or team

Managing feedback

Line managers and non-line managers with legitimate business needs can:

-   view, edit and finalise feedback records
-   retrieve statistics and feedback

For more on access requests and roles, see Management of the Staff
Feedback Tool.

When not to use the Staff Feedback Tool

Do not use the Staff Feedback Tool to record feedback from customers.
However, the Staff Feedback Tool can be used to provide feedback to
staff after investigation of a complaint has identified a service
failure.

Centrelink and Medicare customer feedback is recorded in the Customer
Feedback Tool. Child Support customer feedback is recorded in Cuba. See:

-   Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback
    Tool
-   Managing customer complaints and feedback
-   Recording Child Support complaints and compliments in Cuba

How to access the Staff Feedback Tool

All staff can access and use the Staff Feedback Tool to:

-   send feedback or compliments
-   view their sent items

It is not necessary to apply for a specific role via the ICT Security
Portal.

To open the Staff Feedback tool, go to:

-   the Services Australia Intranet home page, then check under Customer
    Service
-   the Staff Feedback Tool intranet page, then check under Quick links

How feedback notifications are sent - role of Office Locator

Notifications are sent to mailboxes listed for the organisation unit in
Office Locator when feedback:

-   has been submitted by a staff member
-   remains open for 21 days

Line managers also receive notification if the Manager field has been
completed in the feedback form.

To update information in Office Locator, including mailboxes for Staff
Feedback Tool notifications, use the Office Locator Tool Support Request
Form.

The Resources page contains links to the Staff Feedback Tool and
intranet page, Office Locator and other feedback links.

Contents

Recording feedback in the Staff Feedback Tool

Management of the Staff Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
