
Medicare Public quality checking in Quality and Support Tool (QST) 111-22042744

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for the Medicare
Public work types.

Objectives

The Medicare Public quality checking process aligns Services Australia's
Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify process
    improvements
-   makes sure that there is consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for making sure:

Quality checkers complete the process for quality checker accreditation

Quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and Support
Tool by sending an email to Quality Operations & Technical Support

Timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of the
coaching conversation to support any learning and development
opportunities

Analysis of errors

-   That is, if errors occurred because of factors such as limited
    training, understanding the business rules, environmental or system
    based issues

Positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service Officer

Analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
opportunities

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

-   Carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   Understanding and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   Maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   Identifying root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   Reporting and escalating trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   Providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   Explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (if applicable) when providing feedback

Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been trained
to conduct quality checks.

The Quality Team is responsible for:

-   Providing administrative support for quality checking in the Quality
    and Support Tool (QST)
-   Providing relevant reports as needed
-   Arranging QST training for quality checkers
-   Supporting the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To attain accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure
-   meet accreditation standards annually

The Resources page has a link to the Medicare Public Accreditation
process.

Quality checking accreditation must be renewed annually.

See Quality checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division
for more details.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks apply to:

all Medicare Public work types in QST

the following scenarios:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified
-   to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This is to confirm the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a representative sample of
    previously checked work to determine if quality checking procedures
    have been followed correctly

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email to Quality
Operations & Technical Support with the staff member’s details, the
reason and the length of time needed for the targeted check.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Pre-checks proficiency requirements for new starters will be advised in
the scope of training details.

Targeted checks

Medicare Public Targeted Checks only capture teams within Health Service
Delivery.

The sample size is between 1-4% of the total volume processed and it is
randomly selected for quality checking.

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are:

-   undertaken daily on a random sample of work
-   completed within 1-2 business days to make sure timely feedback

All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 3 calendar days
of the following month. After this time, remaining work is abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

For the purpose of quality checking, an error is information
processed/keyed into the system, which does not match the documents
submitted or the supporting documents uploaded to the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in QST.

A system-generated email is sent in real time to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader advising them of the quality check outcome.

Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the:

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is sent to individual Service Officers and Team Leaders by an
email. Feedback data is recorded/stored in QST.

Critical errors and Non-critical errors

Service Officer must correct critical errors immediately as per the
feedback email.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must contact a Program Support Officer (PSO) for any
technical enquires.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved should be directed to Quality Operations &
Technical Support by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with Quality Operations & Technical Support. The
review will make sure that error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that need immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page has tables listing error status codes (critical and
non-critical) for quality checking and a list of links to the intranet.

Related links

Quality Checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
