
Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images 111-10020040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about locating and viewing
correspondence stored electronically as digital images.

Digital images

Digital images are electronic versions of forms or other documents
received by Services Australia. This includes:

-   documents/images uploaded by customers online via the Upload
    Documents Service
-   information sent electronically through a desktop fax
-   uploads by staff using the Document Upload function on the Document
    Tools screen in Customer First
-   paper documents received and digitised using a Multi-Function Device
    (MFD)

Wherever possible, once a document has been digitised, it will be linked
to the relevant work item on a customer's record.

Sometimes the image may not link to an existing activity. The system
will:

-   Create a Document Management System work item
-   Index a new activity, or
-   Create an Image Notification Activity (an SCN activity) for action
    in Customer First or Process Direct

Documents received by post may not be intended for Services Australia
(birth registration form, for example). The scanning provider scans
these with a 'Documents returned to customer - not for SA' coversheet.
The documents can be viewed on the Document Tools screen in Customer
First or the Documents tab in Process Direct. A work item is not created
for these.

Document Management System

All documents received by the Document Management System can be viewed 4
ways:

In Process Direct using:

-   The Documents icon
-   The Open Documents screen, if attached to an active work item. Note:
    once the work item is completed it will no longer be available via
    Open Documents but will be visible through the Documents icon

In Customer First using Document Tools

On the Customer Details screen under the Activities tab in the lower
section of the Customer tab

From work items allocated through Workload Management

In the Digital Image Work Items assignment block on the Activity List
(AL) screen in Customer First

Password protected documents

If a customer uploads a password protected document online, it will
display on the customer record but cannot be opened. The customer will
need to upload the document again, without the password protection.

Editable forms and documents

PDF forms and documents that are fillable and uploaded via the Upload
Documents service or Document Tools are stored in an editable state.

When a staff member retrieves this document via Document Tools, it is
downloaded to their PC to view. The downloaded version of the PDF
continues to be editable but any changes made and saved locally will not
change the version uploaded in Document Tools.

Original customer documents cannot be altered under any circumstances.
If a customer needs to change the document in any way, the customer must
complete and upload the document again.

Staff should not upload any customer documents from their PC that have
been edited.

Image Notification Activity (SCN activity)

Processing teams use SCN activities. These activities must not be
cancelled until the work has been completed or the image linked to
another activity. Cancelling an SCN activity will mean that the related
work is not allocated for completion.

Form codes that have moved across to the Document Management System will
not create SCN activities.

Electronic Customer Documents Activity (ECDA) screen

This procedure provides information on the use of the ECDA screen to:

-   Retrieve and view images from Image Notification Activities and
    legacy Income Security Integrated System (ISIS) activities
-   Link, move or replicate images from Image Notification Activities to
    other ISIS IAM activities

The Document Tools facility in Customer First also provides another
means to locate, move, update or copy digital images.

Documents lodged before September 2011

Digital images of documents lodged before September 2011 are stored in
the National Index (NIM) database. View them manually via Customer
Record.

Documents digitised after September 2011 can be viewed via the Document
Tools screen in Customer First, or the Documents Icon in Process Direct.

The Resources page has information on the Desktop fax workflow.

Related links

Actioning inbound desktop faxes

Customer details and cases

Digital image not located on customer record

Digital image attached to incorrect Centrelink customer record

Digital Image Management

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Locating digital images via the Document Tools in Customer First

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Workload Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
