
Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres 111-05070000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role and responsibilities of a TPS staff
member in Smart Centres. TPS staff provide technical help and Quality On
Line (QOL) checking to Smart Centre Service Officers.

Help from TPS

TPS is provided virtually and accessed by calling the relevant TPS queue
via Services Australia Workspace. Staff with no access to Services
Australia Workspace can refer to Locator National Lists for speed dial
numbers. Staff without access to a CISCO phone can contact the Real Time
and Telephony team.

Appropriate TPS contacts:

-   General enquiries, refer to Service Officer role when seeking TPS in
    Smart Centres
-   Calls where a customer needs to speak directly to a technical expert
-   Urgent payment reconsideration of decision, if requested when
    advising the customer the outcome of their initial request

For all urgent QOL requests, see Urgent QOL process for Smart Centre and
Labour Hire staff.

Role of TPS staff

Staff acting in a TPS role will be expected to:

-   Provide technical help and guidance to Service Officers using the
    appropriate channel
-   Assist Social Workers by undertaking coding and providing technical
    advice
-   Take over responsibility for calls where a customer needs to speak
    directly to a technical expert. TPS may be called upon to explain a
    circumstance to a customer
-   Answer Access Support Centre technical support enquires from Zone or
    Service Centre staff
-   Complete request for review of decision for Urgent Payments, where
    relevant
-   QOL/QMA work submitted by Smart Centre and Labour Hire staff. When
    scheduled or rostered, only select activities in QOL that have been
    generated by Smart Centre and Labour Hire staff. Note: TPS may be
    required to undertake QOL for Service Delivery Partners if they
    require urgent QOL of an activity created by a Services Australia
    Service Officer. This will be requested via the Urgent QOL
    SharePoint
-   Access the Urgent QOL SharePoint

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator and contact
details.

Contents

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Technical Peer Support (TPS) role in Smart Centres

Service Support Officer (SSO) role in Technical Peer Support (TPS) in
Smart Centres

Team Leader role in Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres

Technical Peer Support (TPS) for staff who are deaf or have hearing loss

Technical Peer Support (TPS) for boutique work in Smart Centres

Related links

Quality On Line (QOL) checking in the Smart Centre Division

Urgent QOL Process for Smart Centre and Labour Hire staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
