[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the Upload Document function on the Document
Tools screen in Customer First. This function can be used to attach
electronic documents to a Centrelink customer's record. It may be used
by any staff who receive or create electronic documents, including Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) Assessors, specialist and processing staff.

Appropriate documents to upload

Documents that staff may want to upload include:

-   External Specialist reports received electronically (through email)
-   Internal Specialist reports completed electronically
-   Assessor case notes recorded electronically
-   Test resources provided electronically
-   Supporting documents provided electronically by accountants or
    financial planners
-   Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)
    decision documents and case notes
-   Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) decision statements provided
    electronically
-   MultiCal documents created by debt processing teams
-   Aged care manual letters and calculations, and
-   Any other relevant documents provided electronically (for example,
    email) by a customer

Documents should not be larger than 5MB in size, as the file may be too
large to open at a later date. Lengthy documents (for example, 100 pages
or more) or documents with photos, graphics or other similar content may
result in a file size too large to open once uploaded. Password
protected files should not be upload, as the password will stop the file
from opening at a later date.

The Upload Document feature on the Document Tools screen is different to
the Upload Documents service. Customers can upload documents themselves
to the Upload documents service. Documents uploaded by the customer can
be up to 10MB in size and still be viewed through Customer First
Document Tools. When a Service Officer uploads a document in Customer
First using the document upload function, it is limited to 5MB.

If the documents relate to the customer separating from a relationship,
there are key tasks they should consider to keep their personal
information. See Separating Safely - Protecting personal details.

Related links

Removing or deleting a digital image from customer records

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
