-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for line managers and non-line
managers to apply for manager access to the Staff Feedback Tool. It
explains how to action feedback items, and retrieve statistics and
feedback.

Management of the Staff Feedback Tool access

All staff currently have access to send feedback via the Staff Feedback
Tool.

Manager access to the Staff Feedback Tool is required to:

-   view, edit and finalise feedback records
-   retrieve statistics and feedback

Manager access may fall into the following 2 categories:

Line managers supporting direct line managed staff

A legitimate business need must exist. This may include:

actioning staff feedback items

-   reviewing received/sent items
-   editing, and
-   finalising feedback items

discussing feedback/compliments with staff individually

supporting staff with identified learning needs

retrieving feedback and statistics to improve quality of service

Non-line managers supporting staff or their organisation unit/site

A legitimate business need must exist. This may include:

-   identifying continuous improvement opportunities
-   retrieving statistics and feedback to improve quality of service
-   identifying and address process and communication gaps

To apply for manager access, access the ICT Security Portal. See the
Process page for instructions.

Roles and responsibilities

Line managers and non-line managers must:

-   have a legitimate business need to access and manage staff feedback
    data for which they are accountable. If a legitimate business need
    is difficult to establish, a business case may need to be completed.
    See Process page for instructions
-   only view the information that is required to undertake their role
-   make sure data accessed and obtained from the Staff Feedback Tool is
    used only for its intended purpose
-   maintain privacy and secrecy when handling customer and staff
    information, in accordance with the Privacy Act 1988
-   make sure any reports extracted from the Staff Feedback Tool are
    kept in a secure location supported by a registered control plan and
    disposed of, where required. See Resources for links to secure
    storage of information
-   only distribute reports to the intended audience and should be
    marked 'Official: Sensitive'
-   tell the Service Delivery Quality Centre team to remove access if no
    longer in the relevant position and access is still available

Additionally, line managers must investigate, communicate and finalise
individual staff feedback items within 30 calendar days. This may
include:

-   discussing feedback or compliments with individual staff
-   identifying training and development needs to support individuals or
    teams, or
-   evaluating local procedures and work practices to drive continuous
    improvement

Management of feedback items

Feedback in the Staff Feedback Tool is viewed, investigated and actioned
by the nominated Receiving Office.

The positional mailbox assigned to the receiving office will receive an
email notifying when feedback:

-   has been received
-   remains open for 21 days

Line managers also receive notification if the Manager field has been
completed in the feedback form.

The Resources page contains links to the Staff Feedback Tool form, ICT
Security Portal and secure storage of information.

Related links

Staff Feedback Tool

Recording feedback in the Staff Feedback Tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
