
Requesting deletion of a digital image from Centrelink customer records 111-10010150

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to request deletion of digital
images from Centrelink customer records. Deletion might be required when
documents have been inadvertently or inappropriately scanned, faxed or
uploaded online.

Deletion requests

Documents that have been inadvertently or inappropriately digitised in
error must be removed from customer records. Deletions can be requested
by completing the Enterprise Content Records Management (ECRM) Deletion
Request webform.

Documents that have been attached to an incorrect customer record may
not need to be deleted. These images can be moved via Document Tools.

If a document contains inappropriate, offensive or illegal information
or images in amongst other customer information, a document rescan may
be required before the document is deleted. For more information see
Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location.

A team leader or manager may need to print the image if follow up action
is required. For more information see Reporting, recording and
escalating incidents of customer aggression and/or Customer talking
about suicide or self-harm.

Note: requesting the deletion of an image may not be sufficient action
if the threatening or offensive information is potentially relating to
illegal acts. In this case, Service Officers should follow relevant
escalation processes to seek advice about whether further escalation is
required.

Protection of customer information

Customer information is protected under the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 and cannot be disclosed, recorded or otherwise
used without authority. There are penalties for any person who
contravenes these provisions.

The Resources page contains links to the ECRM Deletion Request form,
Emergency plans and local response guidelines and Employee Assistance
Program (EAP) homepage.

Related links

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Moving and/or updating Centrelink digital images via Document Tools

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
