
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) quality checking in QST 111-21071442

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for AODR.

Objectives

The AODR quality checking process aligns Services Australia's Enterprise
Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify process
    improvements
-   makes sure consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders must make sure:

-   Quality Checkers complete the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation
-   Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool by sending an email to the Services Delivery Quality
    and Support Team
-   error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of the
    coaching conversation. This supports any learning and development
    opportunities
-   errors are analysed, e.g. did the errors occur due to factors such
    as limited training, understanding the business rules, environmental
    or system based issues
-   positive quality checking outcomes are discussed with the Service
    Officer
-   data is analysed to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers must:

-   carry out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   complete root cause analysis and identify systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   provide constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct the
    error (where applicable) when providing feedback
-   make sure they do not check their own work. If Quality Checker's own
    work is selected, it must be passed to another staff member who has
    been trained to conduct quality checks

Quality Team must:

-   provide support for quality checking in the QST
-   provide relevant reports as needed
-   arrange QST training for quality checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Checker accreditation must be renewed annually. See Quality
Checker accreditation for more information.

To be accredited, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the AODR quality checking procedure

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.
Results are used to support ongoing training.

Programme/Post-checks

Programme/Post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted Checks

Targeted checks apply:

-   in response to business triggers or when there is a
    consistent/long-term quality issue identified.
-   to Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This is to confirm the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a representative sample of
    previously checked work to determine if quality checking procedures
    have been followed correctly.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work reviewed until deemed proficient, please
contact the Learning and development Team for the training and
consolidation plan.

Programme/Post-checks

Between 5-8% of the monthly total of AODR work types are randomly
selected for quality checking.

Targeted Checks

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email request to
the Services Delivery Quality and Support Team with the staff member’s
details, the reason and the length of time required for the targeted
check.

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work. Quality
checks are completed within 1-2 business days to ensure timely feedback.
All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 4 calendar days
of the following month. After this time, remaining work is abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

For the purpose of quality checking, an error is information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match the documentation
submitted or the supporting documents uploaded to the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

A critical error is when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

A non-critical error is when it does not meet the above criteria.
Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool(QST). A system-generated email
is sent in real time to the Service Officer and their Team Leader
advising them of the quality check outcome. Individual results are
captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the check, the
result (including any errors identified) and the quality checking
dispute process.

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool.

Correcting Errors

Critical errors - Quality Checkers must correct critical errors
immediately as they are found.

Non-critical errors - Quality Checkers provide instruction in the
feedback email. Service Officer's correct non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to the Services
Delivery Quality and Support Team by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to the Services Delivery Quality and
Support Team. The review ensures error codes are current and approved
policy changes are included.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains tables listing error status codes (critical
and non-critical) for quality checking, links to the intranet and
contact details.

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR) quality checking

Related links

Quality checker accreditation

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

Processing rules for Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
