
Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA) 111-17050404

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines PaNDA and how staff use it. PaNDA is a document
management system within Work Optimiser - Medicare. It is used to
search, access and upload Health Services documents.

How staff use PaNDA

Medicare staff can access PaNDA through the Work Optimiser - Medicare
icon on the desktop.

PaNDA allows staff to:

-   perform detailed searches for documents through PaNDA Search
-   create a new work item or upload a document to an existing work item
    though PaNDA Document Upload

Document upload

If more information or new work items have been received outside Work
Optimiser - Medicare, staff can upload a document to either:

-   create a work item, or
-   associate the document with an existing or completed work item.

Staff can only upload pdf, doc, docx, tiff, jpeg, png and xlsx file
types no bigger than 10mb (megabytes).

Uploaded documents cannot be removed from Work Optimiser - Medicare.

Association

Document association allows staff to associate work items that have been
created separately when a single work item should have been created.

Staff can associate documents by either:

-   uploading the work item, or
-   using the Associate Documents function in the Worklist

A document can be associated to work items with a status of Complete,
Pended or Open.

Associated documents can be removed from work items in Work Optimiser -
Medicare, regardless of their status. Document association and removal
is recorded and visible on the Work Item history screen.

Open HPOS work items

Health Professional Online Services (HPOS) work can enter Work
Optimiser - Medicare via HPOS Form Upload in HPOS Support.

For these work items in Work Optimiser - Medicare, an Open in HPOS
button at top right of the Work Item and Document Details:

-   opens the relevant HPOS Form Upload file in HPOS Support
-   opens a new tab in the browser each time pressed

Note: staff must only select or use the Open in HPOS button when
relevant to that work item and their role.

The Resources page lists HPOS Reference Number fields and expected
results

See Work Optimiser for staff for pending reasons and Send for Delegation
work types for each program.

The Resources page contains a glossary of PaNDA terms, HPOS Reference
Number fields and expected results, and a link to more Workload
Management user guides.

Related links

Medicare scanning

Manage Medicare scanning

Categorisation and validation of scanned Medicare documents

Workload Management

Work Optimiser for staff

Work Optimiser for Team Leaders and Analysts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
