
DOCing procedures in the Earnings and reporting tool 111-21050010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the principles, application of and procedures to
be followed when document recording using the Earnings and reporting
tool.

Online Document recording

Online Document Recording (ODR) processing, otherwise known as document
(DOC) processing, will not be produced for each earnings event, but only
in specific circumstances. This is in line with Online Document
Recording (ODR).

If DOCs are not produced, details of declared earnings can be
ascertained from the Earnings Summary screen of the Earnings and
Reporting workflow by selecting the twisty next to each employer.

DOCs are created automatically by the workflow under three general
scenarios:

-   Circumstance based processing where the user has recorded specific
    customer data within the workflow such as recording the return of a
    late SU19 report type or recording a change of earnings for a
    previous period.
-   Event based processing where a specific workflow action is
    undertaken within the earnings workflow. Responses to an identified
    workflow question or prompt will trigger a specific DOC output such
    as indicating that a discussion was had with the customer about a
    new employment situation, or where payment is to continue after
    ascertaining that care is continuing for a Carer Payment recipient
    who is working.
-   User based processing is based on the initiation of manual comments
    from an identified workflow screen including the notepad or supplied
    free text fields.

Automatically generated DOCs

A full list of all the automatically generated DOC text is the Resources
page. Briefly, examples include:

earnings corrected for a previous fortnight (whether or not arrears or
an overpayment results)

a third party, including a nominee or partner is the contact person for
the update

a report is returned late

a customer or their partner works for a new employer

earnings are reported outside the current reporting/notification period

a discussion has occurred for particular customer events including
(checkbox recorded):

-   First Time Earner - Working Age Participants (WAP) with mutual
    obligation requirements
-   First Time Earner - No mutual obligation requirements
-   DSP customer with Low Earnings Rate
-   Supported Wage System

Non - occurrence of automatically generated DOCs

Auto-generated DOC processing will not occur if:

-   earnings are recorded as income for one period (IOP) for the current
    reporting period (unless they are being recorded outside the current
    reporting/notification period), or
-   earnings verification is added or changed, or
-   an employer is deleted

Staff do not need to check whether a DOC has been produced nor manually
create one when using the Earnings and Reporting workflow. Unless
specific information needs to be captured such as customers providing
details of allowance income that is not being assessed, details of
commission income that may be relevant to future review processing, or
if updating the Family Estimate was discussed. Quality On Line (QOL)
procedures remain the same, there is no requirement for staff to create
a DOC where an automatic workflow does not produce a DOC.

User based processing

A Service Officer can record any special notes, additional detail or
calculations that were captured during the earnings and reporting
interaction with the customer. These circumstances would include:

-   a customer advises allowance income or salary sacrificing that may
    not be treated as income
-   payslips are copied for QOL purposes and batched with a fortnightly
    payment application
-   extra information to support hand-off of debt or further
    investigation when discrepancies in reported income and verification
    details are revealed and indicate a possible overpayment
-   extra information about changes in Reporting Regime
-   recording other employment related income in addition to earnings,
    for example, recording leave for an Income Maintenance Period,
    compensation for a graduated return to work, or self employment

The ability to undertake this processing will be applied on each
individual workflow screen accessed by the notepad icon and/or
generically via the Global Notepad function, a dedicated document
summary screen. Refer to the detail section for more information on
notepad functionality.

The Resources page contains two tables, one for customer circumstances
and the automatically generated text the workflow creates, and one for
prompts that require selection of a checkbox to create a DOC.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) processing in the Earnings and reporting tool

Special help for Service Officers using the Earnings and reporting tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
