
Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD 111-10010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to prepare and scan Centrelink customer
documents on a Multi-Function Device (MFD).

When and where to scan

Unless a scannable document exception exists, all documents that need to
be processed at another location should be scanned where they are
received.

Do not scan documents processed on site. Store them on site and either
attach them to the new claim, or on-file or off-file storage batches.
Information about any action taken with these documents should be on the
customer record. This will prevent incorrect location or rescan
requests.

Scan documents on the same day they are received. If this is not
possible (due to a scanning contingency for example), change the date of
receipt on the MFD.

There is no need to date stamp documents scanned using an MFD. Unless it
is changed on the MFD, the date of receipt is always the date of scan.

Always check documents to make sure there is no mixed customer
information and scan documents in a logical order. For example, payslips
in date order. The Resources page links to the Scanning Order user
guide.

Different scanning processes apply:

-   to prepare and scan medical/sensitive documents. They may need extra
    separation to ensure they store on the customer record with a
    sensitivity warning, and to ensure assessors can view them
-   for Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback, including
    written complaints or feedback documents
-   for Medicare scanning
-   for National Redress Scheme documents

Sensitive documents are those that contain information that would be
considered especially sensitive to the customer. These would mostly be
medical documents. Apply judgement to other documents that may be
sensitive. For example, unreasonable to live at home statements or court
documents.

Managing urgent cases at a service centre

To support vulnerable customers, assess at the time of lodgement whether
urgent processing is needed.

The Service Officer must consider:

-   the vulnerability of the customer, and
-   the expected timeframe to process the item of work

The discretion to determine if a customer's situation requires urgent
processing rests with the Service Officer who is serving the customer.

If urgent processing is needed, different processes apply in addition to
scanning.

Correct and automatic classification of documents

Classification is the process of determining the correct Customer
Reference Number (CRN) and type of document for the digital image.

Documents scanned on an MFD will automatically classify at the point of
scanning if:

-   a valid CRN is entered into the MFD, and
-   a barcoded form or reclassification page is the first page scanned

Note: for documents with no barcode, the first page scanned must be the
reclassification page. The reclassification page has to be double sided,
with the patch T separator at the back.

Reclassification pages and Patch T separators should be printed and not
photocopied. If either one is missing, the document will need manual
classification. See Resources for copies of reclassification pages and
Patch T separators.

Manual classification

Manual classification is needed when:

-   no valid CRN is entered into the MFD, or
-   no barcode can be read by the MFD

As the system does not attach these documents to a customer record,
there may be delays for the customer. Service Officers may also submit a
request to locate the document, resulting in more work for service
centres.

To manually classify an image, the Digitisation Solutions Team (DST)
view the image and assign a CRN and/or form code to it. The Resources
page has an intranet link to scanning dates and classification
timeframes.

Once a digital image is attached to a customer's record, a work item
will be created for processing (if needed). For more information, see
Workload Management.

Scan to Store

For Centrelink documents, MFDs display an option to Scan to Store.

Scan to Store images attach to customer records without creating a work
item for allocation through Workload Management. This means that using
Scan to Store incorrectly may result in delays for the customer.

Staff can view all Scan to Store images on the customer's record.

Reclassification pages

These are used to classify non-barcoded documents. Using the correct
reclassification page will attach the image to the customer record (if a
valid CRN is entered into the MFD).

The reclassification page will classify the document (for example,
UNS005 for financial documents). Always place it in front of
non-barcoded documents.

Print reclassification pages double sided from those on the Resources
page, rather than photocopy them. This will ensure the barcode is of a
good quality that the scanner software can read.

Place the reclassification page on the front and a Patch T separator on
the back. The Patch T separator separates the reclassification page from
the digital image when attached to the customer record.

Note: for all non-Centrelink medical certificates or where the barcode
on the SU415 appears to be of poor quality use the UNSMCER
reclassification page.

Patch T separators

These pages are used to separate digital images on customer records. A
common use is when a customer supplies documents relating to 2 different
claims that will be processed separately. In this case, place a Patch T
separator page between the different documents.

They can also be used to logically break up very large documents to make
them easier to process. It will make the images easier to review. It
will also minimise rescan requests when images cannot be opened because
of file size.

File size: very large documents (100 pages or more), or documents with
photos, graphics or similar content can result in a file too large to
open. As a rule, keep image file sizes below 5mb.

Print Patch T separator pages from those on the Resources page, rather
than photocopy them. This ensures the barcode is of a good quality that
the scanner software can read.

Unless used with a reclassification page, separator pages are single
sided and never placed at the start or end of documents being scanned.
If not used correctly, documents will need manual classification. This
will delay the image attaching to the customer record.

Received 'as is' coversheet

Service Officers can use this when scanning documents using an MFD:

-   to clearly identify where pages are missing. For example, the
    customer provided only pages 1 and 2 of a 4 page form), or
-   if unable to improve the quality of the image. It is often possible
    to improve the quality of the image. The Resources page has hints
    and tips

The coversheet will prevent rework related to rescan requests.

Print coversheets from those on the Resources page.

Place the coversheet behind any barcoded pages. This minimises the risk
of the image needing manual classification after scanning.

Barcodes

Most Centrelink letters and forms are barcoded. Barcodes make scanning
more efficient by ensuring that forms are correctly classified.

There are 2 kinds of barcodes.

History Identifier (HID) barcodes

These contain information about the customer's CRN and the form or
letter code.

Forms and letters with HID barcodes will attach to the customer record
if the MFD can read the form code from the barcode and a valid CRN was
entered into the MFD.

Static barcodes

These contain information about the form or letter, but not the
customer.

Barcodes containing the word LETTER (such as CLK2LETTER) will not read
correctly as barcodes with LETTER are used for multiple reasons. Use a
reclassification page for the image so it attaches to the customer
record without needing to be manually classified.

Non-barcoded often called unstructured documents

Non-barcoded/unstructured documents are often supporting documents like
payslips, identity documents and bank statements.

If the form/document is not barcoded a reclassification page is required
to allow the image to classify correctly.

If a reclassification page is not used when scanning these documents,
manual classification will be needed. This will delay the digital image
attaching to the customer's record.

Select the most appropriate reclassification page to ensure that any
resulting work items are classified and allocated correctly.

Storing scanned documents

Documents that are scanned must be stored onsite for a set period and
then destroyed.

See Storing documents for timeframes and processes.

The Resources page contains intranet links, reclassification codes,
reclassification and separator pages, coversheets, user guides, and
hints and tips.

Related links

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Digital image not located on Centrelink customer record

Medicare scanning

National Redress Scheme enquiries and document lodgement in service
centres

Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Storage and access to information for carers and disability claimants
and recipients

Storing documents

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
