
This document outlines information about the Assessment and
Determination (ASD) cluster that uses common submission and
determination processes to assess a customer or couple.

On this Page:

Definition

Assessment

Assessment is the process of calculating, from changes to a customer's
circumstances, any consequential changes in the customer's Benefit
Entitlements. Assessment can be performed either in online mode on the
request of a Service Officer or on request of a trigger-driven batch
program. When the changes have been calculated, the full results of the
assessment are displayed to the Service Officer on a number of ASD
screens.

Determination

Determination is the process of confirming that the assessment is
correct via the Assessment Results (AR) screen.

Accumulator

Every system recalculates entitlement on the day that something happens,
rather than at the end of the payment period in which things happen.
This daily entitlement needs to be rolled up into the entitlement for a
pay period.

The entitlement accumulator calculates the contribution made by each
period of entitlement to a pay period and applies rounding rules to come
up with the payment entitlement for a period.

To check that the accumulator processing is occurring correctly, Daily
file is used.

Adjustment Handler

The Adjustment Handler is activity based. It compares entitlements
before and after the current activity’s changes are applied, and any
differences are included in the results of the assessment shown on the
Assessment Results (AR) screen.

Note: in general, adjustments are calculated for periods where the
customer has already been paid.

Trigger Assessment Checker

The Trigger Assessment Checker (TAC) is a product that can be used to
manage unexpected results from trigger processing. It has 3 components:

-   Adjustment checking specifically, trapping triggers that generate
    overpayments or underpayments greater than specified limits.
-   Status checking traps triggers that unexpectedly change a customer's
    benefit status.
-   Rate variation checking traps triggers that unexpectedly change a
    customer's ongoing fortnightly rate by more than a specified amount
    (but may not necessarily result in adjustments or status changes).

Alignment of Payday Codes

Assessment Entitlement Period Alignment (ASEPALN) is a continual process
for updating the ASEP group in the DETM file. It was designed to ensure
payday codes are correctly allocated to customer records.

ASEPALN aligns the ASEP groups in the Determination file for a customer
record, whenever an event occurs which changes the payday code for that
customer. The ASEP group is the Assessment Entitlement Period group,
which holds details of the Entitlement Period End Date Code for each
payment system for which the customer has, or has had, an entitlement.

The ASEPALN program was introduced as part of the 1999 Pay cycles
conversion.

Change Point Driver

The Change Point Driver is the engine behind the assessment process. Its
purpose is to process calculation point dates and calculate a rate and
status for each date. When the user enters 'AR' in the Next: field, the
assessment process begins. The TAG process will tag to certain systems
based on the entitlement tasks on the activity.

Common Summaries

Summarisation is the process of copying all the circumstance data
required to perform a benefit assessment to one central location in the
M204 database, from where it can be loaded into rate calculators.

Notification Handler (NOHL)

NOHL is a Date of Effect setting algorithm based on an examination of
Date of Event (DOV), Date of Receipt (DOR), Date of Action (DOA), a
standard 14 day notification period and whether an assessment is
favourable or unfavourable. Each application area also has the capacity
to input exceptions to NOHL where required (that is, specifying the
actual DOE to use, or varying the 14 day notification period etc.).

For unfavourable decisions (decisions where the customer's rate
decreases), the general principle is that, if the customer notifies the
change within the allowable notification period, they do not need to
repay money already received.

The FAO system has its own version of NOHL. Whenever rules 31, 32, 33,
34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 86 appear, this indicates that it is
a FAO/NOHL assessment. Any queries regarding this are to be referred to
the FAO applications area.

ASD Screens

There are a number of screens that are involved in the ASD process. In
the majority of cases these screens are available from either the
Assessment Results (AR) or Daily Rates Summary (RATS) screen, and are
predominantly display only screens. In addition, there are some screens
that are available pre-AR.

Contents

Notification Handler (NOHL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
