
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to build and generate a New
Multiple Intervention Plan (NMIP) multiple records report using the Data
Integrity Multiples Reporting Tool (DIMRPT).

Reason for the report

The purpose of the DIMRPT is to allow Data Quality Unit (DQU), Service
Zone and National Office staff to generate their own tailored reports
showing the number of NMIP multiples created by staff.

This report reflects automatic or New Multiple Intervention Plan (NMIP)
multiple customer records only. After a new customer record (or CRN) is
created, the NMIP process checks for same/similar customer records and,
if a match is found, a CLI/MLC activity is generated for investigation
by the officer responsible for creating the new (and probable multiple)
record. The NMIP report only covers about 40% of all multiples created
by network staff. The remaining are discovered manually or via other
methods.

An alternative NMIP multiple report is available, see Generating a
multiple records report using the Data Integrity Error Search Data
(DIESD) System which provides additional flexibility to the DIMRPT
report.

DIMRPT report

Users are initially required to establish the correct destination of the
DIMRPT. This is done by ensuring the positional mailbox is recorded
accurately in the Reference Data Facility (RDF) table which is sourced
from the Area Offices Details (AOD) screen. If this is not completed, or
completed incorrectly, the report will be sent to the DQU positional
mailbox.

Only authorised users can make changes to the AOD screen. If access is
required to the zones positional mailbox, contact the person who is
listed on the AOD screen in the RDF table. An ISP request is required to
obtain access.

Users can generate a report by specifying a date or settlement period
range and filter by Service Zone and/or Region Office Code of interest
for the office to which the user is assigned access.

The DIMRPT provides the following data:

-   Date
-   Service Zone
-   Region Office
-   User ID
-   Error Code
-   Status
-   New CRN
-   Existing CRN
-   SP (Settlement Period)
-   Settlement Year
-   SP Start Date
-   Activity Code
-   Service Reason

For additional flexibility in NMIP reporting, see Generating a multiple
records report using the Data Integrity Error Search Data (DIESD)
System.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Data
Quality Unit.

Related links

Generating a multiple records report using the Data Integrity Error
Search Data (DIESD) System

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
