
Recording reasons for decisions under Getting it Right (GIR) 111-15040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Getting It Right (GIR) standards that apply
to staff recording reasons for decisions relating to Centrelink
payments. This is to ensure that Centrelink maintains a record of the
reasons for particular decisions in order to support the need for staff
to justify or explain a particular decision.

Recording reasons for decisions

The requirement to record reasons for decisions applies to:

-   all customer entitlement and service delivery decisions
-   the development of business processes and computer application, and
-   the communication of relevant advice and reference materials

The decision making process

There are some basic principles to apply when making and recording
correct administrative decisions.

These principles are:

-   identify the issues
-   find the rules
-   investigate facts and gather supporting evidence
-   decide by applying the law to the facts
-   document the decision and
-   advise the customer

A record of decision must include the elements listed below. However,
when a significant decision directly affecting a customer's entitlement
is made, details of the decisions must be recorded on the customer's
computer record and the DOC must meet GIR DOC Minimum Standards.

Elements of a record of decision

-   the decision itself
-   the Act/Guide reference upon which it is based, and
-   the reason for making the decision

These elements are particularly important where there is a high degree
of complexity or discretion involved (for example, debts, marriage-like
relationships or decisions being reconsidered). It is also the case when
making a significant decision.

Decision making where a DOC is not required

Straight forward decisions (for example, earnings reporting) require
little or no documentation, other than completing activities to record
relevant information on the customer's computer record. This is where
system records clearly show how and why the decision was made. The
conversation with the customer or reason for making the change should
still be recorded on a DOC.

In some situations the decision to grant a payment or service is
automatically determined by the system. The entitlement is assessed and
paid using information already recorded on the customer's record and no
manual action is required by a Service Officer. In these cases,
sufficient information exists on the system and there is no requirement
for a significant decision DOC to be created. Examples of payments or
services include Telephone Allowance, Clean Energy Advance (CEA) and
Relocation Scholarship (RS).

The decision to issue the payment is made automatically and approved by
the Secretary.

Related links

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
