
Process Step Automation (PSA) 111-21060729

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines Process Step Automation (PSA) and the Automation
Framework. It provides an overview of the process for Service Officer's
completing PSA tasks in Process Direct.

The Automation Framework

The Automation Framework uses specific criteria to identify if a claim
is suitable for end to end automation (or straight through processing).
If a claim meets the criteria, the Automation Framework progresses the
PSA claim for an automated outcome.

Claims processed through the Automation Framework are subject to quality
assurance processes to ensure:

-   Automation outcomes are delivered in line with the master plan's
    simple, helpful, respectful and transparent principles
-   the right claims are selected
-   Payment correctness (that is, the right programme, the right rate,
    the right date and the right person)

Process Step Automation (PSA)

Capalaba is using PSA for Jobseeker Payment (JSP) claims. PSA is also in
pilot at Newcastle for Austudy(AUS) student and Youth Allowance (YA)
student claims. Staff participating in the pilot at Newcastle have been
skill tagged to complete PSA tasks for AUS student and YA student claims
only. Additionally, Service Officers at other Smart Centres have been
skill tagged to assist with PSA student tasks.

PSA allows Service Officers to action some specific PSA tasks within a
claim while other parts of the claim are automated.

When a customer submits a claim online or via Assisted Customer Claim,
the Automation Framework will use the responses to the questions in the
claim to identify if it is suitable for straight through processing. If
the claim is not suitable for straight through processing, the framework
will determine if the claim fits the criteria for PSA. If the claim
meets the PSA criteria, a work item is created for the manual tasks that
require Service Officer action. The framework will allocate suitable
claims to a PSA Service Officer to process the PSA tasks in Process
Direct. When the Service Officer completes the PSA tasks, the claim is
then reassessed by the framework. If all automation conditions are met,
the claim is then finalised automatically.

If the claim is selected for Quality Management Application (QMA), only
the PSA tasks will be checked by a Quality Management Officer (QMO).

The Resources page has a link to the Process Direct sub-site, a
demonstration video and a list of tasks that may be completed as part of
the Process Step Automation (PSA) tasks.

Related links

Straight through processing

Automation capabilities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
