
Quality Management Application (QMA) for Quality Management Officers (QMO) 111-20010856

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how QMOs use QMA in Process Direct to complete
quality checks.

Role of a QMO

QMOs undertake quality checks of work items completed in Process Direct.
QMOs must have appropriate business and technical knowledge in the work
types they quality check.

QMOs must:

-   undertake training and be accredited before conducting checks in QMA
-   ensure consistent assessment of work items in line with the QMA
    process and Operational Blueprint procedures
-   identify and record errors correctly, and complete corrective action
-   take the appropriate action if further details are required from the
    customer, or escalation is required before finalising the work item
-   give consistent and constructive feedback to staff members
-   work with leadership and program teams to ensure QMA checks are
    consistent
-   provide relevant feedback about any system, procedural, policy and
    workflow issues

QMOs must not:

check their own work

manually search for QMA work items or quality check work processed their
peers, unless it:

-   is allocated to them via WLM, or directed to do so by Team
    Leader/appropriate delegate
-   meets the urgent QMA criteria, see Step 2 in the Using QMA in
    Process Direct table.
    Note: if an urgent QMA is requested, the QMO must assign the work
    item to themselves in Work Optimiser before completing the quality
    check

allocate the work items back to the original staff member, where they
can fix errors and finalise the claim during the quality check

change a staff member's decision unless it:

-   has no legislative or policy basis, or
-   does not meet the Operational Blueprint procedure

Discretionary decisions

All decisions need to be made using the relevant legislation, policy and
Operational Blueprint procedure.

If the legislation or policy allows for discretion, the staff member can
use discretion when completing the work item.

If the staff member has used their discretion, the QMO must not under
any circumstances change the decision. The QMO's personal opinion is
irrelevant. They can only override the decision if the legislation,
policy or procedure did not allow for any discretion.

For this reason, staff members must document all discretionary decisions
to ensure visibility and rigour around the assessment. Documenting the
discretionary reasons will also help the QMO check the correctness of
the work item.

Accreditation/ reaccreditation

For requirements, see QMA for Team Leaders.

Feedback

QMOs must give feedback using the QMA Comment function.

Valuable and constructive feedback can help identify issues and factors
that contribute to errors.

Analysing errors will help to identify:

-   trends
-   gaps in processing knowledge
-   gaps in policy/ legislation/reference materials
-   issues relating to environmental factors
-   system faults
-   training or development opportunities

Feedback must be provided for every identified error. This includes when
'Other errors identified’ (catch all error) has been used. Giving
effective feedback is an important part of the QMA process.

The feedback must:

-   describe the error identified, and what was incorrect
-   explain the impact of the error
-   explain the action that should have been taken to correct the error
-   include any relevant reference material that supports the action,
    such as Operational Blueprint details if available

Feedback must also be to the point, non-judgemental and constructive.

Feedback should provide enough detail to allow the staff member to
understand the error they have made and what the correct action would
have been.

This information can be used to address training needs and develop
national improvement strategies.

The feedback function can be used for positive feedback, but only when
the outcome of the check is error free.

Staff can replay the completed QMA check of selected work items from
either the:

-   QMA Feedback tile
-   QMA Sampling Report page in the QMA Dashboard - Service Officer tile

The replay function is currently only available on selected work items
where an error has been identified. See:

-   QMA for staff for more details on the QMA Replay
-   QMA in Process Direct for a list of work types that have the Replay
    function

The References page contains links to Quality Checking Feedback Policy.

The Resources page contains links to the QMA intranet page and QMA error
codes.

Related links

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Team Leaders

Quality Management Application (QMA) for staff

Quality Management Application in Process Direct

Quality Management Application (QMA) Sampling Override Tool

Updating proficiency for QOL

Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
