
Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue 111-10010060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of classifying digital images in the
National Queue for Centrelink customers.

Classification of digital images

Digital images that need manual classification are classified via the
National Queue in Process Direct.

To receive National Queue work in Process Direct, Classification
Officers must have the appropriate skill tag(s) for this work coded in
Essentials.

Use correct CRN and form type

Classification Officers need to determine the correct Customer Reference
Number (CRN) and form type for a digital image.

They can escalate documents to a Classification Support Officer for help
with more detailed or complex digital images.

Escalating a document to the Classification Support Queue

A document can be escalated to the Classification Support Queue when
additional support and expertise is required to finalise the
classification process.

To escalate a document, enter the relevant form code in the Form Type
field (refer to the Classification Guidelines table on the Resources
page for the appropriate form code), select the 'Escalate to a
Classification Support Officer' document decision option followed by the
save icon.

Large files

Some documents received are too large and will show an error when
attempting to open the PDF. These documents still need to be attached to
the relevant customer CRN, but also need to be escalated using the
webform. See Requesting a document rescan, retrieval or location.

Orphan and Administrative documents

Escalate to the Classification Support Queue any image that cannot be
attached to a customer record because:

-   there is not enough information in the document to locate a customer
    record, establish a customer's identity, or create a new record -
    Orphan documents
-   they do not relate to any customer. For example, invoices -
    Administrative documents
-   they are part of a process where the documents cannot be attached to
    a record. For example, tip offs or inappropriate images -
    Administrative documents, or
-   there is a business reason why the documents cannot be attached to a
    record but they still need processing. For example, a single page
    contains details for multiple customers - Administrative documents

In some cases, an Administration document may also be an Orphan
document. For example, an invoice addressed to Services Australia where
the owning team or agency cannot be identified.

Note: classification of a document as Orphan or Administrative should
only be undertaken by Technical Peer Support Staff/staff assigned to
action images from the Classification Support Queue.

Medical Information File Envelope (MIFE) documents

MIFE documents are medically sensitive information lodged by customers.
They are accessed for decisions about:

-   new claims
-   reviews
-   work capacity assessments, and
-   exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

To identify a MIFE document, the MIFE indicator tick box will be
selected in Document Tools in Customer First or the Documents tab in
Process Direct.

Unstructured documents

These are typically supporting documents such as payslips, identity
documents and bank statements.

If a reclassification page is not used when scanning these documents,
they will need manual classification.

For a full list of Unstructured (UNS) document codes, see Scanning
Centrelink documents using an MFD.

Tip-offs

Tip-offs received by the agency:

-   must not be attached to a customer record
-   must be escalated to the Classification Support Queue to be sent for
    administrative processing See Orphan and Administrative documents
    above

Documents returned to customer

Documents received by post not intended for Services Australia (for
example, a birth registration form) are scanned by the scanning
provider:

-   with a 'Documents returned to customer - not for Services Australia'
    coversheet
-   then returned to the customer/sender using the relevant 'with
    compliments' slip

Scanning lets Service Officers view the image on the customer's record
if the customer contacts to explain why they sent the document. If the
information is determined relevant to the agency, using the digital
image is appropriate to undertake any required action on the record.
This avoids the customer needing to resend the information.

The Resources page contains Classification Guidelines, Classification
codes for unstructured documents and International customer record
creation tips.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Digital image not located on Centrelink customer record

Classifying escalated Centrelink digital images in the National Queue

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
