
Incentive Programs quality checking 111-22140000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for Practice
Incentives Program (PIP), Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice
Stream, Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI) and General Practice Rural
Incentives Programme (GPRIP).

Objectives

The objective of the quality checking process and procedure is to:

-   give managers and checkers the tools to be able to identify
    strengths and weaknesses in the Incentives business process,
    highlighting opportunities for continuous business improvement,
    using effective quality checking processes
-   make sure quality checkers have the same understanding and are
    completing the checks in a consistent manner by documenting the
    quality checking process

Roles and Responsibilities

Managers are responsible for making sure quality checking is conducted:

-   as specified in the sampling plan to ensure feedback is given in a
    timely manner, issues are addressed, and corrections are made
    immediately (see Feedback for more information)
-   by quality checkers who have successfully completed the appropriate
    training and have the appropriate skill to complete the checks. See
    Accreditation of Quality Checkers for more information
-   Ensuring the skill tag is applied in the Quality Tool (QT) by
    sending an email to Services Delivery Quality and Support Team

Quality checkers are responsible for:

-   performing the quality checks
-   understanding the quality checking process
-   accessing reference material and determining the correct outcome
-   recording the results of the checks in the QT checking spreadsheet

The Team Leader (TL5) or Program Support Officer (PSO) is responsible
for:

-   providing feedback to the originating staff member about the outcome
    of quality checks
-   participating in identifying reasons (underlying factors) for errors
-   contributing towards continuous improvement
-   making sure identified errors have been corrected

Timeframe: quality checks must be completed by close of business of the
first working day of the new month.

Quality checking of own work

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If a quality
checker's own work is selected, it must be given to another trained
staff member to do the check.

Quality Checking Own Work Policy.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Staff members selected to undertake quality checking must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   maintain a personal correctness standard of 98% in the program that
    they are checking
-   review quality checking procedure/agreed standards and email the
    manager advising they have been reviewed and understood
-   meet accreditation standards annually

Team leaders contact Services Delivery Quality and Support Team to
request a skill tag be added to a staff member.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks will be applied to new starters and where there are new
processes introduced into the Programme. Staff will have their work
reviewed and corrected until deemed proficient and the results are not
included in accuracy of processing results.

Quality Checking New Starters Policy.

Post checks

Post checks will be performed on a statistically valid sample of
incentive transactions. The results are used to report on the health of
the program.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks for Incentive Programs are completed for:

-   staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy (to be developed)

An Aim for Accuracy for Incentives is to be conducted yearly.

Aim for Accuracy policy and Aim for Accuracy Guidelines.

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

New starters will have 100% of their work checked until they reach the
program accuracy KPI, with a minimum of 40 activities per program
checked.

Post checks

Two percent of all incentives work types will be checked. This includes:

-   Practice Incentive Program (PIP)
-   Workforce Incentive Program (WIP) - Practice Stream
-   Indigenous Health Incentive (IHI)
-   General Practice Rural Incentives Programme (GPRIP)

The sample is prioritised according to the risk of the work type:

-   High risk work items checked at 2.5%
-   Medium risk work items checked at 2.0%
-   Low risk work items checked at 1.9%
-   PIP Practice Bank Details work type checked at 100%.
-   PIP/WIP – Practice Stream (PIP consenting) Practice Bank Details
    work type checked at 100%

Targeted checks

Team Leaders are to send an email request to Services Delivery Quality
and Support Team with the staff members details, the reason and the
length of time required for the targeted check.

Aim for Accuracy to be developed as a separate process.

Source documentation

Incentives transactions selected for quality checking will be obtained
from work types allocated through the Processing and National Demand
Allocation (PaNDA) tool. Source documents will be obtained through
PaNDA, and/or the Practice Profile.

Quality checking is also performed on the following documentation (where
applicable):

-   scanned applications
-   supporting documentation, for example, accreditation certificate for
    a practice relocation
-   faxes
-   letters

Notations: if a notation has been made, this becomes part of the source
(supporting) documentation that is subject to quality checking. This
will be in the form of notations in PaNDA.

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

Checks are undertaken daily on a sample of work processed during the
month.

All quality checking results must be completed and submitted in the
Quality Tool by the first working day of the new month. The data is to
be extracted on the second working day and is sent via email to Quality
Management to facilitate reporting.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA)
-   Practice Profile
-   Drive where Quality Tool is located

Quality checking enquiries

Checkers must consult their Program Support Officers if they have any
questions about quality checking.

Enquiries about quality checking business rules or issues with submitted
checking results that cannot be resolved on site are directed to the
Quality Management Team by email.

Errors

Definition of what is considered an error

An error is defined for the purposes of quality checking as information
processed/keyed into the system which does not match the documentation
submitted by the practice or provider, or the supporting documents
uploaded to systems (as appropriate).

Definition of critical and non-critical errors

The error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to the:

-   process affecting payments and/or information of Services Australia
    and its customers
-   reputation of Services Australia

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (payment and/or registration) and will not
impact on Services Australia reputation.

Non-critical errors will recorded as feedback and any action required
will be sent to the Service Officer for correction.

Only critical errors will be used to calculate the accuracy of
processing results.

The Resources page lists error codes.

Recording Results

Quality checkers are to record the results in the Quality Tool for all
checked transactions.

Timeframe: all quality checking results must be submitted by close of
business of the first working day of the new month. Any results recorded
outside this timeframe will not be included in the results for the
month.

Feedback

After performing quality checking on selected transactions, an email is
sent to the Service Officers and the Team Leaders email box. The email
includes details about the check and the result, including any errors
identified.

Feedback on errors must:

-   be direct and to the point, non-judgemental and constructive
-   describe the error, and what was incorrect
-   explain the impact the error has, for example to the
    recipient/claimant, agency
-   explain the action that is to be taken to correct the error (where
    applicable)
-   include any relevant reference material that supports the action,
    such as an Operational Blueprint file
-   provide the opportunity for development and not be used for punitive
    purposes

Error documentation

Error documentation is electronically stored for coaching and
development.

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is to be recorded in the Quality Tool.

Analysing Errors

Error analysis is conducted by the:

-   Team Leader or Program Support Officer (PSO) as required for local
    issues
-   Assistance Programmes Branch for analysis of the programs

Correction of Errors

If errors have been identified, action must be taken to correct the
error.

Errors are to be corrected (where required) by the original processing
Service Officer. Where corrections cannot be made by the original
processing Service Officer, the Team Leader will be responsible for
ensuring that corrections are undertaken.

Change Management

The Quality Checking Procedure is reviewed and updated regularly by the
Assistance Programmes Branch and the Quality Management Section. The
review ensures that the error codes are current and applicable, and that
approved changes to Program business policies and procedures are
included.

Issues with the Quality Checking Procedure are recorded and escalated to
the Quality Management Team via email.

Changes needing immediate action will be updated accordingly. Changes
that are not critical to quality will be included in the review of the
procedure.

The Resources page contains error status codes (including the non-error
code), links to contacts, a link to the Quality Reporting form and a
list of intranet links to Quality resources and policies.

Related links

Incentive Programs

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
