
Authenticating an employer 111-05010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of authenticating employers who
contact the Services Australia.

On this Page:

Authentic employers

Employers contacting the agency must satisfy the Service Officer taking
the call that they are the legally authorised representative for the
business. The holder of the business's AUSkey Admin digital certificate
or Australian Tax Office (ATO) Primary digital certificate has, for the
agency’s purposes, been authenticated as the legal authorised
representative. The organisation may also have 'standard AUSkey'
holders, allocated by the Admin AUSkey holder and therefore are also
assumed to be an appropriate authority to act on behalf of the business.

Businesses that are not AUSkey or ATO digital certificate holders can
still register but will require assistance from a National Business
Gateway representative.

[] Employer representatives contacting by phone should be encouraged to
use Centrelink online accounts.

Establish identity

Similar to customers contacting, the Service Officer must establish the
identity of the caller before disclosing any information. This is done
by asking non-public Australian Business Register (ABR) data questions
that have answers which potentially only the employer representative
could know. Service Officers may also contact the representative by
third party means for example, Yellow Pages, if there are any doubts
about the caller being an authorised representative.

The Resources page contains a link for further information about AUSkey
for businesses.

Related links

Employer registration for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Employer notifies a change in circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employer assisted dispute resolution

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
