-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) in Health Service Delivery for the Continence
Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS).

Objectives

The CAPS quality checking process aligns Services Australia's Enterprise
Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The quality checking process:

-   helps Team Leaders and Quality Checkers to identify process
    improvements
-   ensures consistency in quality checking

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   Quality checkers complete the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division
-   Quality checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool by sending an email to the Quality Operations &
    Technical Support Team
-   Timely error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of
    the coaching conversation to support any learning and development
    opportunities
-   Analysis of errors. That is, if errors occurred due to factors such
    as limited training, understanding the business rules, environmental
    or system based issues
-   Positive quality checking outcomes are acknowledged with Service
    Officer
-   Analysis of data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities

Quality Checkers are responsible for:

-   Carrying out quality checks as specified in the sampling plan
-   Updating and maintaining technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   Maintaining a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   Identifying root cause analysis and identifying systemic issues
-   Reporting and escalating trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   Providing constructive and non-judgemental feedback including
    appropriate reference materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   Explaining the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct
    the error (where applicable) when providing feedback
-   Quality checkers must not check their own work. If their work is
    selected, it must be given to another staff member who has been
    trained to conduct quality checks.

Quality Team is responsible for:

-   Providing support for quality checking in the Quality and Support
    Tool (QST)
-   Providing relevant reports as required
-   Arranging QST training for quality checkers
-   Supporting the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

To attain accreditation, Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure

See Quality checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division
for more information.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters/New Process

Apply to new starters and/or when new processes are introduced.

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.

Program/Post-checks

Program/Post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day. The results are reported to executives and relevant
stakeholders each month.

Targeted Checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks provide an
opportunity to look at other areas of the process.

Targeted checks for CAPS may be:

-   checks on staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

New starters/New process proficiency requirements:

100% of their work checked until program accuracy Key Performance
Indicators (KPI) is reached with at least 20 work items checked.

Program/Post-checks

2% of the monthly total of CAPS work types are randomly selected for
quality checking.

Targeted Checks

To arrange targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email request to
Quality Operations & Technical Support with the:

-   staff member’s details
-   reason and the length of time required for the targeted check

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work. Quality
checks are completed within 1-2 business days to ensure timely feedback.
All quality checks for the month must be actioned within 3 calendar days
of the following month. After this time, remaining work is abandoned.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to undertake quality
checks:

-   Program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool
-   Skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool

Error definition

When quality checking, an error is information processed/keyed into the
system, which does not match the documents submitted or the supporting
documents uploaded to the systems.

Critical errors

Quality Checkers must correct critical errors immediately, as they are
identified.

Non-critical errors

Quality Checkers provide instruction in the feedback email. Service
Officer's correct non-critical errors.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

An error is defined as critical when there is a potential risk to a
customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record
-   the agency's reputation

An error is defined as non-critical when it does not meet the above
criteria. Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST).

A system-generated email is sent in real time to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader advising them of the quality check outcome.

Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Quality checking feedback is sent by email to the Service Officer and
their Team Leader. The email includes details about the:

-   check,
-   the result (including any errors identified) and
-   the Quality checking dispute process for Health Service Delivery
    Division

Managing and storing feedback

Feedback is sent to individual Service Officers and Team Leaders by
email. Feedback data is recorded/stored in QST.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must contact their Local Peer Support (LPS) for any
technical enquiries.

Enquiries about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to the Quality
Operations & Technical Support Team by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with to Quality Operations & Technical Support.
The review makes sure error codes are current and approved policy
changes are included.

Any changes that need immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains:

-   links to external websites, intranet sites, forms and contact
    details, and
-   tables listing error status codes (critical and non-critical) for
    quality checking

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS)

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Customer contact, application, ceasing
entitlement and review

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Errors and reports

Continence Aids Payment Scheme - Other requirements

Quality checker accreditation for Health Service Delivery Division

Quality checking dispute process for Health Service Delivery Division

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
