
Quality Management Application (QMA) for Team Leaders 111-20010858

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the role of Team Leaders in ensuring the
integrity of quality checking using QMA in Process Direct. This includes
the accreditation of Quality Management Officers (QMO).

Team Leader role

Managers and Team Leaders are responsible for their staff and for the
work they perform. To ensure the integrity of QMA they need to:

ensure QMOs have the business and technical knowledge in work types they
will be checking

ensure QMOs undertake their role and follow the QMA quality checking
process

conduct annual QMO reaccreditation reviews

support QMOs to deliver quality outcomes by:

-   scheduling required training
-   mentoring staff as they learn the QMA process

maintain skill tags and proficiencies where required

manage QMA sampling overrides (applying/removing), where required

monitor QMA performance across the site and give reports to management
if needed

analyse trends in quality checking results and ensure continuous
improvement

Staff proficiency

QMA identifies which work items need checking. This is based on the:

-   Skill tag model, or
-   Auto sampling model

Skill tag model

Proficiency levels in ESSentials must be current and reflect the staff
member’s capability. This will ensure the correct percentage of work is
selected for quality checking.

All staff completing these work items are subject to ongoing proficiency
advancement assessment until proficiency can be moved to the Experienced
level.

Staff progress between proficiency levels through a review process.
Proficiency reviews can occur at any time, but at a minimum must be
completed annually, with the updates recorded in ESSentials.

See Staff QMA Proficiency Policy.

QMA Auto Sampling Model

Proficiency advancement occurs automatically. Manual and annual
proficiency reviews are no longer required. Note: QMA auto sampling
model does not use skill tags in ESSentials to determine sampling rates
for QMA. However, skill tags are required for Workload Management
allocation purposes.

QMO accreditation

This is assessed by a team leader, Service Support Officer (SSO) or a
manager.

To become a QMO, a staff member must:

-   be APS4 or above
-   achieve and maintain at least 95% correctness in the work types they
    will be checking, and
-   be assessed as effective against each prerequisite in the QMO
    Accreditation form

When the requirements have been met, the staff member must:

-   complete mandatory QMA training, and
-   achieve 100% accuracy on the QMA Skills verification test. See
    Training & Support page

QMO reaccreditation

Reaccreditation is a review process to ensure QMOs maintain the
knowledge and technical skills to perform the quality checker role.

QMOs are accredited every 12 months.

For reaccreditation they need to have:

-   maintained at least 95% correctness in the work items they will be
    checking
-   completed at least 20 QMA checks of the relevant work items over the
    last 12 months, and
-   obtained 100% accuracy on the QMA Skills verification test

QMOs will need to undertake the full accreditation process if they do
not meet the above criteria or if access has lapsed longer than 12
months.

Sampling

See QMA in Process Direct.

Comparison table

See QMA in Process Direct for a comparison table. The table identifies
if the work type:

-   is subject to the auto sampling model, or the skill tag model
-   is part of the Standalone QMA interface, or the Integrated QMA
    workflow
-   has the Replay functionality enabled
-   has the name and a description of each Variant
-   has the number of work items quality checked before auto sampling
    applies. Note: this applies to the auto sampling model only. Once
    'active' movement between sampling rates is automated based on the
    staff member’s recent accuracy rate

Reporting and management data for QMA

See QMA in Process Direct.

The References page contains links to policy for assessing staff
proficiency and QMO accreditation.

The Resources page contains links to the QMA intranet page, QMA
Reporting Dashboard Guide, SAP Role Request, ESSentials intranet page,
forms and QMO Prerequisites table.

Contents

Quality Management Application (QMA) Sampling Override Tool

Related links

Quality Management Application (QMA) for Quality Management Officers
(QMO)

Quality Management Application (QMA) for staff

Quality Management Application (QMA) in Process Direct

Updating proficiency for QOL

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
