
Aged Care payments quality checking in QST 111-21031647

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process using the Quality
and Support Tool (QST) for Aged Care Payments Team (Aged Care and Allied
Health Branch).

Objectives

The Aged Care payments quality checking process aligns Services
Australia's Enterprise Quality Framework and the 7 quality principles.

See Resources for a link to the Enterprise Quality Framework.

The Aged Care payments quality checking process will:

-   ensure the quality of work types not checked within the quality
    online (QOL) assurance program
-   support consistent and correct activity outcomes
-   give managers and checkers the tools to be able to identify
    strengths and weaknesses in the aged care claim process,
    highlighting opportunities for continuous business improvement,
    using effective quality checking processes
-   ensure quality checkers are completing checks in a consistent manner

Out of scope

The following work types are not covered by this procedure:

-   eACCRs/NASF
-   adjustments
-   bank details
-   app provider
-   opt in
-   hardship
-   held events
-   quarterly review
-   unapproved
-   ENQ

Roles and responsibilities

Aged Care Portfolio Holder is responsible for:

-   national implementation of Aged Care quality practices
-   analysis of national quality reports to identify learning needs or
    process improvement opportunities
-   escalation of national quality issues to the program area and/or to
    Quality Operations & Technical Support

Managers/Team Leaders must make sure:

-   Quality Checkers complete the process for Quality Checker
    accreditation
-   Quality Checkers hold appropriate skill tags in the Quality and
    Support Tool by sending an email to Quality Operations & Technical
    Support
-   error feedback is discussed with Service Officer as part of the
    coaching conversation. This supports any learning and development
    needs
-   they analyse any errors, e.g. did the errors occur because there is
    limited training, understanding of the business rules, environmental
    or system based issues
-   positive quality checking results are discussed with the Service
    Officer
-   they analyse data to identify learning needs or process improvement
    opportunities
-   quality checks are done as specified in the sampling plan
-   they notify senior management of serious error which places the
    agency’s reputation at immediate risk
-   they escalate systemic issues
-   lodgement of quality checking outcomes disputes

Quality Checkers must:

-   carry out quality checks as outlined in the sampling plan
-   update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and policies
-   maintain a correctness standard for personal accuracy
-   complete root cause analysis and identify systemic issues
-   report and escalate trends or concerns to their Team Leader
-   give constructive and non-judgemental feedback. Include reference
    materials such as Operational Blueprint
-   explain the impact of errors and action to be taken to correct the
    error (where applicable) when giving feedback
-   examine system information/source documents to make sure Aged Care
    payment claims processes are in line with business rules, policies
    and procedures
-   make sure they do not check their own work. If a quality checker’s
    own work is selected, it must be passed to another accredited
    checker to check

Quality Team must:

-   provide support for quality checking in the QST
-   provide relevant reports as needed
-   arrange QST training for Quality Checkers
-   support the business with flexible and fit for purpose quality
    approaches

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Quality Checker accreditation must be renewed annually. See Quality
Checker accreditation for more information.

To be accredited Quality Checkers must:

-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures
-   maintain a high correctness standard in the program they are
    checking
-   have an understanding of the quality checking procedure for Aged
    Care Payments
-   meet accreditation standards annually
-   renew Quality Checker accreditation annually

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

Pre-checks apply:

-   to new starters
-   when new processes are introduced

New starters have 100% of their work reviewed and corrected until deemed
proficient. Any errors made in pre-check must be recorded as errors.

Claim tolerance approval criteria

Before approving a claim, Quality Checkers must check the following
tolerances:

-   the difference between the total subsidy amount of the service’s
    current and previous claim month is less than 20%
-   the total subsidy amount within the service’s current claim is
    between 1 cent and $5,000,000
-   the positive or negative adjustment (excluding manual adjustments)
    within the service’s current claim is less than 20% variance of the
    current claim month total entitlement amount
-   there was no previous claim
-   a respite claim is more than $5000
-   there has been viability supplement changes

If the claim does not meet any of the tolerances, Quality Checkers must
investigate and complete the claim manually.

Programme/post-checks

Programme/post-checking randomly selects work completed the previous
business day in Processing and National Demand Allocation (PaNDA). The
results are provided to management and external stakeholders as needed.

Targeted checks

Targeted checks apply to:

-   staff when there is a substantial new process introduced or an
    identified quality issue
-   Aim for Accuracy process (Check the Checker) which is completed
    every 12 months. This confirms the accuracy of quality checking
    results. The process involves rechecking a sample of previously
    checked work to decide if quality checking procedures have been
    followed correctly

Sampling plan

Pre-checks

Staff have 100% of their work checked until they become proficient. As a
guide, new starters are considered proficient when as per the training
and consolidation plan from the Learning and Development team.

Programme/post-checks

1% of Aged Care Payments work types are randomly selected for quality
checking.

Targeted Checks

To arrange a targeted check(s), Team Leaders send an email request to
Quality Operations & Technical Support with the:

-   staff member’s details
-   the reason and length of time required for the targeted check

Source documents

Aged Care Payments work are randomly selected for quality checking in
the QST from work types allocated through the Processing and National
Demand Allocation (PaNDA) tool. PaNDA provides the source documents.

Quality checking is done on the source documents below (where
applicable):

scanned application forms such as the scanned Application for the Oxygen
or Enteral Feeding Supplement form (AC011)

supporting documentation, for example:

-   accreditation certificate for a practice relocation
-   certificate from a doctor, and
-   copies of tax invoices as proof of evidence when claiming the higher
    oxygen or enteral feeding supplement

faxes

letters

Process for quality checks

Timeframes

Quality checks are undertaken daily on a random sample of work.

-   Pre-checks - quality checks are normally done within 1-2 business
    day of the work being completed
-   Programme checks - where possible quality checks are completed
    within 4 calendar days of being allocated in the QST. At the end of
    the month any program check not completed is automatically abandoned
    after 4 calendar days

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the following to do quality checks:

-   program specific processing systems
-   Processing and National Demand allocation (PaNDA)
-   Quality and Support Tool (QST)
-   skill tags added on the Quality and Support Tool
-   relevant internet and intranet sites, e.g. Operational Blueprint

Error definition

An error is information processed or keyed that does not match the
documents supplied, or the supporting documents uploaded on the systems.

Critical and non-critical errors

Error codes are categorised as critical and non-critical.

A critical error is when there is a potential risk to:

a customer's:

-   privacy
-   eligibility
-   payments
-   application assessment being finalised
-   record

the agency's reputation

A non-critical error is when it does not impact the above criteria.
Generally, this relates to administrative errors.

Only critical errors are used to calculate the health status of the
program.

Recording results

Each time a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker records the
outcome in the Quality and Support Tool (QST). A system-generated email
is sent in real time to the Service Officer and their Team Leader
advising them of the outcome. Individual results are captured in QST.

Feedback

Feedback is emailed to the Service Officer and their Team Leader. It
gives details about the:

-   check
-   result (including any errors identified)
-   quality checking dispute process

Method for managing and storing feedback

Feedback is recorded/stored in the Quality & Support Tool. Discussion
notes about the feedback should be detailed in coaching sessions.

Correcting Errors

If errors have been identified, action must be taken to correct the
error. An email will be sent to the Service Officer and their Team
Leader following the completion of the quality check. Any errors will
include feedback with details of the error and directing staff member to
appropriate resources to correct.

In the case that the Service Officer is absent, on extended leave or a
time sensitive situation arises the Team Leader will need to follow up
any remedial action.

The Team Leader is responsible for ensuring that corrections have been
undertaken for errors identified.

Critical errors - Quality Checkers must correct critical errors
immediately as they are found.

Non-critical errors - Quality Checkers provide instruction in the
feedback email. Service Officer’s correct non-critical errors.

Enquiries

Quality Checkers must consult their subject matter experts for questions
about Aged Care Payments.

Enquires about quality checking process or issues with checking results
that cannot be resolved on site should be directed to Quality Operations
& Technical Support by email.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are reviewed and updated by the business and
program in consultation with Quality Operations & Technical Support. The
review makes sure error codes are current and approved policy changes
are included.

Any changes that need immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes not critical to quality will be incorporated in
the review of the procedures.

The Resources page contains tables listing error status codes (critical
and non-critical) for quality checking and a list of links to the
intranet.

Contents

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Related links

Quality Checker accreditation

Quality checking using the Quality and Support Tool (QST)

Aged Care program for service providers

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Service in Context

Aged Care Staff Portal (ACSP) – Access and using the home page

Quality online (QOL) assurance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
