
Straight through processing 111-22053152

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of straight through processing for
Service Officer's responding to customer requests for review of their
grant outcome in Process Direct.

Straight through processing in Process Direct

Straight through processing is where a claim is assessed using criteria
to identify if it is suitable for an automated grant outcome.

These criteria are referred to as the automation framework business
rules. The automation framework works with Process Direct. If a claim
meets the criteria, it progresses through the automation framework and
in some instances, is completed within minutes of being submitted.

Claims that straight through processing is applied to are:

-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Dad and Partner Pay (pre-birth)
-   Parental Leave Pay (pre-birth)
-   Transfer to Age Pension
-   Low Income Health Care Card
-   Youth Allowance for students
-   Austudy for students
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card
-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Submitting a claim

When a claim is submitted:

-   by the customer online, or
-   by a staff member via an assisted customer claim,

the automation framework will use the responses to assess against the
business rules. If all business rules are satisfied, the claim is
progressed for an automated grant outcome in Process Direct.

Quality checks are completed after automated claims are granted to:

-   validate the system is working as expected, and
-   to raise and resolve issues where they are identified

Where a claim does not meet the business rules, it is analysed to see if
it meets the criteria for Process Step Automation. If not, the claim is
excluded from automation and assigned to a Service Officer for manual
processing.

Quality Assurance

Automation outcomes are delivered using the agency's Automation
Operating Model (AOM) and Frameworks to assure compliance with ethics,
legal, privacy, policy, quality and risk management frameworks. This
supports automation initiatives to occur safely, legally and ethically
within Services Australia. See Resources page for a link to Automation
Operating Model (AOM) and Frameworks.

Claims that are straight through processed are also subject to the
quality assurance processes under the Payment Assurance Framework (PAF).

The PAF ensures that independent assurance checks are undertaken on
automated decisions by focusing on 3 key elements:

-   Decision accuracy
-   Coding accuracy
-   Payment outcome accuracy

As a result of the AOM and PAF assurance processes, automation outcomes
are delivered in line with the master plan's principles to be simple,
helpful, respectful and transparent.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script. If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Related links

Process Step Automation (PSA)

Claim Automation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
