
Customer Online View for Service Officers 111-06042000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how staff can use Customer Online View to see
what the customer sees when using their Centrelink online account.

Benefits

By using Customer Online View, Service Officers can:

-   gain a better knowledge of services available to customers online
-   gain a better understanding of the user experience
-   support customers
-   encourage and promote these services to customers so they will have
    the confidence and knowledge to access the service for transactions
    and enquiries

Using Customer Online View

Customer Online View behaves the same as for a customer using their
Centrelink online account.

For example:

-   it displays error messages
-   pages flow in the same order
-   menu options are the based on the customer's payment type and
    circumstances

Staff can help and educate customers when they ask about what they have
done or tried to do in their Centrelink online account.

Customer Online View does not allow a:

-   customer to start an online transaction and have it completed by a
    Service Officer
-   Service Officer to start an online transaction and have it completed
    by the customer

The exemption to these rules is the Report Employment Income (REI)
service.

Customer Online View does not save any information that a Service
Officer may enter in Customer Online View when helping customers, except
for the Report Employment Income (REI) service. For more information
about helping customers with the REI service using Customer Online View,
see Item 3 on the Process page

Note: under no circumstances are Service Officers to access their own
record using Customer Online View. This is considered browsing and may
result in disciplinary action. Service Officers who want to access their
own active Centrelink online account should do so using the internet as
a customer would.

Record locking

While a Service Officer is in a customer's record, the customer cannot
update their record online. For example, if the customer tries to report
online, they will get a message that the service is not currently
available or their update cannot be processed at this time.

While a customer is accessing their online account, their record will be
locked. This is just the same as when a Service Officer accesses the
customer's record.

Customers must always select the myGov icon to securely exit their
Centrelink online account session and return to myGov.

The Resources page has questions and answers about accessing and using
Customer Online View.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
