
Using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE) application to access archived Education Student Assistance System (ESAS) data 111-02010010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to search and retrieve historical data in
relation to students who received payments from the old Department of
Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs (DEETYA) now known as
the Department of Education.

Client ID (CID) numbers

Students who were in receipt of ABSTUDY, Assistance for Isolated
Children (AIC), AUSTUDY and Financial Supplement loan (FSL) payments
under the DEETYA scheme (before the transfer of services to Centrelink
on 1 July 1998) were paid through the Education Student Assistance
System (ESAS). These students were issued with Client ID (CID) numbers
that are a unique signifier similar to the Customer Reference Number
(CRN) that currently exists for all customers on the Centrelink system.

Application Number

Customers were also allocated an Application Number each year that was
only relevant to enquiries regarding that year's payment. The CID was
used to identify a customer and would not change, whereas the
Application Number would change depending on the year of payment.

From time to time, customers who were receiving payments under the
DEETYA scheme may query matters related to those payments. These
enquiries will most likely be appeals of decisions regarding repayment
of FSL and other outstanding debts associated with payments before 1
July 1998. Details of DEETYA scheme payments have been archived from
ESAS to the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE).

If the customer does not have a current record for a Centrelink payment,
search in ACE for their records using the CID, the Application Number or
the customer's name.

The Resources page contains a link to the Archiving and Culling Engine
(ACE).

Related links

Using the Archiving and Culling Engine (ACE) application to access
receipt numbers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
