
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Quality On Line (QOL) and Quality Management
Application (QMA) dispute process in the Face to Face (F2F) Services
Division, including how staff can lodge a dispute.

The process is based on the Quality Dispute Policy.

Social Security and Welfare (SSW) Quality will manage disputes lodged by
F2F staff in Service Zones.

Timeframes

Disputes must be lodged within 30 days of the Quality Check being
completed, unless a staff member has been on leave. In these cases, the
dispute is lodged within 14 days of their return to work.

Staff responsibility

Staff must:

support their dispute with evidence:

-   Research the error and make sure the dispute is supported by a
    business process or policy
-   Operational Blueprint will be the most appropriate reference,
    however other nationally endorsed references (that were current at
    the time the check was done) may also be suitable (for example,
    NNU’s, Roxy)

finalise all actions on customer’s record before lodging dispute:

-   Staff must complete all actions on the customer's record as a
    priority, before lodging a dispute
-   Staff must not HOLD or leave a NOT or STA activity on the customer's
    record pending the outcome of a dispute
-   If staff are unsure of the correct action to take pending the
    outcome, they should discuss with their Team Leader

Independent reviewer

A Service Support Officer (SSO) in Social Security and Welfare Quality
(SSW Quality) who has the relevant technical expertise, will carry out
the independent review.

Note: if the SSO network does not have technical expertise in a certain
area, they will consult with a technical specialist.

The Independent Reviewer will determine if the outcome of the dispute
is:

-   Upheld - agree with original check decision
-   Upheld for different reason - original checking decision is correct
    but for a different reason. For example, different error reason
-   Overturned - original decision overturned. That is, agree with
    dispute

The Resources page has frequently asked questions, links to forms,
Intranet links and contact details.

Related links

Quality On Line (QOL)

Quality Management Application

Quality standards in service delivery

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
