
Using the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR) system and microfiche requests for archived information 111-02020010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the use of the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR)
system to search for and retrieve archived records.

Retrieve archived records

Information relating to customers that is no longer required online is
periodically culled, and certain records are electronically stored in
archives. This is generally done anytime from about 2 to 18 months after
the records are created.

Often records that are no longer available online are required by
Service officers or other staff, and these must be able to be retrieved
from the archives.

The CAR system is a computer system which stores historical data and
allows staff to easily retrieve, view and print that data after it has
been archived.

The archive retrieval process may take from a few minutes to a few
hours, depending on the number of users on the system. It is advisable
to submit retrieval requests early in the day where possible, as there
are likely to be fewer users logging requests and it allows more time to
complete retrieval if the system is busy.

Electronic data remains in the environment in which it was created.
Archives may exist in more than one environment for customers who have
transferred to different environments. Staff seeking historical
information may then need to go to each of the customer's environments
to retrieve the archives.

Microfiche records

Records that pre-date CAR, dating back to approximately 1978, may be
available on microfiche. These may be retrieved by contacting the
relevant State Microfiche Officer.

The Resources page contains links to the contact details for State
Microfiche Officers and the Records Management Unit.

Related links

Searching for archived records in other environments

Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR)

Archived information

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
