-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for Medicare patient
claims.

A patient claim involves the claimant and the patient. The medical
service is provided to the patient. The Medicare benefit is paid to the
claimant for fully paid accounts or to the provider for unpaid or
partially paid accounts. Both are mandatory components of the claiming
process, however they do not have to be the same person or be on the
same Medicare card.

Quality checking for patient claims involves checking a random sample of
patient claims transactions to see whether the program business rules
have been applied correctly.

On this Page:

Objectives

The Quality Control System (QCS) is used to select the following
transactions/transmissions for quality checking and to record results:

-   Medicare patient claim transactions and patient claim online
    transmissions
-   bulk bill vouchers and bulk bill online transmissions
-   public eligibility

For more information about how to interpret quality checking information
on the QBBI screen, see The Quality Control System (QCS) for Medicare in
Resources.

The objective of the patient claims quality checking procedure is to:

give checkers the tools to:

-   identify strengths and areas of development in the processing of
    Medicare patient claims, and
-   highlight opportunities for continuous business improvement, using
    effective quality checking processes

make sure quality checkers have the same understanding of the process

ensure quality checkers are completing the checks in a consistent
manner, by documenting the quality checking process

Roles and responsibilities

Managers/Team Leaders are responsible for ensuring:

-   quality checking is performed on a daily basis for every processing
    day available on QBBI
-   checking is undertaken by accredited Quality Checkers
-   quality checks are undertaken as outlined in this procedure
-   results of quality checks are recorded appropriately
-   issues are addressed and corrections made immediately (see the
    Feedback section below)
-   error feedback is discussed with the Service Officer as part of the
    coaching conversation. This supports any learning and development
    needs
-   positive quality checking results are discussed with the Service
    Officer
-   lodgement of quality checking disputes (where applicable)

Where source documents are hard copies, they must be held on site until
the quality check is finalised. If the documents have been archived, it
is the responsibility of the Manager/Team Leader to recall them.

Quality Checkers must ensure the following:

-   they correctly apply Medicare patient claims processing business
    rules
-   quality checking is performed on the specified sample size
-   they update and maintain technical knowledge, procedures and
    policies
-   they give constructive and non-judgemental feedback to Service
    Officers, including reference materials such as Operational
    Blueprint
-   they explain the impact of errors and action needed to correct the
    error (where applicable), when giving feedback
-   quality checking errors are recorded and reported using the online
    Error Explanation Sheet.

At the end of each month, quality checks (post checking) must be
completed by close of business (COB) on the first working day of the new
month.

See Resources for a link to the Error Explanation Sheet.

Quality checking of own work

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If a Quality
Checker's own work is selected, it must be passed to an accredited staff
member to conduct the quality checks.

Accreditation of Quality Checkers

Before undertaking quality checking, selected staff members must:

-   successfully complete the training MCA00802 - Claims and Eligibility
    Quality Checker and MCA00835 - Claims and Eligibility QC
-   have knowledge of relevant policies and procedures and/or know where
    to find them
-   have reviewed the quality checking procedure and emailed the
    Manager/Team Leader advising they have been reviewed and understood
-   undergo refresher training every 12 months

Only accredited Quality Checkers can undertake quality checking.

Types of quality checks

Pre-checks

New starters - Proficiency checking is determined by the training plan
established for the training group. Plans may vary based on business
drivers and previous staff experience.

Post-checks

Post-checks (QBBI) involve checking a statistically valid, random
selection of work processed the previous day. The results are reported
to executives and relevant stakeholders each month.

Targeted checks

In addition to the pre and post-checks, targeted checks (manual
checking) provide an opportunity to look at other areas of the process.

Targeted checks for Medicare patient claims processing may be:

-   checks on staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy (separate procedure)

Sampling plan

Post-checks

The Quality Control System (QCS) randomly selects a number of patient
claims transactions for quality checking (QBBI). These transactions:

are work processed the previous day

are a selection of Service Officers from different source office codes

include manual patient claims from any patient claim processed using the
following suite of transactions:

-   NP**
-   NH**
-   NS**
-   NE**

include online patient claims where a Service Officer has manually
intervened

Note:

-   two-way claims should be left unactioned by the Quality Checker
-   where an online patient claim is partially processed by one Service
    Officer and finalised by another, the QCS will place the claim to be
    checked under the source office code of the Service Officer who
    finalised the claim

Multiple patient claims transactions selected for quality checking

Where several updates have been performed on the same Medicare card, the
QCS may select the same card multiple times on the same day.

For transactions with:

-   the same time stamp, action the first transaction line with a valid
    status code. Leave the additional transaction line(s) unactioned
-   different time stamps, action all transaction lines. If an error is
    identified in each transaction line, the relevant error status code
    must be applied against the corresponding time stamp

All unactioned quality checking items will no longer appear on QBBI
after approximately 21 days.

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

If quality checking for QBBI is not performed for a particular day, the
work must be checked within two working days. Outstanding transactions
must be completed before selecting another day's processed work.

At the end of each month, quality checks must be completed by close of
business (COB) on the first working day of the new month.

Resources

Medicare mainframe

Operational Blueprint

Source documentation

-   Medicare claim forms
-   Invoices
-   Receipts

Online claims

-   Text messages

Quality checks enquiries

Quality Checkers must follow the appropriate escalation process for the
relevant programme.

Quality Operations & Technical Support team is only responsible for the
management of the quality checking procedures.

Quality Checkers who need clarification on processing business rules
must follow the appropriate escalation process for the relevant
programme.

Errors

Errors must be reported and follow-up action sent to the Service Officer
for correction.

Document, processing and referral errors

For the purposes of quality checking, a:

-   document error is when a Service Officer has processed the
    transaction and has not detected the original paperwork was
    incomplete or contained insufficient information to support the
    action taken
-   processing error is when a Service Officer has processed or entered
    information incorrectly which does not match the original paperwork
    submitted
-   referral error is when a Service Officer has identified an anomaly
    that might warrant a referral to Health Compliance

Recording and reporting results

Quality Checkers must record any errors identified during the quality
checking process (post-checks). Follow the steps outlined in the program
quality checking procedure.

Errors should be identified during the quality checking process (post
checks). Follow the steps outlined in the program quality checking
procedure.

Quality checkers are required to record the following:

-   QBBI - only the error that is deemed to have the greatest impact
-   Error Explanation Sheet - all errors

All quality checking results (post-checks) are reported to executives
and relevant stakeholders each month.

Post-checking results recorded by each program are measured against
respective, endorsed key performance measures. Each program is expected
to meet or exceed their endorsed key performance measure.

See Resources for a link to the Error Explanation Sheet.

Feedback

When a quality check is completed, the Quality Checker must provide
feedback to the Service Officer and their Team Leader advising of the
outcome. This feedback should:

-   be positive for transactions identified as error free
-   be given the same day or as soon as possible after the quality check
    is completed
-   describe the error identified, and what was incorrect
-   explain the action required to correct the error
-   include any relevant reference material that supports the action,
    such as Operational Blueprint details (if available)

Analysing errors

In consultation with the processing Service Officer, the Quality Checker
or Manager/Team Leader:

determines the reason(s) for the error (underlying factors)

identifies any possible:

-   areas for development
-   gaps in business rules
-   issues relating to environmental factors, and
-   system faults and limitations

completes the Error Explanation Sheet. See Resources for:

-   an intranet link to the Error Explanation Sheet, and
-   the attachment, Guide to completing the online Error Explanation
    Sheet

Correction of errors

If errors are identified, action must be taken to correct the error.
Errors must be corrected by the original processing Service Officer.
Where corrections cannot be made by the original processing Service
Officer, the Team Leader is responsible for doing it.

Recurring errors must be brought to the attention of the Manager/Team
Leader of the processing area, and the Service Officer concerned.

Remedial action (such as training) needed to reduce the occurrence of
errors should be planned by the Manager/Team Leader and undertaken as a
matter of priority.

Change management

Quality checking procedures are regularly reviewed and updated by the
respective programs in consultation with the Quality Operations &
Technical Support team. The review ensures:

-   error codes are current and applicable, and
-   approved changes to program business policies and procedures are
    included

The Resources page contains information about the error status codes
(including the non-error code), contact details, attachments and
intranet links.

Related links

Claims processing in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
