
Locating digital images via Document Tools in Customer First 111-10020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information about the Document Tools screen in
Customer First and how it can be used to search for and display all
digital images that have been declared to a customer record.

Document Tools functions

Document Tools can be used to search for and view all digital images
that have been declared on a customer's record. Other functions of the
Document Tools screen include:

-   Moving an image from one Customer Reference Number (CRN) to another
-   Copying an image from one CRN to another
-   Updating information on digital images
-   Display of undeclared images awaiting attachment to a customer
    record
-   Display document information on how and where the image was received
    (staff can search a date range to display older documents than the
    default displayed)

Digital images of documents lodged before September 2011 cannot be
viewed via the Document Tools screen. These images are stored in the
National Index (NIM) database and can be viewed manually via Customer
Record. For more information, see Viewing Centrelink customers' digital
images.

Any enquiries about images that have been incorrectly classified during
manual classification or issues with delays in the manual classification
of digital images should be directed to the Operational Planning Branch.
The Resources page contains a link to the Operational Planning Branch
page.

Access through Customer First

The Document Tools screen can be used by all staff that are required to
view and action digital images. It is accessed by any staff member with
Customer First access.

The Resources page contains links to the Scanning and Digitisation
Programme and Operational Planning pages, and Office Locator.

Related links

Moving and/or updating Centrelink digital images via Document Tools

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
