[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for staff during initial phone contact
with customers and the public.

Reviewing Display on Access (DOA) DOCs

Service Officers must read and comply with all DOA DOCs at every
customer contact. It is possible to access DOA DOCs in Customer First
and Process Direct.

These alerts display immediately when a customer record is accessed and
help to provide a better customer service. This is a Business
Imperative.

When accessing a customer record, staff must:

-   check the Document List (DL) screen for DOA DOCs
-   open and read each DOA DOC on the customer's record
-   follow the directions and information in each DOA DOC

Staff must read and adhere to DOA DOCs to avoid:

-   placing customers affected by family and domestic violence at risk
    of further harm
-   exposing customers and the agency to fraudulent activity
-   inadvertent disclosure of a customer’s personal information
-   staff being exposed to extreme customer aggression
-   staff being unaware of relevant critical information such as
    bereavement periods and Managed Service Plans

Greetings and authentication

When answering a call a Service Officer can use a best practice greeting
phrase or an appropriate greeting of their own, for example:

-   'Hello, this is [Service Officer’s name], can I start with your name
    please?'
-   ‘Hi, my name is [Service Officer’s name], may I start with your
    Centrelink reference number please?’

The Service Officer can combine the greeting and the name confirmation
request in the one sentence if they wish. It is also acceptable if the
customer volunteers their name as part of their own greeting.

The Service officer must:

-   confirm the name of the caller before proceeding, regardless of the
    authentication level achieved on Services Australia Workspace. This
    is to ensure that Customer Overview is displaying the correct record
-   authenticate the customer correctly. See Authenticating a Centrelink
    customer

Confirming customer phone numbers

This may be completed in the IVR. The Update Phone Number instructions
must be checked on Customer Overview to confirm the action required.
This is a Business Imperative.

Customer Overview displays cards with a Green icon for successful
interactions that need no further action:

-   Phone number confirmed
    The phone number the customer is calling from has been checked
    against the number on the customer record
-   Updated phone number
    The customer has successfully updated their phone number in the IVR

Customer Overview displays cards with an Amber or Red icon if Service
Officer action is needed:

-   Phone number check required
    The IVR could not confirm the customer’s phone number. Phone details
    must be checked and updated if necessary
-   Please update Phone
    The IVR has received new telephony details from the customer.
    However, the update was not completed as the customer did not have
    the required level of authentication
-   Attempt to update phone number failed
    There was a technical error in the IVR. Phone details must be
    checked and updated if necessary
-   An alternate method
    All contact details must be updated from claim information in new
    claims and scanned images

Customer Overview displays cards with Amber and Red

-   Check customer is registered for electronic messaging, see
    Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Confirming family assistance income estimates and payment choices

At every contact by an FTB and/or CCS customer, where appropriate, staff
must:

-   prompt the customer to review and update their current year
    estimate, and
-   discuss payment choices with FTB customers and update as appropriate

If the customer has Voice Print Authentication this may be completed in
the IVR. Staff must check the income estimate instructions on Customer
Overview to confirm if action is required. This is a Business
Imperative.

Customer Overview displays cards with a green icon for successful
interactions that need no further action:

-   Income estimate confirmed: the customer has confirmed the income
    estimate recorded and no further action is needed

Customer Overview displays cards with an amber or red icon if Service
Officer action is needed:

-   Income estimate update required: the customer has indicated they
    would like to update their family assistance income estimate. The
    income estimate must be updated via normal processes
-   Income estimate update failed: there was a technical error in the
    IVR. The income estimate should be checked and updated via normal
    processes if required

Checking the Customer Issues page

Service Officers must check the Customer Issues page in Customer First
at every customer contact. Customer Overview will warn if there are
issues on the Customer Issues page. This is a Business imperative.

The Customer Issues page is used to ensure any mandatory actions or
handoffs are handled correctly.

Any payment related issues must be actioned if the Service Officer has
the capability.

The Customer Issues page can be accessed in Customer First in the Quick
Links (left panel), in the Other Links block on the Workspace screen, or
at the top right corner of the Customer Summary (CRN/BP) screen.

Any actions outside the Service Officer's skills must be handed off to
the relevant queue or business area, and the customer advised why their
call is being transferred.

Promoting self service

Self service is the preferred way for customers to do business with the
agency and for most customers is the quickest and easiest option. Self
service is available through mobile apps, online accounts and phone self
service.

Staff are expected to:

-   transition customers to self service at every opportunity, unless
    the customer is not eligible or the staff member deems it
    inappropriate
-   educate customers about self service options
-   encourage eligible customers to enrol a voiceprint
-   troubleshoot self service issues and, where possible, transition the
    customer back to self service to complete their business
-   escalate self service issues unable to be resolved through
    troubleshooting

This is a Business Imperative.

Applying first contact resolution principles and call quality standards

Service officers must apply first contact resolution principles:

-   assist the customer with their enquiry
-   offer a complete solution to a customer's enquiry
-   avoid call transfers unless necessary

Service officers must maintain call quality standards at all times.

Privacy

Privacy and confidentiality provisions administered by the agency must
be followed at all times.

This includes times when a Service Officer may accidentally access a
record of a person they know.

If during the course of their duties, staff inadvertently access the
information of a person in whom they have a personal interest, they must
record the incident on the Inadvertent Access Register. This was
previously known as the Oops register.

Note: Staff logons are not to be given to customers.

Authentication when receiving call transfer

If receiving an announced or warm transfer from:

within Centrelink, Customer Overview and/or the transferring officer
will advise if the customer has been authenticated or not

a Service Officer outside of Centrelink but within the agency (for
example from Child Support), the Services Australia Workspace may not
pre-populate the correct customer’s record:

-   The transferring officer will need to provide the necessary
    identifying details to locate the correct record
-   Once the customer is on the call, they must be fully authenticated
    by the receiving officer for the purposes of their Centrelink
    enquiry including confirming their password (if required)

outside the agency, immediately request the customer be transferred in
to fully authenticate the customer directly:

-   If the transferring caller is an authorised third party, they may be
    identified in their own right
-   If the transferring caller is of a helping profession, refer to
    Implied consent regarding third parties. If possible and practical,
    ask for the customer to be transferred in to fully authenticate the
    customer directly. Escalate to your team leader if there are any
    issues with customer authentication in the instance of a third party
    with implied consent

If receiving an unannounced or cold transfer from any origin, the
receiving Service Officer will proceed in the same manner as they would
for a standard inbound call. Customer Overview will display the
authentication status and, where possible, will pre-populate the correct
customer’s record.

See:

-   Transferring a call with Services Australia Workspace
-   Transferring calls
-   Implied consent regarding third parties
-   Authenticating a Centrelink customer
-   Centrelink customer authentication – quick guide
-   Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

The Resources page contains intranet links to privacy and secrecy and
information release.

Contents

Authenticating an employer

Telephone standards

Handling a call on hold

Receiving personal calls

Conferencing a call with Services Australia Workspace

Related links

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Centrelink customer authentication – quick guide

Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Customer aggression - filming, recording and photography

Finalising and terminating customer contacts

Implied consent regarding third parties

Inadvertent access and authorised access

Privacy concerns when calling customers, returning calls or leaving
messages on answering machines

Transferring a call with Services Australia Workspace

Transferring calls

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
