-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the quality checking process for the My Health
Record - Provider - process.

eHealth foundations combine the basic technologies of unique
identification (Healthcare Identifiers), and authentication and
encryption (NASH certificates) to provide a safe and secure method of
exchanging healthcare information. The My Health Record System is a
voluntary opt-in system for both providers and individuals. Participants
are required to complete a registration form and supporting
documentation to participate in the My Health Record System.

Objectives

The quality checking process for the My Health Record System provider
program aims to ensure that quality is maintained or improved and
processing errors are reduced or eliminated.

Reporting of My Health Record System provider quality checking results
provides stakeholders with an assessment of quality checking accuracy;
for example: consistent application of the business rules. This
procedure will assist staff members to complete quality checking for the
My Health Record System Provider program registrations.

Roles and responsibilities

Role of Quality Checker

The quality checker is:

-   responsible for the examination of the documentation to ensure the
    accuracy of the My Health Record application processing
-   to ensure that the business rules of the program are adhered to and
    the data entered into the system is accurate.

Role of Team Leader (TL5)

The Team Leader (TL5) is responsible for ensuring:

-   that daily pre-check is performed for every processing day
-   that weekly post-checking and aim for accuracy checking is performed
    on the Monday following the processing week
-   that timely feedback is provided to processing staff on accuracy of
    processing results
-   where errors are recurring, staff are provided with additional
    training, or notifying National Office (NO) where training material
    may need updating

Quality checking of own work

Quality checkers must not quality check their own work. If a quality
checker's own work is selected, it must be passed to another staff
member who has been accredited to conduct quality checks.

See Also Quality Checking Own Work Policy

Accreditation of Quality checkers

Staff members who complete quality checks must have:

-   subject matter expertise - the staff member completing the check has
    product knowledge, understands the business rules and/or knows where
    to source them (typically Program Service Officer (PSO4) or higher)
-   reviewed the Quality Checking My Health Record - Provider procedure
    (this document) and email Team Leader (TL5 and TL6) advising
    procedures have been reviewed and understood
-   Checkers are to undergo refresher training if required

Types of quality checks

My Health Record Provider program will be subject to the following
checks:

pre-checks

-   letters
-   new staff proficiency

Note: the results of the pre-check are not included in the accuracy of
processing results.

post checks

-   a sample of all registrations processed will be subject to
    post-checking

targeted check

-   closed registrations
-   open registrations
-   staff members with identified quality issues
-   Aim for Accuracy

Sampling plan

Due to the sensitive nature of the My Health Record System Provider
program a number of checks are undertaken to ensure quality outcomes.

The sampling methodology will be reviewed annually or as required.

Pre-checks: New Starters

Pre-checks are completed on the complete registration process for staff
new to My Health Record Provider processing. New starters have their
work reviewed and corrected with the guidance of a mentor until they are
deemed proficient. The pre-checking is a safeguard to improve the
quality of the business process.

Any errors detected by the mentor during this process are not normally
reported for accuracy of processing purposes. The combined efforts
between the mentor and new starter may be subject to post quality
checks. Any errors identified for a new starter in transactions selected
for post checking must be recorded.

The information below guides the amount of checking to be completed for
new starters:

-   Level of pre-check - Time period - Condition
-   100% - 4 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   50% - 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days
-   25% - 2 weeks - Nil errors for 3 consecutive days

Pre-checks: Letters

All letters are system generated on the Provider Participation Register
(PPR) at 2:00am (Canberra time) on the day after the application is
processed. 100% of applications supporting these letters must be checked
before close of business on the same day of processing, to ensure the
legislative requirement has been met.

Post-checks

100% My Health Record Provider applications will be subject to a post
check. Note: This is subject to volumes and should be reviewed if
volumes increase.

Targeted Checks: Closed registrations

A list of Service Officer created applications from an EDW report will
be sent from Tier 3 helpdesk each Monday morning. Application that have
been closed off on the My Health Record Tracking Database need to be
compared against the list. Any anomalies – i.e. missing applications, or
applications that are not on the list, must be investigated, and an
email reply sent to Tier 3.

Targeted Checks: Open Registrations

To ensure applications are not missed, and are processed within KPM, a
database check needs to be conducted weekly on HI and My Health Record
applications processed. These checks will help to ensure that no
applications are left unattended or missed.

Targeted Checks: Staff members with identified quality issues

Where critical error/s are identified in any checking process for a
Service Officer, every registration processed will be checked for the
following week or until no further errors are identified.

Targeted Checks: Aim for Accuracy

The Aim for Accuracy check (check the checker) is completed on work
previously checked. Aim for Accuracy will be undertaken weekly. A
separate procedure exists for Aim for Accuracy checks.

See

Resources for a link to Aim for Accuracy policies

Process for undertaking checks

Time frames

Pre-checks should be conducted before the close of business same day,
ensuring that processing service level agreements are met. Post checks
are to be completed no later than the Monday of the week after
processing.

All checking needs to be finalised by the first working day of the new
month, and the spreadsheet sent to the Quality Management Section by
close of business on that day. This will ensure timely reporting of the
accuracy of processing results.

Resources

Quality checkers must have access to the

-   The Provider Participation Register (PPR) through eBusiness Systems
-   Customer Relationship Management (CRM) web based application
-   HI/My Health Record joint workflow management access database
-   Shared drive where the electronic applications are stored
-   TRIM access to relevant My Health Record containers
-   The relevant drives
-   Managers\HI_ehealth\Quality Control
-   access to the protected spreadsheets where quality checking is
    recorded

Source documentation

My Health Record applications subject to quality checking can be
actioned from several different sources. This includes, but is not
limited to:

-   HW018 (previously 2978) Healthcare Identifiers Service - My Health
    Record System - Application to Register a Seed Organisation form
-   Application to register Network Organisation in the My Health Record
    system (states in foot note: All information in this publication is
    correct as of November 2014)
-   10616 (previously HAO916) - Application to establish list of
    authorised healthcare provider individuals
-   Telephony requests where the action taken is sent as an email to the
    shared email box

Where a notation has been made electronically on the application and in
CRM, this becomes part of the supporting documentation that is subject
to quality checking.

All quality checking for the My Health Record Provider program is
conducted on site in the Melbourne office (Tier 2). Reporting to program
area and program executive occurs monthly.

Quality checks enquiries

All quality checking enquiries are to be directed to:

-   Program Service Officer (PSO4) - eServices - Specialised Provider
    Services section
-   Team Leader (TL5) - eServices - Specialised Provider Services
    section

Any enquires that cannot be resolved on site can be directed to the
program area:

-   Provider Operations Assistant Director - eHealth program - National
    Office

Errors

Definition of errors

An error is defined as critical when there is an impact to:

-   the agency by allowing the registration to proceed without
    sufficient information to support legislative requirements
-   the individual or organisation, affecting the use of a NASH
    certificate. An error which impacts either the issuance of a NASH
    certificate or the requirement to issue a new NASH certificate due
    to an error in processing
-   the agency’s reputation, by keying errors being available for
    viewing externally, by incorrect information being sent in a
    successful registration letter

An error is defined as non-critical when there is no identifiable risk
to the business process (registration) and will not impact on Services
Australia reputation.

Non-critical errors will recorded as feedback and any action required
will be sent to the Service Officer for correction.

Note: while non-critical errors are recorded as part of the quality
checking process, they do not impact the quality result reported to
stakeholders (i.e. only critical errors are used to calculate the
accuracy of processing results).

Document errors

For the purposes of quality checking, a document error is defined as ‘a
document received from an individual, provider or organisation
representative which features omitted, incomplete or incorrect
information’. The error code(s) are applied when the Service Officer has
not detected that the document is in error and has processed the
transaction without identifying/noting the use of additional evidence to
support the action taken.

Processing errors

For the purposes of quality checking, a processing error is defined as
‘information processed/keyed into the system which does not match the
document submitted by an individual, provider or organisation
representative’. The error code(s) are applied when the Service Officer
has keyed or not keyed information as per the business rules.

Recording Results

Quality checking is recorded on the ‘My Health Record Provider Quality
Checking Results’ spreadsheet. This will record the results for
financial year to date, with a tab for each month.

Additionally there is an:

-   accuracy tab which will display the accuracy results for each type
    of check by month and year to date
-   error register tab that will allow for analysis of errors for
    exception reporting

This spreadsheet is to be sent to the Quality Management Section and the
Tier 3 helpdesk each Monday and by close of business on the first
working day of the new month for monthly reporting.

See Process for the Recording Post Checking Results process table.

Feedback

After performing the quality check on each work item, the quality
checker is to provide feedback to the appropriate Service Officer. This
feedback:

-   includes positive feedback for transactions identified as error free
-   should be given the same day the quality check is completed, or as
    soon as possible after the quality check has been undertaken
-   must determine the reason for the error/s (underlying factors). This
    helps identify any weaknesses in processing, gaps in relevant
    business rules, and issues relating to environmental factors, system
    faults and limitations

Identification of underlying factors for errors

The quality checker, in consultation with the processing staff member,
analyses the error/s to determine the underlying factors for the error
occurring. This helps identify any weaknesses in processing, gaps in
relevant business rules, and issues relating to environmental factors,
system faults and limitations.

Information gathered in the feedback process needs to be entered in the
underlying factors on the My Health Record provider Quality Checking
spreadsheet.

Method for managing and storing feedback

The feedback will be recorded in the coaching files and addressed if
required during coaching sessions.

Analysing errors

Analysis of errors will be completed by the Team Leader (TL5) or
nominated Program Support Officer (PSO4). The My Health Record provider
Quality Checking results are maintained by the business areas. This
information includes the details of the errors as recorded on the
quality checking spreadsheet.

Analysis of errors is to be completed by the Team Leader (TL5). Error
documentation to be kept on site (for root cause analysis) should it be
required.

Change Management

As part of continuous improvement, the Quality Checking procedure is to
be reviewed annually by the My Health Record program and the Quality
Management Section. This incorporates endorsed changes to program
business policy and procedures, and ensures that error codes are current
and appropriate.

It is the responsibility of both Tier 2 and Tier 3 to ensure that issues
with the Quality Checking procedure or tools are escalated to Quality
Management Section using the applicable Quality Checking contact on the
Quality Processes page. See Resources for a link.

Any changes that require immediate action will be advised and updated
accordingly. Any changes that are not critical to quality will be
incorporated in the annual review of the procedures.

Resources contains information about the error status codes (including
the non-error code), data entry field descriptions and a list of links
to the intranet.

Related links

The My Health Record system - Your Health

My Health Record - Health Professionals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
