
Electronic Data Exchange with Financial Institutions tool 111-21060000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to access and use the Electronic Data
Exchange with Financial Institutions user interface to request
information from financial institutions.

Electronic Data Exchange

This interface allows a timely turnaround of information from financial
institutions.

Service Officers can send electronic requests for individual customers
to the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) through the Financial
Institution Exchange (FIE) tool to get specific details about the
customer's financial holdings. The customer record is then updated.

Financial Institution Exchange (FIE) tool

Service Officers use the FIE tool to help with new claim processing and
payment review activities. The tool:

-   allows details to be requested and garnishee notices to be issued
    from financial institutions in a fast and secure way
-   helps with new claim processing and payment review activities

Garnishee should only be done when:

-   APS5 approval has been obtained
-   the garnishee is cost-effective

See Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts.

For Debt, Intelligence and Investigations area cases only

The information received from the financial institution is not placed on
the customer's record. It is placed on a restricted organisation (ORG)
record in the Centrelink system. Only users with the required Security
Access Management System (SAMS) resource and the correct ORG Customer
Reference Number (CRN) will be able to view the information requested
and received.

Types of information that can be requested

Information includes:

-   account details (account number, name, BSB and current balance as at
    the time of request) other persons linked to the account (joint
    account holder)
-   a summary of transactions in the requested period (start and end
    balances for the period, and total deposits and withdrawals)
-   extra details given when the account was opened (for example,
    customer's date of birth and address)
-   other accounts held by the customer (for example, transaction
    accounts, savings accounts and term deposits)
-   garnishee notice - Debt, Intelligence and Investigations areas

The Resources page contains FAQs on using the Financial Institutions
tool.

Related links

Actioning a Service Update or Review in the Integrated Review System
(IRS)

Cost effectiveness when recovering debts

Financial Institution (FI) garnishees to recover debts

Verification of information for Random Sample Surveys (RSS) reviews

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
