
Coding Compensation and damages (Mod C) to request a clearance 117-01040010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to record a clearance request for customers
who are receiving, or may be eligible to receive payments of
compensation.

Compensation recovery provisions

When a person is unable to work because of an injury or illness, they
cannot receive:

-   a compensation affected payment (CAP) from Services Australia and
-   compensation payments from a compensation payer or liable party for
    the same period

This will ensure the compensation payer or liable party is responsible
for providing the compensation payments.

Compensation

Compensation can be paid to a person as a result of:

-   a work-related injury or illness
-   a car accident
-   injuries received due to negligence or fault of another person

Payments may be treated as a compensation payment, depending on the
terms of the policy, made under:

-   an income replacement policy
-   sickness and accident policy or
-   for sporting injuries

Clearances are required for criminal injury compensation claims. The
Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will determine how to treat the
compensation payment.

Payments not treated as compensation should not be recorded on the
Compensation Management System (CMS). Many payments commonly called
compensation do not meet the definition of compensation under Social
Security Law. These include:

-   income protection policies attached to superannuation policies
-   payments made to 'victims of crime' by victims compensation schemes

Mod C

When a customer has an injury it is a requirement for them or their
partner to pursue and obtain compensation they are eligible to receive.

Get this information:

-   verbally during the customer contact
-   via the Module C (Mod C) form

The Mod C can be:

-   downloaded online
-   issued manually
-   submitted online along with any supporting documents within 14 days

Customer will need to complete a separate Mod C for each compensation
injury or claim.

This information is recorded in the Compensation Management Summary in
Customer First

CAP

A current compensation affected payment (CAP) may continue pending an
assessment from the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT).

A new claim for a CAP cannot be finalised until a clearance is received
from the CRT.

Different rules apply to ABSTUDY for the treatment of compensation.

The Resources page contains links to the Mod C and Office Locator for
more details on Compensation Recovery Teams.

Related links

Completing the Compensation and damages details via Mod C or verbal
lodgement

Compensation lump sum preclusion periods

Periodic compensation arrears charges

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

Verifying and recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
