
Assessing compensation payments from personal injury insurance schemes 117-22092101

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to assess compensation
payments made from personal injury insurance schemes.

Types of payments

Payments made from personal injury insurance schemes replace the income
lost through a person’s inability to work due to injury or illness.

Personal injury insurance payments include payments from:

-   a superannuation fund, such as disability benefits in the form of
    income protection payments.
-   an employer such as salary continuance payments
-   an insurer, such as sickness and accident policy or trauma payments
-   an approved friendly society

Consider the nature, source and purpose of the payment to determine
whether to treat the payment as compensation or ordinary income.

Offset clauses

An offset clause ensures the compensation recipient does not receive
more in 'replacement income' than if they had not been injured.

Offset clauses allow the compensation payer to reduce payments by the
person’s other income while unable to work (for example WorkCover
payments or Centrelink income support payments). Offset rights must be
included in the policy contract and are not common law rights.

When assessing these payments, a copy of the policy is usually required
to determine the details. When the information is being requested from
an insurer, use the Compensation Personal Sickness and Accident Claim
(SS485) form.

Superannuation payments

Payments from superannuation funds are not compensation. They may be
treated as ordinary income depending on the customer’s circumstances.
This includes regular, ongoing payments made under Total and Permanent
Disability (TPD) and/or Total and Temporary Disability (TTD), regardless
of whether:

-   an offset clause exists and
-   the individual or a third party (eg. union or employer) contributes
    to the premium

Treatment of payments

Periodic and/or lump sum compensation payments made under a personal
sickness and accident policy or income protection policy are
compensation if they are for:

-   lost earnings or
-   lost capacity to earn as a result of personal injury

However, policy/scheme payments are treated as ordinary income when:

the person made payments towards policy, and

-   the policy does not have an offset clause, or
-   the policy has an offset clause which has not been invoked

Trauma payments

Trauma payments from insurance companies are made for a specific medical
trauma or event. They do not relate to a person’s lost earnings and are
not assessed as compensation.

-   Lump sum trauma payments are exempt but are subject to ongoing
    income and asset assessment
-   Periodic trauma payments are assessed as ordinary income

Salary continuance payments

Salary continuance payments are provided by employers to employees who
cannot work because of injury or illness. Staff can purchase the
payments through salary deductions or be part of their salary package.

It is sometimes unclear who has made contributions to the payments.

Where it is not clear who has made contributions and

there is no offset clause or

it has not been invoked, if the employee opted out of the continuance
and it:

-   resulted in a pay rise, payments are treated as ordinary income
-   did not result in a pay rise, payments are treated as compensation

Related links

Verifying and recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Assessing superannuation

Coding Compensation and damages (MOD C) to request a clearance

Actioning a compensation clearance

Treating periodic compensation payments as a direct deduction or income

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
