
Calculating a compensation debt for out of court settlements 117-02010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for calculating the social security
debt when lump sum compensation has been paid as a result of an out of
court settlement or consent judgement.

Lump sum compensation preclusion period and debt

A preclusion period is applied to prevent customers receiving a social
security Compensation Affected Payment (CAP) for the same period. A debt
is raised to recover CAPs paid within the preclusion period.

When lump sums are settled out of court, by consent or agreement and:

-   there is a component for economic loss
-   lump sums cannot be divided into parts when calculating a debt
-   the compensation part is 50% of the gross settlement, and
-   the only allowable deduction before applying the 50% rule is the
    periodic compensation that has been paid

‘Global’ and ‘All in’ settlements are taken to have an allowance for
economic loss.

Further written verification

If the compensation payer contacts Services Australia suggesting they
are going to pay a lump sum compensation payment, tell them:

-   notification can be provided by completing and returning the
    Compensation Advice of Lump Sum Payments (SS446) form
-   valid supporting documents/evidence (for example, a copy of the
    signed settlement release or consent judgement) must be provided

The acceptance of supporting documents/evidence is the responsibility of
the determining officer (delegate). The delegate must decide if
supporting documents or evidence is acceptable and/or if further
information should be requested.

When requesting verification, the onus is generally on the customer to
provide verification unless consent exists to send the request to the
compensation payer. In the event the request is not fulfilled, this will
result in a 'not clear to pay' determination being applied to the
customer and/or partner record.

Where the supporting documents/evidence supplied requires further
explanation as to why it was or was not accepted (or not
requested/provided), the delegate must include full details in a
decision DOC to support that decision.

Where there is any doubt the claim does not contain any economic loss,
the CRT must obtain a copy of the:

-   writ seeking damages
-   particulars of special damage/statement of particulars
-   letter from the scheme of insurance or insurer identifying the final
    settlement amount and any breakdown (for example, general damages,
    medical and like expenses and economic loss)
-   claim form, or
-   statement of claim from the compensation payer

This will show whether the customer's compensation claim has been made
in respect of lost earnings or lost capacity to earn (that is, economic
loss), resulting from personal injury (including a disease or
condition).

Lump sum paid to settle multiple claims and events

A single lump sum payment made in settlement of claims for different
events should be apportioned to each event.

If more than one lump sum is made for the same compensable injury/event,
and one of these payments is in respect of lost earnings, the lump sums
are aggregated and treated as one lump sum.

If lump sums are received for different compensable events:

-   treat as separate matters
-   payments are not aggregated

If the settlement documentation advises 'plus costs', the CRT must check
with the compensation payer if the costs were agreed before or after the
date of settlement. If the costs are not determined at the date of
settlement they are not taken into account.

Settlement date

The settlement date is the date the formal decision or determination on
the compensation claim was made. For example, the component of economic
loss is either:

-   fixed (date specified) in the Deed of Release or Settlement
    Agreement, or
-   objectively identified where documents/evidence available specifies
    an amount for the economic loss component

If the person receives compensation under a scheme of insurance or
compensation under a Commonwealth, State or Territory law, including a
payment made under contract entered into under such a scheme, the
settlement date is the date the Registrar signed:

-   the non-disposal letter, or
-   Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)

Signatures required on settlement documents

Settlement documents including a Deed of Release/Discharge must be
checked against supporting documents or information provided by the
customer or third party is true and accurate. Most settlement documents
will contain at least one signature either physical or electronic from
either:

-   the Defendant Solicitor or
-   compensation payer and/or
-   Plaintiff Solicitor or
-   customer

The signature legally binds an individual to the information in the
document.

The acceptance of supporting documents/evidence is the responsibility of
the determining officer (delegate).

Preclusion period and appeals

If a preclusion period has been calculated and a debt raised, then later
found the decision has been appealed, CRT will need to seek
clarification from the compensation payer before:

-   cancelling the lump sum preclusion period, and
-   deleting the debt

Compensation notices

A compensation notice refers to a:

-   Preliminary Notice
-   Recovery Notice

See the Resources page for more information.

If a notice is sent:

-   before the death of a customer, the notice will still apply
-   after the death of a customer, the debt is recovered against the
    Estate under Chapter 5 of the Social Security Act 1991

Third party obligations when more than one notice received

Centrelink and Child Support notices

When a compensation payer receive notices from Centrelink and Child
Support, both instructing the payer to pay an amount of money the payer
is holding, the notices are to be complied in the order they are
received.

Where the compensation payer receives a preliminary or recovery notice
before a Child Support notice, the payer is to refund the Centrelink
debt first before releasing funds to Child Support.

Small debt waivers

The waiver of a debt is dependent on the recoverable amount specified in
the recovery notice under section 1184.

Waivers, like any other decision, can be reviewed and changed.

Low income card (LIC)

If the customer and/or partner is only claiming or has a new claim for a
LIC card, record the lump sum on CMS. The lump sum is apportioned across
52 weeks from the day the person is entitled to receive it.

The Resources page contains a link to the intranet A-Z index for access
to calculators and tools where the Payment Details Download Sheet (PS
Tool) is located, details about the Lump Sum Assessment Results screen,
compensation notices, relevant divisor, and state specific examples.

Related links

Calculating the compensation part of a lump sum payment

Compensation lump sum preclusion periods (CLK)

The effect of compensation on Social Security payments

Compensation garnishees to recover debts

General debt raising information

Compensation payments and special circumstances decisions

Payment Details Download Sheet (PS Tool)

Compensation Online Advice (OLA) letters

Date of receipt

Reversal of waivers

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
