[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes to follow when deciding whether to
apply the special circumstances provisions.

Special circumstances

Applying the normal Centrelink compensation provisions to a particular
customer's situation may:

-   have an unintended effect,
-   lead to extreme hardship or
-   creating an inequitable or unjust situation

Where such 'special circumstances' exist, Section 1184K allows the
Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) to treat all or part of a compensation
payment as:

-   not having been made, or
-   not liable to be paid

A combination of factors usually apply to each person. Apply the
provisions in situations that are:

-   unusual
-   unforeseen or
-   exceptional

Reducing preclusion periods and debts

A decision to apply the special circumstance provisions reduces part, or
all, of a preclusion period. This may also reduce, or negate any
associated compensation debt.

Special circumstance provisions are usually applied to lump sum
compensation payments. However, they may also be applied to reduce all
or part of periodic payments.

A new decision must be made if a customer:

-   provides new information or has a change in circumstances, and
-   requests consideration to reduce a compensation preclusion period or
    waive recovery of a debt due to special circumstances

Sometimes a decision has not been made or has no effect. For example, a
claim has been submitted but a decision not yet made or a compensation
preclusion period has not yet been applied. A customer cannot request an
explanation or apply for a formal review of a decision that has not been
made or that has no effect.

Making a claim

Customers who request a shorter preclusion period because of special
circumstances must make a claim for a compensation affected payment
(CAP) before the compensation preclusion period review can be
considered.

A further claim is not needed if the customer's claim has already been
cancelled or rejected within the previous 13 weeks because of the
preclusion period.

Failing to obtain and assess the customer's claim for a CAP may cause a
customer to miss out on payments. This may result in a claim of
detriment due to defective administration. Higher bodies may decline to
review decisions that do not involve a payment.

Reviews and appeals

If a customer requests an explanation or wants to apply for a formal
review of a decision that has not been made or that has no effect:

-   Advise the customer that a decision must first be made, or be
    affecting, before they can request an explanation or apply for a
    formal review
-   If a request for an explanation has already been recorded, see SME
    explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

If a customer does not agree with the compensation or special
circumstances decision, they can request an explanation or apply for a
formal review of the decision. See Initial contact about a decision and
the review of decision process.

Contents

Special circumstance provisions for customers receiving compensation
payments

Changing compensation debt details for customers in special
circumstances

Changing compensation preclusion period details for customers in special
circumstances

Related links

Calculating a charge for lump sum compensation payments (CLK)

Compensation lump sum preclusion periods (CLK)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Date of receipt

Storing scanned documents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
