-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a customer or their partner
is eligible to receive an income support payment when a compensation
claim has been made or could be lodged.

Compensation clearance

The purpose of a compensation clearance is to determine the customer's
payability for an income support payment.

Compensation recipients must take reasonable action to claim or obtain
any compensation they are potentially able to receive.

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will check the recorded information
and where information needs to be clarified, will follow up with the
customer.

Following assessment, the CRT will:

record a compensation clearance decision in a Fast Note on the customer
record

check if the clearance has been requested as part of a new claim
activity. If so, the CRT will take the claim off hold. This will result
in the new claim being allocated for assessment, based on the previous
established priorities

check the customer record for any compensation activities created as a
result of the assessment and action where appropriate, including
activities:

-   CLE ‘clear to pay’ or ‘not clear to pay’
-   CLR ‘Compensation Management System/Clerical Review’
-   REA ‘Review net amount received for assets and investment income’

Activities are to be cancelled where not required and must not be
referred to a Service Centre, other Zone teams or Smart Centre.

When the clearance assessment is completed, the Service Officer must
check the clearance decision DOC for any actions they must complete.
Clearances requested as part of a new claim activity may result in an
automatic rejection of the claim due to compensation.

Obligation to supply information

Legislation allows the agency to request information from:

a claimant; a person who has lodged a claim where the claim had been:

-   received but it is not yet determined, or
-   granted and is not yet payable

current customers and/or partners

an ex-recipient; a person who has previously been in receipt of a social
security payment or holder of a concession card

third parties

Generally, all requests for information must be made in writing.
However, Section 63 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
also allows enforceable requests for information to be made verbally to
claimants/recipients for payments/concessions administered under social
security law.

For the agency to take action for non-compliance, requests for
information must include:

-   details of the information/action required
-   the time allowed to respond
-   the consequences of non-compliance
-   the reference of the relevant Act that the request has been made
    under

Where a request for information notice has been issued, the customer has
a legal obligation to comply with the request. If the customer fails to
comply with this obligation, the customer's payments may be suspended.

Individual written requests for information must be issued if the
customer and partner:

-   have both submitted a claim or are currently receiving payments, and
-   information needed will impact both customer/partner entitlements

The requests for information must be sent at the same time. This is to
ensure where an adverse decision needs to be made for not responding to
the request, that is, rejection or suspension, this decision can be
applied to both records at the same time.

An adverse decision for not responding to a request for information can
only be made to the individual that was issued the request. It cannot be
applied to their partner, unless they were also issued a request for
information and failed to respond.

Note: information from third parties must be requested in writing.
Information may be requested from a third party when there is difficulty
obtaining information or documents from customers.

Verification of documents

A customer may need to provide documents that support the information
declared in their Compensation and damages form (MOD C).

Documents identified during completion of a new claim must be provided
with the claim, whether submitted:

-   online or via upload documents service
-   at a service centre, or
-   via post or fax

The determining officer (delegate) who is actioning the compensation
clearance must:

-   decide if supporting documents/evidence provided is acceptable
    and/or if more information should be requested. See the Resources
    page for a guide in making this determination
-   include full details in the compensation clearance decision DOC when
    supporting documents/evidence supplied needs further explanation as
    to why it was accepted (or not requested/provided)

The Resources page contains a Guide for incomplete or incorrect
supporting documents, Service Reason Codes (SVC), links to forms and
details for a Preliminary Notice.

Related links

Coding Compensation and damages (MOD C) to request a clearance

Reasonable action to claim compensation

Assessing compensation payments from personal injury insurance schemes

Recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Manual compensation finalisations

Suspension of payments

Linking and unlinking compensation claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
