-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on when and why a customer or their
partner need to claim compensation.

Entitlement to compensation

A person who has suffered a personal injury and has lost earnings or
lost the ability to earn maybe entitled to compensation. Personal injury
can also include a disease or condition.

If they claim an income support payment from Services Australia, they
must take reasonable action to claim or obtain compensation. This
applies even if the compensable event occurred while the customer was
overseas.

The compensation recovery provisions of social security law are designed
to make sure that people who get compensation for a loss of income do
not also get income support from the Australian Government in respect of
the same period of time.

Reasonable action

Taking reasonable action to claim compensation includes but is not
limited to:

-   lodging a claim, along with any medical evidence, with their
    employer, or with the compensation payer
-   starting legal proceedings by engaging the services of a solicitor
-   seeking legal advice on whether a claim could be successfully
    pursued

The Resources page contains scenarios

Failure to claim compensation

A customer may suffer an injury, which is or may be compensable,
however, they have not claimed or taken action to get compensation. This
may occur because the customer:

-   is unaware they may have an entitlement to seek compensation
-   may not want to seek compensation, or may feel they do not need to
    seek compensation
-   would prefer to receive an income support payment
-   or someone on behalf of the customer (legal guardian etc.), may have
    agreed to give up the right to compensation

Compensation payers and insurers have the primary responsibility to
provide support to customers who because of a compensable injury are
unable to work.

Customers who have not taken action or not taken reasonable action to
claim compensation, may be given notice to take action to claim
compensation. This presents an opportunity for a customer to explain
their circumstances. The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will determine
whether documents/evidence is required and any impact on the customer to
comply with the request.

Failure to take reasonable action to claim compensation can be a breach
of section 1166 of the Social Security Act 1991.

Failure to make a claim may mean that the customer’s income support
payment:

-   is suspended
-   cancelled
-   claim is rejected

When they take reasonable action their payments may be granted or
restored.

The Resources page contains scenarios.

Assessment and determination process

When a customer makes a claim for compensation, the customer cannot
change their mind and withdraw the claim. The claim must go through the
entire assessment and decision-making process.

Compensation payers or insurers decide if the customer and/or their
partner are eligible for compensation payments.

If the compensation payer or insurer refuses liability or determines
that the customer is not eligible for compensation, the customer is
regarded to have met their obligations.

Requesting evidence

If the Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) is satisfied that the customer
may be entitled to compensation, and the customer has not taken any
reasonable action to claim or obtain compensation. The CRT must decide
if the customer needs to provide supporting documents/evidence that
demonstrates the required action has been taken.

Any request for information must be made in writing, requests must
include:

-   Details of the information or action required
-   The time allowed to respond
-   The consequences of non-compliance
-   The reference to the relevant Act that the request has been made
    under

Acceptable circumstances for not pursuing compensation

The Compensation Recovery Team (CRT) will take into account the
customer’s individual circumstances where it may be acceptable not to
pursue a claim for compensation, and may include reasons:

-   Time limitation periods
-   Jurisdiction
-   Complexities of establishing liability, including contributory
    negligence
-   Difficulties the customer has encountered when seeking legal or
    other assistance
-   The customer’s financial circumstances

When determining whether reasonable action has been taken, the CRT may
consider, but is not limited to, the following:

-   Whether legal advice has been sought
-   Whether a lawyer has been engaged to commence legal proceedings
    and/or
-   Whether a claim for compensation has been lodged with the
    appropriate body with relevant evidence.

What is reasonable must be determined having considered the context and
circumstances of each individual case.

The delegation to determine if the customer has taken action or has not
taken action must be made by an APS5 or above. Where a CRT officer has
made the decision that the customer has not reasonably pursued their
claim, they should seek approval from the Level 2 Compensation helpdesk.

The Resources page contains scenarios.

The Resources page has scenarios about reasonable action to claim,
breach of S1166 and reasons for not pursuing compensation.

Related links

Compensation Recovery Teams (CLK)

Compensation affected payments (CAPs)

Treatment of compensation payments for ABSTUDY

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
