
Extended Family Care Group (EFCG) 125-01010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Family Payment Support Worker (FPSW) no longer exists. There are
several Financial Literacy and Support programs provided externally by
Government agencies and community organisations. This procedure will be
updated with more specific information as soon as possible.

This document outlines how the Extended Family Care Groups (EFCGs)
formally acknowledge the extended family care groups within specified
Indigenous communities.

On this Page:

Care groups

Extended Family Care Groups (EFCGs) formally acknowledge the extended
family care groups within specified Indigenous communities. Principal
carers (family payment recipients) within an ECFG do not need to notify
Services Australia of a change of care within the care group when a
child temporarily moves between nominated care group members.

These groups:

-   may also form the 'household' or 'extended family unit' which
    knowingly shares responsibility for looking after the child or
    children
-   enter into an agreement that the family payment recipient (usually
    the mother) will pass this money or goods to the current carer of
    the child
-   comprise individuals nominated by the family payment recipient who
    registers the care group with Services Australia

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children can only be in 1 care group except in
shared care situations. Care group members may be in more than 1 care
group. A care group must have at least 1 child and 2 adults to remain
active.

Family payment recipients will, for legal purposes, remain 'primary
carers' with legal responsibility and care for children within the
arrangement. Other members of the care group are not able to claim the
child as dependent for any other payment purposes, for example to claim
FTB or Parenting Payment.

All FTB children of the family payment recipient will be included in the
care group, including children who later enter the group. The family
payment recipient will identify which children will be looked after and
by whom, and will then register the care group to look after the
children.

Care group member with Centrelink requirements

A care group member with Centrelink payment mutual obligation
requirements who has their own dependent children will not be exempt
from these requirements when they enter into a care group arrangement.
This is the case even if they care for a child who would normally
preclude them from obligations had they claimed the child as a
dependant. Care for dependent children determines the care group
member's working obligations.

When a care group member, including the family payment recipient, is
experiencing difficulties within the arrangement they will be required
to speak to the Family Payment Support Worker (FPSW) as a liaison and
negotiation point. Where resolution cannot be found on internal issues,
including where money/goods are not following the care of the child
within the group, the EFCG will be dissolved.

No special 'password' arrangements will exist within the EFCG. If the
payment recipient or any other member wishes another person to gain
access to their personal information held by Services Australia, they
will need to authorise that person to become a nominee for payments
and/or correspondence.

The Resources page contains examples of EFCGs.

Related links

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
