
This document outlines information about traditional child rearing
practices of Torres Strait Islander people. Consideration should be
given when assessing eligibility to Social Security and Family
Assistance payments.

Child rearing practice

The Torres Strait Western Island language name Kupai means 'umbilical
cord' and the Eastern Island language name Omasker means 'children'.
Together, they mean 'to sever the umbilical cord of the children'.

The traditional Torres Strait Islander child rearing practice is the
giving of a child or children from one family to another, with the
child/ren usually remaining within the extended family permanently. This
is by mutual consent between the two parties concerned. The practice is
widespread throughout Torres Strait Island society, both in the Torres
Straits and on mainland Australia.

By custom, this practice is not openly discussed and can be seen as a
taboo topic. People may be uncertain of the status of children in the
community and may be unwilling to talk about it. It is confidential and
private between the parties involved. Although this practice is not
openly discussed, the family generally tells the child of their status
when they believe the time is right. Community protocols designed to
protect the child and the families govern how and when the parties are
informed.

Family Court of Australia recognition

The Family Court of Australia recognises this practice and Torres Strait
Islanders are requesting that other state legislative bodies recognise
their traditional child rearing practices when making decisions
regarding children.

Children who are affected by this child rearing practice meet the Social
Security definition of a dependent child for Parenting Payment (PP)
purposes. Centrelink would assess this similarly to the way foster
children are currently treated. The documents approved by the Family Law
Courts would satisfy the legal responsibility component of the policy.

The parents meet the Social Security guidelines for a foster carer. A
foster carer is subject to the same qualification criteria that apply to
all other customers who claim PP. This includes the requirement that the
foster carer has at least one PP child, i.e. a dependent child as above.

Documentation for change of care

Generally, Centrelink would require some documentation to support the
change of care. The documents approved by the Family Law Court should be
sufficient. If a dispute occurs, most state or territory laws (excluding
Queensland), do not cover this child rearing practice, so biological
parents may have a case to retain payment or reapply for payment.

The Meriba Omasker Kaziw Kazipa (Torres Strait Islander Traditional
Child Rearing Practice) Act 2020 was passed in Queensland Parliament and
royal assent was granted by the Governor on 14 September 2020.

This ground-breaking Act provides legal recognition in Queensland of
Torres Strait Islander families’ continued use of traditional child
rearing practice.

If a person advises Centrelink that a child has come into their care
under Torres Strait Islander child rearing practices, this person is
deemed to now have legal responsibility for the child. The child will be
deemed as a dependant for Social Security and Family Assistance
purposes.

Related links

Child enters customer's care/custody

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims

Explanation of the Extended Family Care Group (EFCG)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Foster care

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
