-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers update their details using their
Centrelink online account.

Menu options

The customer can update address, accommodation and contact details
separately, or all together.

Centrelink online account

From the homepage, they select:

-   MENU
-   My details
-   Personal and contact details.

To update their:

-   address only, they select Update address details
-   accommodation only, they select Update accommodation details
-   contact details only, they select Update contact details

Customers can also view and update these details by selecting My
details > My profile > Personal and contact details.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

The customer selects:

-   Profile from the home screen, then Contact details.
    A message shows to tell them they will be redirected to their
    Centrelink online account to complete the action
-   OK to continue.
    The customer can update their details in Centrelink online account
    on their mobile internet browser

This service does not collect relationship status details. The customer
needs to contact to advise a change in their relationship status.

Note: some customers can advise of a separation using the Update
relationship details service in their Centrelink online account. They
should advise of a separation before they use the Update address,
accommodation and contact details service.

Advise customers of the letter and messaging options.

Separating Safely

If the customer is updating their address, accommodation or contact
details due to a relationship separation, there are other key updates
they should consider to keep their personal information safe. The order
in which the customer completes these updates is important. They need to
make all updates separately with Centrelink, Medicare and Child Support.
See Separating Safely - Protecting personal details.

Eligibility

Customers must have a Centrelink online account linked to myGov.

Customers will not be able to use this service if they need to complete
a Rent Assistance (RA) Profile review.

myGov Update your details

Customers with a myGov Profile can update their address and contact
details using the myGov Update your details service.

This will:

-   update their details with all participating services they have
    linked to their myGov account
-   create a task on their Centrelink online account homepage if they
    add a new home address and need to provide more details. The task
    will ask the customer to confirm their home address that they
    recently provided through myGov

The customer:

-   must complete the task for the changes to apply to their Centrelink
    record
-   will not need to use the Update address, accommodation and contact
    details service in their Centrelink online account

The Resources page contains links to more information and support. It
also lists customer groups not eligible to use this service and error
messages.

Related links

ABSTUDY customer leaving parental home

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

Assessing a life interest in a home

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Change of address for Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP)

Changing personal address details of Nominees

Granny flat provisions

Interaction Records

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment
related exclusion period

Using myGov accounts

Non-homeowner purchasing a home

Real Estate

Rent Assistance (RA)

Separating safely - protecting personal details

Updating telephone details and/or paying Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Youth Allowance (YA) customer leaving the parental home

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
