
Income and assets options online 133-04090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can use their Centrelink online
account to view and update their income and assets details.

Accessing the Manage income and assets service

Customers need to create a myGov account and link their Centrelink
online account. They can then access the Manage income and assets
service.

Centrelink online account:

-   from the homepage, select MENU, followed by Income and assets, then
    Income and assets details, and Manage income and assets.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app:

-   from the home screen, select More, followed by Manage income and
    assets
-   the app securely directs the customer to the service in their
    Centrelink online account on their mobile internet browser

Staff can use Customer Online View to see the service as the customer
does in their Centrelink online account.

Updating income and assets online

Customers can update many of their income and assets details online.

This includes:

Customers on an income support payment

Self-funded retirees who have a current residential care assessment

Customers who hold a:

-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Low Income Card (LIC)

Customers with permission to enquire can view and update their partner's
income and asset details.

Customers without permission to enquire can view and update anything
they fully or partly own.

Customers need to provide a date of event for each income and asset item
they want to change.

Customers can save their update and have up to 14 days to come back and
complete it.

Online guides

Staff can view the Manage your income and assets online guide and
sub-guides, and the Staff Simulation on the Digital Support Products
sub-site.

Customers unable to access income and assets options online

The Manage income and assets service is not available:

to customers who have not received a primary benefit within the last 13
weeks

when another income or asset activity is pending customer or staff
action and the customer is receiving:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) only
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB) only
-   Carer Allowance (CA) only, and no primary benefit in the last 13
    weeks
-   Exceptional Circumstances Relief Payment (ECRP) or Farm Help Program
    only

when another income or asset activity is pending customer or staff
action

Income and asset view and update

Eligible customers can add, edit or delete these income and assets in
the Profile:

-   managed investments and superannuation
-   real estate
-   banking (savings)
-   shares
-   other income (including foreign income)
-   annuities, income streams and superannuation pensions
-   gifting
-   home contents, personal effects, vehicles and other assets
    (including foreign assets)
-   sole trader and business partnerships (except for Farm Household
    Allowance (FHA) customers)

Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC) customers can only view and
update annuities, income streams and superannuation pensions.

Customers cannot update and can only view existing details of these
income and assets:

-   other government payments
-   foreign pensions
-   private trusts and private companies
-   compensation

Eligible Home Equity Access Scheme customers can get an advance payment
from their loan secured against their principal home. They can view and
update the advance payment details via the Banking details option in the
Manage Income and assets service.

Task Locking

Customers may see the following message when they try to update their
income and assets online:
'Locked account. No updates allowed at this time to your Income and
Assets due to changes in progress.'

This occurs when a started activity on the customer or partner record
prevents further updates.

If the customer contacts about this:

In Customer First/Customer Record

Check the Activity List (AL) screen on the customer and partner record
for any open activities. If the open activity is:

-   a claim, follow normal processes to action it as required
-   an income and assets update, finalise the update where possible

Check the Online Interaction Summary to make sure items are set to
Completed after an update is finalised

Check the Online Interaction Summary for an online claim that has been
in draft status for more than 13 weeks and manually cancel

Tell the customer they can complete their income and assets update
online when the activity is complete.

The Process page contains information on types of income and assets, and
how customers view and update details.

The Resources page lists items customers can add, edit or delete, and if
they need to provide a document to support their update. It also has
links to the Services Australia website and Digital Support Products
sub-site.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Centrelink self service

Assessing deprivation/gifting

Assessment of trusts and companies

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Customer online view for service officers

Foreign income and assets

Foreign pension coding

Income streams

Managed investments - adding a new investment

Real estate

Shares and securities

Sole traders

Partnerships

Verifying and recording other income on the Other Income (OIN) screen

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
