-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how carers can use the View/Update Absence From
Care online service.

Access the service

Carers must be receiving Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
(including current at zero rate). Correspondence nominees can also use
this service on behalf of customers.

Carers must register online and access their Centrelink online account
via myGov. They can then select the View/Update Absence from Care
option.

Carers, their correspondence nominee, or combined correspondence/payment
nominee can:

-   view balance of absence from care (respite and hospitalisation)
-   view absence from care (respite and hospitalisation) for the current
    calendar year
-   edit absence from care (respite and hospitalisation) for the current
    calendar year
-   add absence from care (respite and hospitalisation)
-   view edit and add education, training, or treatment

Customers cannot delete an absence online. They should contact Services
Australia to discuss this with a Service Officer.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Absence from care rules do not apply to Carer Payment (XWP). CP (XWP) is
paid under grandfathered provisions for customers who transferred to CP
from Wife Pension on 20 March 2020. carers. However, absence from care
rules still apply to CA as normal. This means CP (XWP) carers who are
not providing additional care and attention every day can continue to be
paid CA by using their TCC (respite) days for CA.

When the carer’s only or last payment level CA is cancelled from the
first date the carer ceased providing care and attention, then CP (XWP)
will be automatically be cancelled. A carer loses their qualification
for CP (XWP) permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a
gap in entitlement.

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

The Resources page contains a list of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
about the Absence from care option online. It also has a link to the
Services Australia website.

Related links

Temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
