-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can submit a Medicare claim online.
They can do this using their Medicare online account or the Express Plus
Medicare mobile app.

Eligibility

Customers can claim a Medicare benefit if they have:

current Medicare eligibility

valid bank details recorded (for fully paid invoices)

a valid address recorded

a valid receipt/invoice that shows:

-   patient name
-   date of service
-   MBS item number
-   provider number
-   payee provider number (if applicable)
-   referral provider details (if applicable)
-   referral date (if applicable
-   cost of service
-   if the invoice is unpaid, partially paid, or paid in full
-   if the invoice item was for an 'admitted patient' or 'in-patient'

Note: an account number is not required for an invoice/receipt to be
valid. See Account and receipt documents for Medicare claims processing.

The Process page explains when customers cannot submit their claim
online.

Submitting a claim

The quickest and easiest way for customers to receive their Medicare
benefit is by asking their doctor to submit the claim for them. The
customer will get their Medicare benefit paid into their bank account.

If this service is not available, the customer can submit their claim
online. They can do this if they have set up access to Medicare self
service (online account or app).

When claims over $9,999.99 have been submitted via digital self-service,
see Process a claim with a minor difference table on Process digital
self-service claims for processing information.

Note: tell customers that due to system limitations, claims for
individual items with a charge greater than $9,999.99 must be submitted
using the Medicare claim form (MS014).The Resources page has a link to
MS014.

The Resources page contains links to more information and support. It
also explains upload error messages for the app.

Related links

Access to Medicare self service - set up, checking, cancelling and
enabling

Troubleshooting Medicare self service

Claims processing in Medicare

Patient claim requirements for payment of Medicare benefits

Medicare fraud abuse and inappropriate practice

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
