
Advance payment options online 133-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer can access and use the Advance
payment options online. Customers can apply for a Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), Mobility Allowance (MOB) or social security entitlement advance
payment.

This procedure does not apply to Advance payments for Home Equity Access
Scheme loans.

Advance payment options

[] Eligible customers must register online to use a Centrelink online
account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to:

-   view advance payment details
-   apply for an advance payment
-   make a repayment (full or partial) on the outstanding balance of
    their advance payment
-   increase or decrease (within limits) their fortnightly repayment
    amount
-   cease their regular FTB advance

The system will advise the customer if they are not eligible. It will
tell the customer:

-   why they are not eligible, and
-   if possible, the next date they may be eligible

Customers can also use phone self service to apply for an Advance
payment.

Access to apply for an advance

[] Encourage customers contacting to apply for an advance payment online
unless:

-   the customer is not eligible
-   the customer is not able to manage the transaction
-   the self service channels are unavailable, or
-   there is a known issue with the Advance payment digital services.
    Newsflash and Network News Bulletins (NNU) will confirm this

Service Officers need to consider each customer's ability to self-manage
each transaction.

FTB customers do not need to have a current status (CUR) to access and
use the service. Customers whose FTB is cancelled can still use the
service for up to 28 days after cancellation.

Apply for an advance or view advances and advance history

Customers receiving a social security payment, MOB or FTB will see the
Advance Payment options in their Centrelink online account.

The Advance Payment page will display:

-   current advances
-   advance payment history
-   eligibility for each advance type
-   final repayment date for each advance

Customers eligible to receive more than one advance type must apply for
each advance payment separately.

Making advance repayments online

[] Customers receiving a current social security payment or FTB can
access the Make a payment option.

The Make a payment page displays the customer's current advances and the
outstanding balance for each advance.

Changes to regular repayments

[] Customers receiving a social security payment or FTB will see the
Advance Adjust repayments option. This is available from within the
Advance payments service. Customers can adjust their repayments or repay
their advance.

The customer is able to:

-   increase their repayment to a maximum of twice the minimum repayment
    amount
-   decrease to the minimum repayment amount. (where the customer
    already increased the repayment amount)

The following payments are not eligible for this service:

-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advance
-   Farm Household Allowance (FHA) advance
-   Special Employment Advance (SEA)
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB) advance

The whole advance will cancel if:

-   an FTB advance has been set up the same day (before payment strip)
    and
-   the 'cease' or 'discontinue' option is used

A message will display to alert a customer of this.

Eligible customers who cannot apply online

The following customers may be eligible to apply for an advance but
cannot apply online:

-   Customers under the age of 18 on the independent rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY. They must apply for an advance in person
    at a service centre unless they are rurally isolated
-   FTB customers under the age of 18 need to discuss their application
    for an FTB advance payment in person or over the phone
-   Customers on weekly payments unless they are rurally isolated
-   Customers with a nominee. Note: these 'second level' checks apply
    after the general eligibility checks
-   Customers applying for a Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) advance,
    Farm Household Allowance advance or Special Employment Advance (SEA)

The service will display a message advising they must apply for an
advance in person or by phone.

Online help

Customers can access online help about this service by selecting the
question mark icon.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia website and
Digital Support Products sub-site. There is also information on the
privacy notice and troubleshooting.

Related links

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payments for Home Equity Access Scheme loans

Advance payment options online

Lump sum repayment of advance payment

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Using myGov accounts

Income Management and BasicsCard self service options

Identifying and assisting income managed customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
