-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines information to help customers access their
Centrelink online account to view their Child Care Rebate (CCR)
information via the View Child Care Details and payment options.

Online service access

Customers need to be registered with an active online account to use
this service.

This service can also be accessed using the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app.

Eligibility for CCR

The CCR assists families with the costs of approved child care. It is
paid in addition to Child Care Benefit (CCB), and covers 50% of a
customer's out-of-pocket child care expenses for approved care, up to an
Annual limit per child.

Out-of-pocket costs have been defined as the total fees for approved
child care, less actual CCB entitlement (including Special CCB and JET
Child Care fee assistance (JETCCFA) entitlement where applicable). To be
eligible for the rebate, the customer must be eligible for CCB for
approved child care (as reduced fees or a lump sum) and meet the rebate
work/training/study requirements.

Viewing Child Care Rebate Statement online

This service allows customers to view CCR payment details for the
current financial year and up to 2 financial years in the past where
reconciliation for that year has not yet been completed.

This service displays information for each week of child care attendance
received and also year to date (YTD) totals per eligible child for the
year.

Note: only periods for which the customer satisfied the rebate
work/training/study test or an exception applies is displayed.

The following information fields are displayed on the page:

-   Child name - lists all eligible children for which CCR has been paid
    during the year
-   Total child care fee - the total amount of child care fees that was
    payable by the customer before they were reduced by CCB
-   CCB entitlement - the amount of CCB paid as reduced fees, per
    eligible child, in the period displayed
-   Child Care Rebate - the amount of CCR that the customer was paid per
    eligible child

Related links

How users create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov services

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
