
Apply for a payment or concession card options online 133-03010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can apply for a payment or
concession card online. When a customer contacts about making a claim,
recommend using online accounts if they are able.

To claim a payment or concession card online, customers must create a
myGov account and link to Centrelink.

Payments and concession cards

[] There are a number of payments, concession cards and services a
customer can claim online.

[] The Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website
checks for the most suitable payment or service based on the customer's
circumstances.

Benefits of claiming online

Customers will have any known data pre-filled (for example, contact
details) in their online claim. Customers will need to confirm their
details or provide updates.

[] Individual Correspondence (NOC) or combined Correspondence (NOB)
nominees can submit an online claim on behalf of their principal for
some Centrelink claims.

Organisational nominees cannot submit an online claim on behalf of a
principal, except for Age Pension claims.

Other benefits of claiming online include:

-   'Screening' questions prevent customers completing claims when they
    do not qualify
-   The online claim considers customer circumstances and tailors the
    claim to them
-   The questions make sure the customer provides everything needed for
    their claim
-   Supporting documents can be provided via the Upload documents
    service in the claim or through the Express Plus Centrelink mobile
    app
-   The online claim will save answers if the customer cannot finish
    their claim in one session. They can then complete it later

After submitting their claim, customers can view the status of the claim
in their online account or in the mobile app. They do not need to call
or visit a service centre.

For the earliest possible payment date, a customer should submit a
completed claim on time with supporting documents.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
Save time -claim online factsheet and Digital Support Products sub-site.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Self service for nominees

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

Applying to become an assurer

Claiming a Home Equity Access Scheme loan

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Claiming emergency payments

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) renewals

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Online claim for Mobility Allowance

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Participation Interview

Transfer to Age Pension

Upload documents service

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
