
MBS Items Online Checker and patient care plan history search in HPOS 133-20111745

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Items Online
Checker, and the patient care plan history search functions in Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS).

MBS Items Online Checker

The MBS Items Online Checker lets a health professional:

-   view and check patient eligibility based on their MBS history
-   check their own eligibility for claiming MBS items
-   check the claiming conditions for MBS items

The MBS Items Online Checker will advise if there is a claiming issue
for the item selected. A Yes or No result will display. No additional
information is provided about the reason a claim is returned with a No
result.

Note: the MBS Items Online Checker does not search Veterans' Affairs
claiming history.

Only 1 item should be checked at a time. If there is a time
dependency/restriction, the checker will not advise which items are
restricting with the searched item.

Note: the MBS Items Online Checker function is similar to a pro-forma
claim. If multiple items are entered, the checker will see if they could
all be paid together on 1 claim. This could give an incorrect result and
the history may not be searched if the items restrict against each
other.

The MBS Items Online Checker will return a No result for claiming
errors, for example, the health professional is not registered, age
restrictions etc.

The MBS Items Online Checker information is provided under the following
conditions:

-   The response is based on information supplied by the health
    professional at the date the check is done
-   Where a requested MBS item requires a valid referral, the MBS Items
    Online Checker assumes a valid referral is in place
-   The result of the item check does not guarantee payment of a claim.
    Medicare assesses a claim based on the patient’s eligibility at the
    time Medicare receives and assesses the claim
-   The information is subject to change if claims are pending
-   The result of the MBS Item Online Checker is based on a patient’s
    claiming history and only indicates the benefits that may be payable
    at the date of enquiry

For further information, see the Resources page for:

-   links to the Services Australia website
-   MBS Items Online Checker screenshots

See the Training & Support page for links to:

-   eLearning
-   simulations
-   the Health Professional Education Resources website

View patient care plan history

Care plans are created for patients under the following initiatives:

-   General Practice Management Plans
-   Team Care Arrangements
-   Multidisciplinary Care Plans
-   General Practice Mental Health Treatment Plans

Health professionals cannot access a patient’s clinical care or
treatment plan in Health Professional Online Services (HPOS).

To create, review or manage a care plan, health professionals can view a
patient’s care plan history to:

-   see if there is a current plan in place
-   check eligibility for Medicare services

Patients can monitor access to their care plan history through their
Medicare online account. Patients can report unauthorised activity to
Services Australia. See Resources for information on reporting health
fraud.

Eligibility to view patient care plan history

A health professional can only view a patient's care plan history if the
patient:

-   is enrolled in Medicare
-   is over 18 years of age
-   is registered for a Services Australia Medicare online account, and
-   has given verbal consent

The health professional must be registered with a Provider Digital
Access (PRODA) account to access services in HPOS.

HPOS access requirements

Health professionals can access the MBS Items Online Checker and patient
care plan history in HPOS with a PRODA account.

Delegates are unable to access these services on behalf of the health
professional due to the Privacy Act 1988.

See Health Professional Online Services for more information

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
answers to frequently asked questions from health professionals and
customers, and screenshots from the patient care plan history search and
the MBS Items Online Checker.

The Training & Support page contains information about the eLearning
courses and a simulation available for Service Officers and health
professionals.

Related links

Education resources for health professionals

Health Professional Online Services

Find a patient service Health Professional Online Services (HPOS)

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Medicare online account – Care plan search history screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
