
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how organisation nominees get access to Nominee
Services in Business Hub.

On this page:

Business Hub

Organisations can use Nominee Services in Business Hub to conduct
business for customers they are a nominee for.

They have access to most of the range of online service options as
individual nominees.

They do not have access to:

-   phone self service
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile apps

Managing Personnel

Organisations must have at least one user with the role of Access
Manager.

Service Officers with access to Business Hub Access Management in
Process Direct can assign the role of Access Manager to a user. Once
completed the Access Manager can assign roles to other users as
appropriate. See Step 5 table 1.

Note: there must always be at least one person assigned to each role.
See Resources to view all roles and their descriptions.

Online registration for new nominee organisations

Provider Digital Access (PRODA) identifies a person as an associate if
they are the person(s) associated to the business’ ABN in the Australian
Business Registry.

The organisation’s associate must:

-   register for an individual PRODA account, and
-   register for an organisation PRODA account, and
-   link the account to Business Hub, and
-   apply for Nominee Services, to automatically be assigned the role of
    Authorised Officer

Personnel must:

-   Register for a PRODA account before an access manager can add them
    as a user of Business Hub and Nominee Services. See Resources for
    roles

Note: there is no need for individuals or organisations to create a
PRODA account if they already have one.

International Users

Nominee organisation users have access to a high level of customer
information. Consequently, they must have a PRODA account before they
can use online services.

International users who do not have Australian identification are not
able to create a PRODA account and therefore cannot access Nominee
Services.

International users with Australian Government issued identification are
able to access Nominee Services if they meet the PRODA identification
requirements and create a PRODA account.

Resources has a link to the PRODA website, which provides a list of the
identity documents that can be used.

Online letters

Nominee organisations receive mail online through Letters in Business
Hub.

Users can choose to view:

-   customers’ mail
-   Organisation mail
-   all mail

The Resources page contains links to Organisation Nominee Online
Services, PRODA and Business Hub which contains user guides, including
Nominee Services.

Related links

Self service for nominees

Nominees

Transition to Business Hub from Centrelink Business Online Services

Business Hub

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
