
Documents and Statements option online 133-04020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can use online options to view or
request documents, concession cards and statements.

Online service access

Customers need to have a myGov account linked to their Centrelink online
account to use this service.

Documents available through the Request a document option depend on the
customer's circumstances.

Viewing, printing and saving documents

Customers are able to request certain documents using their Centrelink
online account. Depending on their circumstances, customers can access a
PDF version of their:

-   Income Statement
-   Payment Summaries
-   Replacement Concession Card
-   Rent Certificates
-   Centrelink Statement
-   Deduction Statement
-   Detailed Income and Asset Statement
-   Home Equity Access Scheme Statement
-   Income Management Statement
-   Reporting statement (for current EAN customers)
-   Application for Payment form
-   Statement of debt

Customers requesting a Reporting Statement or Statement of debt cannot
access it straight away. If subscribed to letters online, they will get
it in their myGov Inbox on the following business day. If they are not
subscribed to letters online, it will be sent through postal mail.

Customers who request a replacement concession card will get the card
through postal mail.

Customers can use the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app and phone self
service to request a:

-   Centrelink Statement
-   Deduction Statement (phone self service only)
-   Detailed Income and Asset Statement
-   Income Management Statement (phone self service only)
-   Income Statement
-   Payment Summary
-   Replacement concession card (phone self service only)

Customers who successfully access this service will receive a receipt
number.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the Digital Support Products sub-site.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service – set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Centrelink Statement

Deduction Statement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
