
Access to Child Support self service - set up, checking and updates 133-19061407

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to help customers set up and access Child
Support self service. This includes online accounts, Express Plus Child
Support mobile app and the automated Child Support information service.

Online access

Customers access Child Support services online through their myGov
account or the app.

Staff can help customers by:

-   advising how to create a myGov account and link to Child Support
-   issuing a linking code so they can link their myGov account to Child
    Support
-   completing proof of record ownership and issuing a temporary
    password
-   advising how to download the Child Support mobile app

To use the app, customers need a myGov account linked to their Child
Support online account.

Services Australia website

The website explains how customers can access and use self service.
Online guides and videos show them how.

There are links on the website for customers to sign in to myGov to link
to and access Child Support online accounts.

Customers do not need a Child Support online account to use some
services on the website, for example the Child Support estimator.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer Level 3 (SO3): complete all online service functions,
other than those at the SO5 and SO6 level. Staff at SO2 level can do
this work with their Team Leader's support.

SO5 and Service Support Officers (SSO): advise staff about online
account issues, escalate technical issues with online accounts.

SO6: approve any unique letters sent in response to complaints or
feedback.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia and myGov
websites, and intranet links.

Contents

Using the myGov Staff Linking Application

Create and manage Child Support online accounts in Pluto

CSAonline accounts Cuba Process Help

IVR Maintenance Cuba Process Help

Related links

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Child Support self service

Child Support channel preferences, online letters and messages

Troubleshooting Child Support self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
