
Voiceprints for phone self service 133-04160050

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can enrol their voiceprint for
Centrelink phone self service. It explains how to manage voiceprints for
customers.

Benefits of a voiceprint

-   When the customer calls it will be simpler and faster
-   It is more secure
-   They do not have to remember a PIN
-   They can get personal reminders and messages
-   They can use phone self service with a voiceprint

The agency uses Voiceprints in line with the privacy policy on the
Services Australia website.

Voice biometrics

This is the study and measurement of how a person speaks. It focuses on
characteristics of the human voice, not the sound humans hear.

The technology creates a digital voiceprint using the characteristics of
a person's voice that are unique to them. This is similar to, and as
secure as, a fingerprint.

The voiceprint Common Pass Phrase (CPP) recording process

The customer can record their voiceprint CPP in the Integrated Voice
Response (IVR) after entering their Customer Access Number (CAN) /
Customer Reference Number (CRN).

Before a Service Officer receives the call, the customer must say the
CPP 3 times:

'In Australia my voice identifies me'.

This takes about 30 seconds. The voiceprint recording is ready after 3
successful repeats of the CPP.

Note: the system may ask the customer to repeat the CPP up to 5 times if
it cannot use the audio.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

The voiceprint enrolment offer in the app has been expanded to all
customers. They just need to download and install from the Google Play
and App Stores.

Staff need to:

encourage customers to upgrade to the latest version of the app from
either the Google Play or App Stores

let customers know about the benefits of creating a Voiceprint, such as:

-   extra security to their Centrelink record
-   access to self service
-   personalised/targeted messages in the IVR

If required, guide customers through the process using the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app - Navigating home screen and key app services
staff task card (pages 13-18).

Staff can also view a staff simulation, Voiceprint enrolment offer for
phone self service.

For more about the app, see:

-   Using Centrelink self service
-   Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Customers with multiple records

A multiple Customer Reference Number (CRN) is when a Centrelink customer
has more than one CRN. See Centrelink customer has multiple Customer
Reference Numbers (CRN) for more information.

If a customer has recorded their voiceprint on an incorrect multiple CRN
record, the provisional voiceprint must be deleted.

Note: a multiple record is different to intertwined records.

Nominees, third parties and organisation nominees

A nominee is either an individual (such as friend or relative) or an
organisation that has been appointed to act on behalf of a customer.

Nominees, third parties or organisation nominees often use the
principals CRN/CAN when contacting Centrelink via phone.

Nominees or third parties can only record a voiceprint on their own
Centrelink record. If a nominee, third party or organisation nominee has
recorded their voice on the principal's record, and the enrolment
process has been completed, the Service Officer must immediately delete
the voiceprint. If a provisional voiceprint has been provided by a
nominee or third party on the incorrect record, the audio passphrase
will not be stored and will automatically be deleted within 24 hours. Do
not enrol a provisional voiceprint if they are not the owner of the
record. Place a DOC on record detailing that the voiceprint had to be
deleted.

Service Officers can offer the nominee or third party a PIN for them to
enrol for voiceprint authentication on their own Centrelink record.

Note: Do not offer an organisation nominee a voiceprint enrolment as the
customer may have multiple people for the organisation/agency acting on
their behalf.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the Intranet for more information, contact details, mySupport,
frequently asked questions and conversation tips.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Access Management for Self Service (AMSS) - Staff-assisted access for
phone self service and nominees online

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Using Centrelink self service

Troubleshooting Centrelink self service

Answering a call with Services Australia Workspace

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
