-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help a customer cancel a started or
withdraw a submitted online claim. Customers can use their Centrelink
online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Cancel or withdraw online claim

[] Customers can cancel or withdraw claims online that use the
Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM). To cancel or withdraw their online
claim, customers need to access:

-   My online claims in their Centrelink online account, or
-   My claims in the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

A correspondence nominee can cancel or withdraw an online claim on
behalf of their principal for some Centrelink payments using their
Centrelink online account.

Cancel claim

This option is available for started claims that are not yet submitted
(incomplete status). Customers can access these claims in the Express
Plus Centrelink mobile app when the customer has:

-   reviewed their claim
-   accepted the declaration, and
-   moved to the Next steps page of the online claim

If an online claim is cancelled, the customer or correspondence nominee
will:

-   no longer be able to view the claim details, or
-   continue with the claim

Claim information does not store or transfer to the customer's
Centrelink record. There is no DOC created when the customer cancels a
claim.

Withdraw claim

For all online claims, the withdraw option is available on:

-   a current platform, for a submitted claim until it has been
    finalised
-   the old platform, if the submit date was within the past 14 days. If
    the submit date is more than 14 days ago, the customer must contact
    Services Australia to withdraw their claim

When a customer withdraws a claim, they cannot:

-   reinstate it
-   appeal the decision

If the customer wants to apply for a payment, they need to complete a
new claim. The claim activity on their Centrelink record will cancel
and:

-   a DOC is created, or
-   an ACTDOC created for Manual Follow-up (MFU)

Staff can withdraw a claim on behalf of a customer.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
YouTube channel and the Digital Support Products sub-site.

Related links

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Apply for a payment or concession card options online

Withdrawal of claims

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Upload documents service

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
