
Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM) 133-02160000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use CCM to support a customer's online
claim.

CCM purpose

CCM reduces the need for customers to contact Services Australia. It
gives information about the progress of their online claim.

CCM:

-   shows an online tracker to show a claim's progress
-   shows the estimated completion date of a claim
-   gives online messages about claim progress after it is submitted
-   sends SMS and email messages to customers about claim progress after
    it is submitted
-   if required, sends requests for further information through SMS and
    email after the claim is submitted

Claims using CCM

Claims using CCM allow customers to use their Centrelink online account
or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to:

-   give all required information before submitting their claim
-   submit or cancel their online claims
-   view and action tasks relating to their claim
-   withdraw a submitted claim
-   book their New Claim or Unreasonable To Live At Home (UTLAH)
    appointment
-   submit claims without all supporting documents when they meet the
    exception criteria

Customers must complete all online claim steps and Required Tasks. This
will allow the customer to submit their claim (some exceptions apply).
The Process page contains the exception criteria for each claim type.

Customers will get online messaging advising them to submit their claim
as soon as possible. This will make sure payments start from the
earliest possible date.

Customers have 13 weeks from the claim start date to submit it. If the
customer does not submit their claim during this time, it will expire.
The Process page contains more information about claims that expire.

The following claims (submitted online or through Assisted Customer
Claim) use CCM:

-   ABSTUDY Apprentices (Living Allowance and Incidentals)
-   ABSTUDY Tertiary (Living Allowance and Incidentals)
-   Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care and Aged Care Calculation
    of your cost of care combined partner
-   Age Pension and Age Pension combined partner
-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Austudy (Students and Australian Apprentices)
-   Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC)
-   Crisis Payment (Extreme Circumstances Family and Domestic Violence,
    Humanitarian Entrants Release, National Health Emergency, Other
    Extreme Circumstances and Release from Prison and Psychiatric
    Confinement claim types only)
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Ex-Carer Allowance (Child) (EHC) Health Care Card
-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB) (unless combined with CCS)
-   Farm Household Allowance and Farm Household Allowance combined
    partner (claim submission exceptions apply)
-   Foster Child (FST) Health Care Card
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Low Income (LIC) Health Care Card
-   Parental Leave Pay (unless combined with CCS)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Pensioner Education Supplement
-   Pension Bonus Scheme
-   Pension Loans Scheme (PLS)
-   Special Benefit
-   Tertiary Access Payment
-   Youth Allowance (Job seeker)
-   Youth Allowance (students and Australian Apprentices)

Note: claims may create as Social Application (SOA) shells:

-   for reassessments of rejected claims,
-   for partner claims, or
-   as a result of a customer initiated review of decision
-   some paper claims will automatically create a SOA shell

Social Application (SOA) shells have no link to the original online
claim. This means they are not subject to the CCM process.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers using the app or their Centrelink online account will have
similar information.

However, the Age Pension or Aged Care combined partner Task will not
appear in the partner record.

Customers using the app can:

-   cancel an incomplete claim
-   upload documents to complete Required and Supplementary Tasks
-   submit their claim when all Required Tasks are complete
-   confirm the date they submit their claim
-   get messages when their claim is On Hold and needs additional
    information
-   get advice of their claim outcome

Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

Staff can view the Next steps page and Claim Tracker in ACC. Customers
can view it through their Centrelink online account or the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app.

Note: it is important for Service Officers to ask customers if they have
a Centrelink online account before promoting CCM and/or requesting
information. Although claims (listed under 'Claims using CCM') submitted
by Service Officers in ACC use CCM, customers will not be able to access
all options (including the Claim Tracker) if they do not have a
Centrelink online account.

Customers who are unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
should be encouraged to provide requested information by mail or in
person. Service Officers can record the return of requested documents by
either:

-   using the 'Request and Manage Customer Tasks' guided procedure in
    Customer First, or
-   selecting the Tasks icon in Process Direct

The Process page contains information about managing Tasks in Customer
First and Process Direct.

Customers subscribed to Electronic Messaging (EM) will get CCM
notifications whether they have a Centrelink online account or not.

Claim submission exceptions

It may not be reasonable for a customer to complete all their Required
Tasks before submitting their claim.

These include exceptions where certain vulnerabilities exist, and where
only parental income details are outstanding. The Process page contains
the exception criteria for each claim type.

Claim Tracker

Customers who submit claims online or via ACC (with CCM functionality)
can track their claim using their online account or the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app.

Claim Tracker status includes:

-   Submitted
-   In Progress/On Hold
-   Outcome/Completed

The Process page contains more information about the Claim Tracker.

Targeted notifications

Customers are automatically subscribed to Electronic Messaging (EM) and
letters online when they first link their Centrelink online account. If
the customer unsubscribes, they should subscribe to Electronic Messaging
(EM) through the My profile service before they make a claim so they get
notifications throughout their claim progress.

The Process page contains a list of EM notifications a customer may get
throughout the progress of their claim.

Customers must inform the agency if their contact details change to get
claim updates.

Claims not subject to CCM

CCM provides an online end-to-end service and does not support these
claims:

-   CCS claims combined with FTB or PPL
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB)
-   Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)
-   paper claims
-   claims created through the 'SOA shell' function in Process Direct

The Resources page contains information on how letters/messages are
delivered, a CCM notifications matrix, letter-writing guides and a link
to mySupport and the Staff Training Simulations page.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Youth Allowance and Austudy students and Australian Apprentices online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Requesting information (CLK)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Coding identity documents

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Identity Confirmation

Commencement of Identity

Alternative Identity

Supporting Identity Confirmation for customers unable to attend in
person

Claiming Age Pension

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Process Direct

Aged Care Calculation of your cost of care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
