
Health Professional Online Services Support Mail Centre - managing emails from health professionals 133-02050040

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Health Professional Online
Services (HPOS) Support Mail Centre, managing emails from health
professionals.

About the HPOS Support Mail Centre

HPOS Messages is the email facility for external HPOS users which is
supported by the HPOS Support Mail Centre. This system includes an
internal mail centre system for nominated Services Australia staff to
manage emails from HPOS users.

When mail is received from HPOS users are sent a notification to the
relevant outlook group email box. A link in the notification directs
Service Officers to the relevant program in the HPOS Support Mail Centre
system where they can send and reply to email messages and establish an
online mail thread. The new mail thread eliminates the need for HPOS
users to create a new message for each reply.

The Resources page provides a summary of the HPOS Mail Centre and HPOS
Support Mail Centre functions.

Access request to HPOS Support Mail Centre

Access to the HPOS Support Mail Centre system and the individual program
Mail Centres and form upload function is based on Tivoli Access Manager
(TAM) user groups. A request through mySupport is required and your line
manager must approve the request.

The Process page describes how to access and log onto the HPOS Support
Mail Centre.

HPOS Support Mail Centre listing screen

The initial screen in the HPOS Support Mail Centre is the Mail Centre
listing which displays all incoming mail and any other mail that has not
yet been filed.

Mail is sorted on the date and time that the last activity occurred on
the mail thread, whether received or sent.

The Resources page contains a list of fields displayed in the Mail
Centre listing screen.

Show received, sent or all messages in HPOS Support Mail Centre

The Display drop down list at the top of the screen can be changed to
show which messages are displayed on the screen.

The HPOS Support Mail Centre system defaults to display Received
messages.

The Resources page describes how to display other messages.

Sort mail in HPOS Support Mail Centre

Mail is sorted by columns.

Displayed messages in the HPOS Support Mail Centre can be sorted by the
following columns:

-   Provider/Practice
-   Subject
-   Update Date/Time
-   Ref No

The HPOS Support Mail Centre system defaults to sort by Update
Date/Time. To sort by a different column, select the relevant column
header.

Note: the column is sorted in ascending order. Select the same column
again to sort by descending order. If a column is sorted, the column
will have the sort indicator next to it.

View mail and attachments in HPOS Support Mail Centre

To view mail within the HPOS Support Mail Centre, select the message to
be viewed. This opens the view message screen. The subject of the
message thread is displayed at the top of the screen.

Mail is displayed as message threads:

-   incoming messages (From) are shaded green, indented from the right
    side and are messages that have been sent from the HPOS user
-   outgoing messages (To) are shaded blue, indented from the left side
    and are messages that have been sent to the HPOS user

Each mail message thread is displayed with the:

-   header of the provider stem or RA Number of the individual
-   provider name
-   date and time the message was sent
-   HPOS Reference Number and sequence number of the thread

Note: attachments sent with a message can be opened by selecting the
file name. The attachment will open in a new window.

Search function for Program mailboxes

The Quick Search function allows a mail thread to be searched for within
the HPOS Support Mail Centre.

Note: only the reference number of the mail thread is required, not the
sequence number.

Quick Search results can include the following:

-   Successful - When the search is successful, the system will display
    the mail thread that was searched for
-   Unsuccessful - mail not found - If the mail thread searched for does
    not exist in the Mail Centre an error message is displayed
-   Unsuccessful - mail not found, no access - If the mail thread
    searched for exists but in a different Mail Centre, than the Service
    Officer has access to, an error message is displayed

Searching in folders

Each folder has a search function to allow mail to be searched for
within the folder.

Search by options are displayed at the top of each screen and allow the
following options:

Provider Stem

-   This search will only display mail relating to the entered provider
    stem
-   Where it is displayed, select the Provider stem radio button and
    enter the provider stem into the box provided

Range, there are four options for the range search:

-   ALL (Default): Will display all records
-   Previous week: Will display mail threads from the previous week
-   Previous month: Will display all mail for the previous month
-   Date range: Will display all mail within the entered date range.
    Note: selection of this option will open the date range input fields
    which can be input manually or selected from the calendar

Search function for Form upload mailbox

Service officers will need to select a category and/or date and time to
display messages, prior to doing a search.

Using Quick Search

The Quick Search function allows a mail thread to be searched for within
the HPOS Support Mail Centre.

Note: only the reference number of the mail thread is required, not the
sequence number. All mail is given a HPOS reference number which is
located in either the Ref No. column or within the message in the, To
and From section.

Example of the reference number:

Reference numbers are made up of two parts, the first part is the
reference number and the second part is the sequence number. (The
sequence number will change when the email has been sent again with
additional information or when a Service Officer replies to the message
for example 12345678-01, 1234567-02.

Quick Search results can include the following:

-   Successful - When the search is successful, the system will display
    the mail thread that was searched for
-   Unsuccessful - mail not found - If the mail thread searched for does
    not exist in the Mail Centre an error message is displayed
-   Unsuccessful - mail not found, no access - If the mail thread
    searched for exists but in a different Mail Centre, than the Service
    Officer has access to, an error message is displayed

Searching in folders

-   Each folder has a search function to allow mail to be searched for
    within the folder

'Search by' options are displayed at the top of each screen and allow
the following options:

Form Category

-   This search will only display mail relating to the entered category

Form Type

-   This search will only display mail relating to the entered form type

Date Range

-   Will display all mail within the entered date range
-   From date: input fields which can be input manually or selected from
    the calendar
-   From time: must be used with From Date element and must represent
    valid non future date/time, if left blank will default to 12:00am
-   To date: input fields which can be input manually or selected from
    the calendar
-   To time: must be used with To Date element and must represent valid
    non future date/time, if left blank will default to 11:59pm

Practice Id/Provider Stem/User RA

-   either Practice ID or Provider Stem or User RA number can be
    entered, this search will only return all valid matches

HPOS Mail Centre email addresses

The HPOS Mail Centre provides the ability for health professionals to
email Services Australia using a secure email address book. Health
professionals can use pre-defined email addresses to email the
Department and include attachments. Health professionals contact
information is available on Services Australia website.

The Resources page contains the User guides that have been developed to
assist health professionals with this feature.

Related links

Health Professional Online Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
