-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers use the Money you owe
service. This service is available in Centrelink online account and the
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Money you owe service

The Money you owe service allows customers to view and update details
relating to their Centrelink debts.

Customers can:

view:

-   outstanding debt amounts, debts that have been temporarily written
    off and repayments
-   debts repaid in the past 2 years
-   a current repayment arrangement
-   current withholdings arrangements
-   interest charge balances
-   recovery fees

set up a repayment arrangement via credit or debit card, direct debit,
BPAY® or Post Billpay

make changes to:

-   cash and voluntary payment arrangements
-   bank account details for direct debit payments
-   a repayment arrangement
-   withholding arrangements

miss an overdue repayment

cease some payment arrangements

stop or delay a payment arrangement due to a disaster/emergency or
hardship event

Accessing the service

To access this service, customers need to create a myGov account and
link their Centrelink online account to it. Customers can use this
service to make payments through an outstanding task, if the customer is
eligible.

They can access the task from:

-   their Centrelink online account, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers may still need to take action, even if there is no task shown.

Staff can view the outstanding task in Customer First using Customer
Online View.

Go to the Resources page for further information on eligibility rules
and debt task examples.

Centrelink online accounts

Customers can access the service from their homepage by selecting:

-   Favourite services > Money you owe, or
-   Menu > Payments and claims > Manage payments > Money you owe

Go to online guide, Centrelink online account help - Manage the money
you owe online.

Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Customers can access the service from their home screen by selecting
the:

-   More icon > Money you owe

Go to online guide, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app help - Manage the
money you owe.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website, the
Digital Support Products sub-site and contact details for Australia
Post. It also contains a table of eligibility rules and customer debt
task examples.

Related links

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

How users create a myGov account and link services

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Advance payment options online

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Income Statements and detailed income and asset statements

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
