
Payment details options online 133-04140000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can view details about their
payments online. Customers may be able to update their payment
destination and view a history of their payments details.

Access this service

Encourage customers to go online to view and update details for their
payment.

Customers need to register online with an active online account linked
to myGov to access these services.

Customers can access the service via their Centrelink online account or
by using the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

To access this service, customers must:

-   receive a Centrelink or family assistance payment or
-   have a Commonwealth Seniors Health Care card with an existing
    payment destination

Manage payment destination option online

Customers can use the view service, if:

their payment is via:

-   direct credit to a financial institution, for example, bank,
    building society or credit union accounts
-   cheque, such as customers with a current Direct Credit Exemption
    reason

they have a group institution arrangement (for example, Public Trustees)

they have overseas destinations (both direct credit and cheque)

they do not have a payment nominee appointed

Customers can use the update service, if:

their payment is via:

-   direct credit to a financial institution, for example, bank building
    society or credit union accounts, or
-   cheque, such as customers with a current Direct Credit Exemption
    reason

their payment is not:

-   via a Group Payment Schedule
-   to an overseas payment destination (either direct credit or cheque)

they receive Youth Allowance or ABSTUDY. They must be:

-   aged 18 years or over, or
-   aged between 16 and 18 with a personal payment exemption

they do not have a current third party payment (including payment
nominee) arrangement in place

The account must be in the customer's name alone or jointly with another
person. Customers without legal access to the account will not be able
to change the payment destination online.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
Digital Support Products. There is also information about issues
customers may have using the service and possible fixes.

Related links

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using Centrelink self service

Using myGov accounts

Payment destination

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
