
Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems 277-51030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to record private maintenance income on
Centrelink systems.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer

Child support, spousal maintenance, discharged child support arrears and
voluntary maintenance received by an FTB customer or their partner may
affect the customer's rate of FTB Part A. In certain cases, child
support, spousal maintenance, discharged child support arrears and/or
voluntary maintenance may need to be manually recorded on a customer's
record.

Deeming for private collect customers (from 1 July 2012)

From 1 July 2012, customers who privately collect their child support
are deemed to be receiving their full child support assessed amount and
will have their FTB Part A assessed on that amount regardless of the
actual amount collected, unless they:

-   have a partial exemption in place and they are collecting a lesser
    amount
-   discharge arrears owed from a Child Support collect period
-   privately collect child support arrears relating to a private
    collect period prior to 1 July 2012

Spousal Maintenance

Customers can receive spousal maintenance privately or they can ask
Child Support to collect it for them. If the customer is collecting the
spousal maintenance:

-   privately, the full amount collected (child support assessment plus
    the spousal maintenance amount) must be recorded on the customer's
    record to make sure the correct rate of FTB is paid
-   via Child Support, no updates are required as Child Support will
    advise the full amount (child support assessment plus the spousal
    maintenance amount)

If spousal maintenance is being received from someone who is not paying
child support, there is nowhere to code it on the customer's record. It
must be recorded in a DOC. There is no ability to record spousal
maintenance in the Centrelink system.

Where spousal maintenance has been received as a lump sum, see Assessing
capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Discharged child support arrears from a Child Support collection period

Arrears can only be discharged if the customer elects to change their
collection method from Child Support collect to private collect. From 1
July 2012, customers who change their collection method to private
collect have the option of either:

-   Asking Child Support to collect the outstanding arrears.
    Disbursement amount details will be automatically transferred from
    the Child Support system to the Centrelink system via the data
    exchange when the customer receives them, or
-   Discharging Child Support from the responsibility of collecting the
    arrears, effectively advising Child Support that these amounts will
    be collected privately. Details of the discharged arrears are not
    included in the entitlement data transferred from Child Support and
    therefore must be recorded on the customer's record to make sure the
    correct rate of FTB is paid for the remainder of the financial year
    in which the arrears were discharged.
    The discharged arrears amount will need to be manually coded by the
    Child Support Unit (CSU) and will be included in the Maintenance
    Income Test (MIT) in addition to the customer's ongoing child
    support entitlement in the year it is discharged, regardless of the
    period to which it relates.
    An exception to this is if the customer has been granted a VIO MAT
    exemption, any arrears discharged will not be taken into account for
    the MIT

Note: discharged child support arrears in relation to a child who is no
longer an FTB child should not be included in the MIT. This is because
it is not for the maintenance of an FTB child. If there are other
remaining FTB children, only the portion of the discharged arrears that
relates to the current FTB children should be included in the MIT.

Private child support

This can be recorded as:

voluntary maintenance where it is received by a person who does not have
a child support case for the relevant children

actual maintenance where the:

-   amount received is a combination of child support and spousal
    maintenance (and the spousal maintenance is not being collected by
    Child Support)
-   where the customer receives less than their child support assessment
    amount and has been granted a partial exemption, or
-   customer received less than their child support assessed amount for
    a private collect period and a full maintenance exemption has been
    backdated

Notes: effective from 21 September 2015, customers can no longer ask
Child Support to backdate the case end to align with the exemption start
date. This means that where the customer is granted a full exemption
from a date in the past, additional coding is required by Centrelink to
remove the uncollected child support from the Maintenance Income Test.
If a private collect customer receives more than the amount assessed by
Child Support and the additional amount is not related to arrears
accrued for a private collect period prior to 1 July 2012, the amount is
not to be recorded.

The Resources page contains examples of assessing voluntary child
support that is collected during a DMA (Deciding Maintenance Action)
period. Coding of discharged child support arrears, coding voluntary
maintenance where the customer has a partial exemption and no child
support case, and coding voluntary maintenance where the customer has a
partial exemption and a private collect child support case. It also
contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Related links

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing child support received for child disability expenses for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Determining if a payment is child support/maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Non-cash maintenance income assessments for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
