
Collection of child support debts through third parties (s72A and s72AC) 277-04100000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines collecting child support payments through third
parties via sections 72A or 72AC and follow up on non-compliance.

Collection of child support through third parties

Child Support may enforce collection of payments through third parties
in certain circumstances. Child Support can issue a notice under section
72A of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988 (s72A).
This notice requires a third party to forward funds to Child Support
that it otherwise owes to the customer. Collection through a third party
used appropriately, it is an effective method of transferring child
support between parents.

When a debtor is not physically present in Australia and is unlikely to
return soon, a section 72B notice can be issued requiring a third party
to forward funds it holds or controls for amounts already due, and
retain money to also pay current amounts before they become overdue.

Collection through Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)

DVA customers can receive their pensions and benefits through
income/disability support or military rehab/compensation payments.
Careful consideration must he applied to ensure the correct notice is
issued to the correct DVA organisation Child Support Reference Number
(CSRN):

-   Issue a notice under s72A for military compensation pensions, or
-   Issue a notice under s72AC for certain income/disability support
    payments

See, Collection through Department of Veterans' Affairs on the Resources
page for more information.

The References page contains links to policy and legislation on
collection and complying with notices.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, macros, AUSTRAC
access and disclosure information, external websites and a referral
template.

Related links

Bank and organisation listing

Centrelink deductions used to collect child support debts

Child Support estimates - Reconcile (pre 1 July 2011)

Child Support's information gathering powers

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer referral guidelines for Child Support staff

Debt repayment

Direct requests for information from Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA)

Documenting Child Support information

External Searches Guide

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Income processing for Child Support customers

Income Support Payment (ISP) concession for Centrelink deductions

Letters for Child Support customers

National Redress Scheme overview

Status Resolution Support Services payment

Technical support in Child Support

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Letters Cuba Process Help

Section 72A, 72B and 72AC notices Cuba Process Help

Section 120/161 notice Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
