
Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous financial year 277-51070100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for backdating exemptions from
seeking child support for a period before 1 July of the previous
financial year for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment or lump sum claim
customers. An exemption may be granted if the customer does not know the
identity of the child's other parent or if circumstances make it
unreasonable for them to seek child support from the parent.

Exemption decisions

This procedure should only be referred to once a decision on an
exemption has been made and special circumstances for a period before 1
July of the previous financial year need to be considered.

For arrears to be assessed for a period before 1 July of the previous
financial year, special circumstances for backdating a maintenance
action exemption must first be established. That is, there must be
special circumstances which prevented the customer from applying for a
formal review of their rate of payment and/or MAT failure within 52
weeks of it occurring. If special circumstances cannot be established,
arrears are limited to 1 July of the previous financial year.

A customer's right not to discuss sensitive matters must be respected.
No sensitive material should be recorded on a customer's record.

Exemptions may be backdated

If the circumstances existed previously, exemptions may be backdated.
This may be appropriate for instalment customers and customers who lodge
an FTB claim for a past period. Grounds for backdating an exemption are
established through an assessment of whether the circumstances existed
before the date of claim for the entire backdated period. Generally the
date of effect can be no earlier than 1 July of the previous financial
year; that is, arrears of FTB are generally limited to 1 July of the
previous financial year. When backdating an exemption before 1 July of
the previous financial year, for arrears to be paid, special
circumstances for backdating a maintenance action exemption must exist.
Any evidence obtained to support the backdating should be outlined in
the assessment. The DOC must include the date from which the exemption
is to be applied from.

If it has been determined that an exemption should be backdated before 1
July of the previous financial year, the DOC must be updated to include
what special circumstances exist. The case will then be referred to a
Families Service Support Officer (SSO) to assess if special
circumstances can be established for the period before 1 July of the
previous financial year. The SSO will liaise with the referring officer
as required.

Partial exemptions for child support

A partial exemption may be granted in private collect cases where a
customer is unable to collect their full entitlement, and where it is
not considered appropriate for them to transfer the collection method to
Child Support. The partial exemption enables the customer to collect
whatever they can privately with the customer's rate of FTB Part A based
on the amount of child support received, not the amount of the child
support assessment.

Child Support collection period and (full) exemption

When a customer is granted an exemption and they have a current child
support case, there may be outstanding arrears owing on the child
support case.

Customers can no longer ask Child Support to backdate the case end to
align with the exemption start date. In the past, backdating the end to
align with the exemption start date allowed any arrears of child support
to be offset (essentially removed). However a customer can elect to
discharge any arrears outstanding without them being taken in to account
for Maintenance Income Test (MIT) purposes. This effectively means that
there is no requirement to backdate exemptions for this customer group.

Family and domestic violence circumstances present

Where a customer is granted an exemption from the MAT and there are
outstanding arrears owing on the case, the customer can end the case and
discharge any arrears accrued. This means the customer is advising Child
Support they will collect the arrears privately. Ordinarily, if a
customer chose to collect arrears themselves, that amount would be
assessable under the MIT. However, where the customer is granted an
exemption, the 'discharged' amount will not be taken into account for
MIT purposes.

For social workers

If the customer is granted a full exemption and has arrears accrued for
a previous Child Support collect period and the customer elects not to
'discharge' the arrears, it may indicate that an exemption is not
appropriate. If the customer elects to collect the arrears they will be
assessable under the MIT.

Private collect child support and backdated (full) exemptions

When a customer has a private collect child support case and there are
family and domestic violence circumstances present, it may be
appropriate to backdate an exemption. The backdating of the exemption is
to offset the effect of child support that the customer was deemed to
have received, but may not have received due to the family and domestic
violence circumstances. This enables Centrelink to re-assess their FTB
entitlement based on the actual amount of child support they received
during this period.

Customers can no longer ask Child Support to backdate the case end to
align with the exemption start date. This means where the customer is
granted a full exemption from a date in the past, additional coding is
required by Centrelink to remove the uncollected child support from the
Maintenance Income Test (MIT).

Requests to end a child support case

Before 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019) if the customer or their partner were
in receipt of FTB Part A at more than the base rate, approval of the
Secretary approval was required to end the child support case.

Child Support no longer needs Centrelink approval to accept an election
to end an assessment from:

-   15 May 2019 for WA Ex-nuptial cases, and
-   1 July 2018 for all other cases

If a parent or their current partner is receiving, or is entitled to
receive more than the base rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A,
their rate may be reduced to base rate if they do not have a MAT
exemption.

Child Support will discuss the implications of the election to end on
their FTB Part A entitlement and will confirm if the customer or their
current partner is claiming FTB or if they intend to claim FTB at the
end of the financial year. Child Support will offer to transfer the
parent through to Families staff to discuss the potential impacts before
making a decision to end the case. This may mitigate any unexpected and
unnecessary financial hardship for the parent. This may include further
discussions around whether an exemption may be appropriate.

Note: approval of the Secretary was still required to end a child
support assessment on a WA Child Support ex-nuptial case between 1 July
2018 and 14 May 2019.

To end a case, the customer must lodge a request with Child Support.
Alternatively, the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671) form may
be used. Child Support will still need to speak with the customer before
they can end the case.

Discharging arrears

When a customer is granted an exemption and the customer has a current
child support case, there may be outstanding arrears owing on the child
support case. The customer may elect to discharge these arrears without
having the discharged amount taken in to account for Maintenance Income
Test (MIT) purposes.

When a:

-   full exemption is granted, the child support email template to have
    the child support case ended must indicate if the discharging of
    arrears has been approved. This is so Child Support are aware the
    amounts can be discharged
-   partial exemption is granted, the child support case is not ended.
    The customer will need to advise Child Support directly if they want
    to discharge any arrears owed for a previous Child Support collect
    period

The Resources page contains a Child Support email template, contact
details for Access Support Centre (ASC) and Child Support and links to
the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query Form and the Direct Referral to
Service Support Officer webform.

Related links

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result
of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure
(including children of same-sex couples)

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Social Work Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
