
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines where to find child support information used to
assess a customer's entitlement to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A under
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) and Maintenance Income Test (MIT).
This information can be viewed at the customer, Maintenance Entitlement
Group, and child levels.

On this Page:

FTB instalment claims

The Child Support Overview via Customer First Workspace provides an
overview of the customer’s current child support assessment, including
MAT, MIT and child support assessment and collection method.

Alternately, this information can be viewed via the Maintenance
Entitlement Group Summary (MNGS) screen. On this screen, children are
grouped according to whether or not the customer or their partner is
entitled to take action to obtain child support for them.

Child support screens display child support entitlement and disbursement
information transferred electronically from Child Support as well as
information recorded manually.

The Assessment Explanation (AXFTB) screen indicates if FTB Part A is
restricted to the base rate for a child due to the MAT.

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) details

A summary of the assessment of the customer's maintenance income can be
viewed on the Rate Explanation (REXFTBA) screen.

Details of the customer's total annualised maintenance income,
Maintenance Income Free Area (MIFA), MIT ceiling and maintenance income
reduction can be viewed on the FTB Maintenance Assessment Explanation
(REXFTBM) screen.

A detailed explanation of the maintenance income assessment can be
viewed from the MIT Explanation Summary (MNEX) screen.

FTB reconciliation

After the end of each financial year, maintenance reconciliation occurs
as part of the FTB reconciliation process. Separate screens are used to
show how MAT and MIT were applied in the FTB reconciliation calculation.
These can be viewed from the FAO Reconciliation (FRCS) screen.

FTB lump sum claims

For claims for 2008-09 onwards, child support details used for the
relevant financial year can be viewed for a child or payer group from
the Maint LSC Group Summary (MLGS) screen after selecting the child
support recipient from the Maintenance Details Selection (FMPYS) screen.

For earlier years, child support income details can be viewed by
selecting the recipient from the FMPYS screen. Maintenance action
details can be viewed on the Child Maintenance Previous Year (CHMPY)
screen after selecting the child from the Child Selection (CHS) screen.

For FTB lump sum claims lodged with the Australian Taxation Office
before July 2009, child support details are displayed on separate ATO
claim screens.

FTB lump sum claim calculation screens show how child support details
affected the lump sum claim result.

Contents

Finding old Fam (pre July 2000) maintenance information on Centrelink
systems

Related links

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

How to group children on a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) record

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
