
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for exchanging information between
Centrelink and Child Support.

Information exchange

Information is exchanged automatically between systems in Child Support
(Cuba) and Centrelink (Income Security Information System (ISIS)) on a
daily and weekly basis, depending on the type of customer information
provided. The data exchange also occurs when the External Information
window is refreshed using the CNTLK refresh button.

Data exchange processes automatically trigger a request for matching and
exchange of data when customer or child details are updated, or case
events occur - this request and exchange occurs daily.

However, to respond to customer needs, there are times when information
is manually requested from and by either Child Support or Centrelink.

Information must only be disclosed if that action complies with the 2016
Governance Arrangement, formerly known as the Memorandum of
Understanding. See Resources for details of the Governance Arrangement.

Data files

Data is transferred from Child Support to Centrelink and vice versa,
electronically via various data files. These files are sent daily,
weekly, monthly and annually depending on the information contained in
the file.

Entitlement files

Entitlement files are sent weekly and contain child support case
entitlement information including:

details of persons (name, date of birth, reference number) who have
applied for a child support assessment in order for Centrelink to match
data for identification of mutual customers

the outcome of their child support applications including:

-   entitlement amount
-   child details
-   collection method
-   ending of assessments

Daily update files

Child Support sends a daily file to Centrelink where the following
information is requested:

-   customer information including current contact, benefit,
    relationship and child(ren) details of mutual customers
-   Centrelink Deduction action (new requests, updates and cessations)
-   determining whether a customer is a mutual customer of both Child
    Support and Centrelink

Centrelink send Child Support a daily file containing responses to Child
Support requests as well as updates to information relating to mutual
customers.

Payment files

Payment files are sent 3 times a month and contain information on
collected disbursements and delivery dates.

Information is exchanged automatically between Cuba and ISIS on a daily
and weekly basis, depending on the type of customer information
provided. The data exchange also occurs when the External Information
window is refreshed using the Centrelink refresh request (MNRF).

Data exchange processes automatically trigger a request for matching and
an exchange of data when customer or child details are updated or case
events occur. This request and exchange occurs daily.

The Resources page contains contact details and resources relating to
the exchange of information between Centrelink and Child Support
including Macros, Centrelink/Child Support response times, and the 2016
Governance Arrangement.

Contents

Manual information request about a Centrelink customer record

Manual information request about a Child Support customer record

Related links

Applications for a child support assessment

Change in child support care levels from 1 July 2018 (15 May 2019 for WA
Ex-nuptial cases)

Documenting Child Support information

Ending a Child Support assessment

Child Support objections

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

External Information Window Help

Notes Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
