[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the impacts for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers whose circumstances change after they have taken initial
action to obtain child support. It contains procedures that cover
changes in action to obtain child support, child support options and
maintenance income.

Changes to child support assessment and collection

In most cases, initial action is taken by applying to Child Support for
a child support assessment. Child Support electronically transfers to
Centrelink details of child support entitlement and disbursements. Child
Support may advise of a retrospective change in child support
entitlement.

After taking initial action to obtain child support, customers may
contact Centrelink to:

-   advise a change in maintenance income received
-   advise a change in collection method (private or Child Support
    collect)
-   request a change in the way annual maintenance income is estimated
    during the financial year (entitlement or disbursement method) if
    they are Child Support collect
-   vary or end a child support assessment
-   advise an arrangement to collect child support arrears or to repay
    child support for a previous income year as a result of a
    retrospective child support assessment

Advising FTB customers of the effect of the change

Service Officers should advise FTB customers of the effect of the change
on their rate of FTB Part A, in terms of the Maintenance Action Test and
Maintenance Income Test. If maintenance income is reassessed, details of
the effect on a current FTB instalment rate and the likely effect at FTB
reconciliation should be provided.

Before 1 July 2012, under the Maintenance Action Test (MAT), customers
who elected to privately collect their child support had to collect
their full child support entitlement to be paid more than the base rate
of FTB Part A.

From 1 July 2012, if it is reasonable (i.e. the customer is not eligible
for an exemption, such as a fear of family and domestic violence) for a
parent to take action to privately collect their full entitlement, the
parent will be deemed to receive their full child support entitlement
for the Maintenance Income Test (MIT), regardless of whether or not they
receive less than their entitlement, or when the amount collected
exceeds their entitlement.

The rate of FTB Part A for a child will no longer be restricted to the
base rate due to the parent privately collecting less than their full
child support entitlement (the deemed amount).

In some cases, details will need to be confirmed with Child Support
before updates can be made. There are protocols in place for contact
between Centrelink and Child Support.

When a child/case end is transferred by Child Support for a Child
Support Collect customer on the Disbursement method, the system
retrospectively changes the case to Private Collect and applies the full
maintenance entitlement amount.

This retrospective change in assessment results in the customer having
their annualised maintenance income assessed under the Entitlement
Method. In the majority of cases, this will result in a decrease in the
customer's ongoing rate of FTB Part A. This change in annualised
maintenance income can also invoke Mandatory Continuous Adjustment,
causing a further reduction to the customer's ongoing rate of FTB.

Note: this is not caused by incorrectly entered/ended case data or a
system problem, however it can lead to an unintended and unexpected
reduction to the customer's ongoing rate. Occurrences of this issue must
be reported to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for escalation to the Policy
(Advice) Assessment Team for a workaround to be considered. See the
Resources page for a link.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk.

Contents

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

Action required when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer no longer
entitled to child support

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments
from paying parent (non-agency payments)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Child Support data has not loaded onto or is incorrectly affecting
customer's record

Related links

Child Support collection information for Centrelink staff

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
