
Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink 277-51010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about applying to Child Support for a
child support assessment.

Reasonable maintenance action

Even if a customer's personal income means they will only receive base
rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A, they must be encouraged to take
reasonable action to obtain child support. It is every parent's
responsibility to provide financial support for their children.

Customers may only apply for a child support assessment for an eligible
child. However, it is not always appropriate for the customer to apply -
first check that an application for child support assessment is needed.

Maintenance Action Test

For parents, there is a 13 week (91 day) timeframe for the customer to
take reasonable action to obtain child support so Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A can continue to be paid at more than the base rate for a
child. Information should be given to the customer about the effect of
taking action to obtain child support and maintenance income on their
rate of FTB Part A.

How to apply

Customers must contact Child Support directly, either [] online or by
phone, to apply for a child support assessment.

[] Customers should make an application for a child support assessment
online, either via:

-   the Services Australia website, or
-   their myGov account, if they are an existing Child Support customer

Links to the Services Australia website and myGov are located on the
Resources page

After the application is submitted, Child Support will contact the
applicant and other party wherever possible to:

-   ensure all relevant information is provided, and
-   discuss the child support process and provide support options where
    required

Customers that apply for child support online or via their myGov account
are issued a receipt. The receipt includes their application number and
the date and time the application was submitted. Customers can provide
this information verbally to Centrelink as evidence of taking
maintenance action.

If the customer contacts Centrelink to discuss applying for a child
support assessment, refer the customer to Child Support. This allows all
required information to be obtained and advice given to the customer
about their child support options. For contact details, see Child
Support.

Customers contacting Child Support by phone will be provided with the
following information and will then be 'cold transferred' to Centrelink
to allow maintenance action details to be recorded on their record:

-   Child Support Case Number
-   Child/ren's names the case applies to, and
-   Start Date of Child Support case

There is no requirement for staff to confirm these details with Child
Support unless the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes (APP or CAC) have
previously been coded in the past 3 to 6 months. In these cases,
evidence of action should be sought before updating the customer's
record.

Payer lives overseas

If the customer advises they are privately collecting 100% of an
overseas court ordered amount, and:

-   the payer is overseas in either a non-reciprocating or excluded
    jurisdiction, or
-   the payer is in a reciprocating jurisdiction

Refer to Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is
overseas and the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for further information
and what to advise the customer.

Shared care

From 1 July 2008, as part of the Child Support Scheme Reforms, Child
Support changed how they assess customers for child support purposes.
The main change is where customers share the care of a child or each
have one or more children in care, there is now only one child support
case rather than 2.

Parents and carers under 18 years of age

As part of the Commonwealth Child Safe Framework, Services Australia has
developed Child Safe Policy May 2019. The policy outlines the agency’s
commitment to creating an environment that safeguards children under 18
years of age during their interactions with the agency.

The Parent Support Team (PST) manages Child Support customers who are a
parent or carer and under 18 years of age. PST management continues
until the customer turns 18 years of age.

To transfer customers on the phone to PST who fit the criteria, see
Customer Referral Guidelines for Child Support customers.

Non-parent carers

If a customer provides care for a child and they are not the parent,
they may be able to apply for Child Support from both of the child's
parents. Examples of non-parent carers include legal guardians,
grandparents or other family members.

There is no MAT requirement for these customers if they elect not to
apply, however they still may wish to apply for an assessment. If an
assessment is commenced for a non-parent carer the Maintenance Income
Test (MIT) will apply as per normal.

Customers can apply for a non-parent carer child support assessment if
they:

-   care for a child 128 nights or more a year (35 per cent or more
    care), and
-   are not considered to be a member of a couple with one of the
    child's parents

The Process page contains further information.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and information for
separated parents on the Services Australia website and contact details
for Child Support.

Related links

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Private collection information for Centrelink staff

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Child support deductions from income support payments

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support data has not loaded onto or is incorrectly affecting
customer's record

Parent advises Centrelink they want to pay child support

Centrelink action when an application for child support assessment is
rejected by Child Support

Who can apply for child support?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
