-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to manually reconcile an estimate of
income (from 1 July 2011). Most reconciliations are automatically
performed by Cuba, Manual intervention is required in specific
circumstances.

This document also explains the processes to follow in other specific
circumstances. For example, a customer disputes the reconciliation
outcome.

International customers and overseas estimates

If the estimate is for an International customer, a 'Reconciliation
Required' or ‘Pending Auto Reconciling Inc’ intray will generate on
receipt of an ATO income. These intrays may also generate for an
estimating customer who had income as both an Australian resident and as
an overseas resident.

'Est Rec Tax Ret Not Lodged’ intrays will be generated for customers who
have lodged an overseas estimate but where no ATO income is received.

See Reconciling an overseas estimate (from 1 July 2011) for help in
manually processing these estimate reconciliations.

How to determine if an estimate requires reconciliation

Generally, if the actual Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) is higher than
the estimated ATI, the estimate will be reconciled. When the
Reconciliation Calculator is populated with the estimate and reconciling
income details Cuba identifies whether the estimate requires
reconciliation by displaying a 'Y' or 'N' in the box beside
'Reconciliation Required'. However, there are some circumstances where
this indicator displays incorrectly.

Check the 'Total Reconciling Debt' to determine if the estimate requires
reconciliation:

If the 'Total Reconciling Debt' is a positive amount, for example
$127.64, and the estimating parent was a payer, the reconciliation is
raising debt. This occurs when the customer underestimated their income
and had been assessed to pay too little child support. The
reconciliation will result in a change to the assessment and the
estimate requires reconciliation

If the 'Total Reconciling Debt' is a negative amount (for example
-$141.46) then more investigation is required:

-   If the estimating parent was payee then a negative amount would be
    correct as they underestimated their income. Based on the estimate
    the customer was assessed to receive more child support than they
    were entitled. Reconciliation will result in a reduction to their
    entitlement. The estimate requires reconciliation
-   If the estimating parent was a payer, a negative amount can display
    if the customer was assessed to pay at the Fixed Annual Rate (FAR)
    based on their estimate and reconciliation will result in an
    assessment of less than FAR. The estimate does not require
    reconciliation as reconciliation would result in the assessment
    reducing from FAR. The decision notepad should include reference to
    this circumstance

Not reconciling an estimate where the income is higher

In cases where reconciling an estimate with a higher income would
benefit the estimating parent, the Estimate must not be reconciled. The
status of these Estimates must be set to Recon No Change. The Resources
page has an example. If a Service Officer identifies an Estimate where
reconciliation appears to have had an unfair outcome, they escalate to a
Service Support Officer (SSO). An error correction and lodgement of a
system incident form may be required.

National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS), National Redress Scheme, Territories Stolen Generations Redress Scheme and First Home Super Saver (FHSS) Scheme

Payments (either ongoing or a lump sum) received by customers under the
NDIS, National Redress Scheme, Territories Stolen Generations Redress
Scheme or FHSS Scheme are not considered income for Child Support
purposes.

If a customer provides NDIS, National Redress Scheme, Territories Stolen
Generations Redress Scheme or FHSS Scheme payments as an income source,
or it is established the customer is receiving these payments, document
for information only.
See Documenting Child Support information.

Do not include in any income calculations.

For more details, see National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS),
National Redress Scheme or Territories Stolen Generations Redress
Scheme.

The Resources page contains:

-   link to Deceased Customer Management Team contact details
-   submission templates for section 63AE decisions
-   an example of reverse case estimate reconciliation when manual
    intervention is needed
-   information about FAR, DoE and DoN
-   link to UQ90.02 letter, and
-   an example of not reconciling an estimate where the income is higher

 

Related links

Child support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Auto reconciliation procedure for child support estimates (from 1 July
2011)

Reconciling an overseas estimate (from 1 July 2011)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
