
Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas - Maintenance Action Test (MAT) 277-51070130

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online form and
an example where the payer has entered a reciprocal jurisdiction
(including Australia) and text that must be used in a Q888 letter
advising payee they must tell Child Support and Centrelink if they learn
the whereabouts of the payer.

Intranet link

Level 2 Policy Helpdesk homepage

Examples

Payer has entered a reciprocal jurisdiction (including Australia)

Megan and Robert met and married in Russia. Megan gave birth 2 years
later, but their relationship broke down shortly after the child was
born.

Megan (who is an Australian citizen), decides to return home to
Australia to raise the child. As Russia is a non-reciprocal country,
Megan was not required to pursue maintenance.

Six months later, Robert who has dual citizenship, decides to move to
Australia. Robert advised Megan of the date of entry to the country,
January 15, for custody reasons.

Megan's DMA period commences on January 15.

Letter text

This letter text is used to prepare the Q888 letter sent to the payee to
advise in writing that if the paying parent’s place of residence
changes, they need to contact Centrelink and may be required to take
maintenance action.

Dear [customer/title/surname]

Child Support is not able to register a case for [affected child name/s]
because the payer resides in a non-reciprocal or excluded jurisdiction.
As a result, it has been decided you will be exempt from taking action
to obtain child support.

This may be reviewed in the future. If this happens, [you or your
partner] may be contacted to confirm whether any of these details have
changed. [You or your partner] must also tell us within 14 days if you
commence to receive any amount of child support directly from the other
parent, or if you become aware the other parent has moved to another
location, as they may now be residing in a reciprocal jurisdiction.

This is an information notice given under family assistance law.

This letter text is used to prepare the Q888 letter sent to the payee to
advise in writing that if the whereabouts of the payer become known to
them, they need to re-apply with Child Support and advise Centrelink.

Dear [customer/title/surname]

Child Support is not able to register a case for [affected child name/s]
because the other parent cannot be located overseas. We therefore
consider it too difficult for [you and/your partner] to meet the
Maintenance Action test for [this child/these children]. As a result, it
has been decided you will be exempt from taking action to obtain child
support.

This may be reviewed in the future. If this happens, [you or your
partner] may be contacted to confirm whether any of these details have
changed. [You or your partner] must also tell us within 14 days if you
commence to receive any amount of child support directly from the other
parent, or become aware of the other parent's location (either in
Australia or overseas).

This is an information notice given under family assistance law.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
