
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance 277-51080020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how spousal maintenance, which may be included as
maintenance income under the Maintenance Income Test (MIT), may affect
the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A. Spousal maintenance is paid
to support a separated partner.

Maintenance income (including spousal maintenance)

Spousal (partner) maintenance is a payment or benefit that is received
by the individual for their own maintenance and is provided by the
individual's former partner.

Maintenance income, including spousal maintenance, is not ordinary
income for income support payments (assets transferred as spousal
maintenance are not exempt assets).

Like child support, spousal maintenance can be regular payments,
non-cash benefits and capitalised maintenance it must be specifically
intended as maintenance to be treated as maintenance income.

At the moment there is no way to record spousal maintenance separately
from child support. It must be included as child support income from the
relevant paying parent.

If the customer is collecting child support and spousal maintenance from
the same payer, the total amount received will be used in the
Maintenance Income Test (MIT). If spousal maintenance is received from a
person who is not liable to pay child support, this is not coded on the
customer's record.

Private collection

If the customer collects spousal maintenance privately (directly from
the paying parent), they need to advise Services Australia so that the
amount they collect can be recorded as private maintenance income. If
the customer has a Child Support assessment, the entitlement amount
reported will not include spousal maintenance unless the customer has
registered an Agreement or Court Order with Child Support, electing to
privately collect their entitlement.

The Process page contains information on recording this spousal
maintenance.

Child Support collects

If Child Support collects child support payments and spousal maintenance
for the customer, there is no need to record spousal maintenance as
private maintenance income. Spousal maintenance is included in
disbursement data sent by Child Support and is included in the
Maintenance Income Test.

Lump sum FTB

For a lump sum FTB claim, the customer is asked to report spousal
maintenance received.

Customer not receiving FTB

If a customer is not receiving FTB, information received about spousal
maintenance should only be recorded in a DOC. There is no coding
required as spousal maintenance is not classed as ordinary income.

Related links

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Relevant period for maintenance for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
