
Completing the Details of your child support (FA003) 277-51140010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the information a customer needs to provide when
completing the Details of your child support (FA003) form and explains
why the FA003 needs to be completed.

On this Page:

FA003 form

The FA003 is completed by the customer (or their partner) to provide
details for a child from a previous relationship (opposite-sex or
same-sex) or for a child who is not the customer's or their partner's
biological child. The information is required to ensure customers
receive the correct rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.

Information requested on the FA003 should be accepted verbally from the
customer if possible. Customers are not required to lodge an FA003 for
their FTB claim. An FA003 should only be issued if necessary. For
example, a current customer advising spousal maintenance.

If a customer has been advised of their child support requirements to
meet the Maintenance Action Test, they can be warm transferred to Child
Support or visit the Services Australia website for information. There
is no requirement to issue an FA003.

Request information when FTB claim is made

The information should be requested, if necessary, when a customer
claims FTB or when a current FTB customer advises they have separated
from the parent of the child remaining in their care or advises that
their level of shared care has increased to 35% or more.

If the customer is claiming FTB for their partner's child (and the
customer is not the child's parent), it must be their partner who
completes the form.

If both members of a couple are entitled to child support, they will
both need to complete an FA003 or provide the information verbally.

A separate FA003 is required for each previous relationship.

Services Australia needs the information on the FA003 to:

-   work out what action, if any, the customer needs to take to obtain
    child support
-   assess any maintenance income the customer or their current partner
    is receiving.

Separating Safely

If the customer advises they have separated from the parent of the child
in their care, there are key steps they should consider to keep their
personal information safe. See Separating Safely - Protecting personal
details.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
Details of your child support (FA003).

Related links

Completing child support forms with Centrelink

Completing the Ending a child support assessment (CS1671)

Completing the Child Support Statutory Declarations (CS4649 and CS4648)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result
of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure
(including children of same-sex couples)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
