
Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income (MNOI) screen 277-51130020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to amend the maintenance income details on
the Override Maintenance Income (MNOI) screen for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) customers.

On this page:

Purpose of MNOI screen

The MNOI screen allows maintenance income details to be amended to
ensure a correct FTB reconciliation result for an FTB instalment
customer.

Updating for past periods

Updates to the MNOI screen can be made for a past period during or after
the relevant financial year. If reconciliation has already occurred for
the relevant financial year, amending maintenance income details will
trigger re-reconciliation of FTB.

Details recorded on the MNOI screen override all maintenance income
details for that maintenance entitlement group for the same period
except capitalised maintenance, regardless of the customer's collection
method.

Impact on ongoing rate of FTB

At present, updates to the MNOI screen do not directly affect a
customer's ongoing FTB entitlement. However, MNOI screen details are
used in the mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
process to work out a customer's projected FTB reconciliation result.
This may affect their ongoing FTB payments.

When to amend maintenance income

Maintenance income details may need to be amended if:

-   The system calculated amount of privately collected child support is
    different to the amount actually received by the customer or
    achieves an incorrect FTB reconciliation result. Note: prior to 1
    July 2012, under the Maintenance Action Test (MAT), customers who
    elected to privately collect their child support had to collect
    their full child support entitlement to be paid more than the base
    rate of FTB Part A if the customer received less than their full
    child support entitlement, they could fail the Maintenance Action
    Test.
    From 1 July 2012, customers who collect less than the full child
    support entitlement will no longer be restricted to the base rate of
    FTB Part A due to failing the Maintenance Action Test (MAT). If the
    customer has a current child support assessment, they will pass the
    MAT, and will be deemed as receiving their full child support
    entitlement Child support entitlement and disbursement amounts
    advised by the Child Support program are either incorrect or achieve
    an incorrect FTB reconciliation result. This includes where the
    customer is repaying a child support debt via the Overpayment or
    Consolidated Revenue Methods.
-   An incorrect child or case end was received from Child Support which
    has resulted in an FTB overpayment for a previous financial year

Access to MNOI screen

All Centrelink system users have view access of the MNOI screen, however
updates can only be made by Child Support Unit (CSJ), Applications
Service Desk and National family assistance staff who have been granted
access.

If network staff identify maintenance income details must be amended,
refer the case to the Child Support Unit.

See Office Locator > Notes.

The Resources page contains examples of amending maintenance income
details to ensure a correct Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation
result.

Related links

Ongoing contact and child support assessment for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Action required when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer no longer
entitled to child support

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Changing from Child Support collection to private collection: effect on
Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments
from paying parent (non-agency payments)

Transfer of information between Centrelink and Child Support

Child Support data has not loaded onto Centrelink system or is
incorrectly affecting customer's record

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Centrelink action when a Child Support collection customer is owed or
receives child support arrears

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
