-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the relevant period used to work out the annual
maintenance income amount for a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer.

On this Page:

Applying relevant period for maintenance

A relevant period is the total of all periods within a financial year
that a customer is entitled to receive maintenance income from a paying
parent.

Maintenance income received from the paying parent is applied to the
customer’s FTB Part A to calculate the rate of payment during a relevant
period.

If the customer is not entitled to child support from a payer for the
full financial year, the maintenance income they receive or are entitled
to receive from that payer is converted to an annual figure to apply the
maintenance income test during the relevant period.

Annualised amount = total maintenance income from payer x 365 / number
of days the customer is entitled to child support from the payer in the
financial year (relevant period or periods).

More than 1 relevant period may exist for a customer if they (and/or
their partner) are receiving maintenance income from more than 1 paying
parent in respect of different children or where the last child (of the
same paying parent) leaves the care of the customer and later returns to
their care within the same financial year.

End of relevant period

The following events end the relevant period:

-   case ended by Child Support
-   death of last child in Child Support case (see below)
-   last child turns 18 if the child completed year 12 or equivalent
    prior to turning 18
-   last child is aged 18 or over and reaches the last day of school in
    the year in which they turn 18 (as determined by Child Support)
-   last child in care less than 35 per cent
-   payee request to end the case because payee and payer reconcile
-   payee request to end the case because payee now believes payer is
    not a parent of the child
-   death of payee or payer

An extension to a relevant period occurs if a Child Support disbursement
is received by the payee (and notified to Centrelink) after the relevant
period has ended due to 1 of the events described above. The relevant
period will extend to the pay date notified on the disbursement.

Note: reconciliation of the payee and payer is not a terminating event
to end a child support case. The payee must request the case be ended.

Details of the annual maintenance income assessment can be viewed from
the MIT Explanation Summary (MNEX) screen.

Death of only child support child

If an individual is entitled to receive maintenance for only 1 child and
that child dies, the maintenance liability, and therefore the relevant
period, ends when the child dies.

Any child support received for the deceased child during or after the
bereavement period does not extend the relevant period and the
maintenance received is disregarded for the purpose of the Maintenance
Income Test.

However, if there is an entitlement to maintenance from 1 payer in
respect of more than 1 child and 1 of the children dies, the entitlement
to maintenance continues for the other child/ren in the child support
case and the relevant period continues after the death of the child. Any
maintenance received for the deceased child during the bereavement
period is assessable under the Maintenance Income Test.

The Resources page contains examples of relevant periods.

Related links

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Determining if a payment is child support/maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Maintenance Income Test for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
