-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the process when an election to end a Child
Support assessment is received.
This instruction is for WA Ex-nuptial child support cases only.

Ending assessments

A payee can end an assessment for a child by electing to end the
liability from a specified date which must be a date after the election
is made. If the payee or their current partner is entitled to receive
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A, Centrelink approval is required.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer (SO3)

To process an end to an assessment.

Note: this does not prevent an officer at the SO2 level who has the
support of their team leader from carrying out this type of work as long
as the final decision to either accept, refuse etc. is made by an
officer at the SO3 level or above.

The Resources page contains links to Child Support Services and FTB
information relating to ending a child support assessment.

Related links

WA Ex-nuptial child support cases - Overpayments and payee debt

WA Ex-nuptial child support cases - Terminating Events (Stage 2)
notified before 15 May 2019

Centrelink-Child Support information exchange

Child support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Child support estimates review (post 1 July 2010)

Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Family and domestic violence

Income processing for Child Support customers

Terminating Event (Stage 2)

Updating Child Support customer information

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

Care Cuba Process Help

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help, Discharge of arrears

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help, Reversing a discharge of arrears

Eligibility Cuba Process Help, View, pend and save eligibility results

Employer withholding (linking) Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Overpayments Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
