
Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Child Support collection of
child support payments. It explains who can apply, how to apply, and the
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.

On this Page:

Child Support collection

Customers can ask Child Support to collect child support payments from
the paying parent if they:

-   have a current child support assessment
-   have a registered child support agreement
-   have a court order or court registered agreement for child support
    or spousal maintenance

Customers are to contact Child Support directly, either [] online or by
phone, to apply for a child support assessment. Refer the customer to
Child Support.

Applying for Child Support collection

A customer may apply for a child support assessment or register a court
order or court registered agreement at the same time. Customers need to
have registered a child support agreement before applying for collection
in relation to the agreement.

FTB customers may apply for Child Support collection if they are unable
to collect their full child support entitlement privately. Customers are
not obliged to apply for collection if they are privately collecting
their child support entitlement. For further information, see Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support entitlement
privately.

Child support arrears

Child Support will contact the paying parent to arrange payment of child
support.

If a customer is owed child support arrears, they may ask Child Support
to collect the amount owed at the same time they apply for collection.
Generally, Child Support will only collect arrears in respect of the
three month period immediately before they transfer to Child Support
collect. If Child Support accepts the customer's request to collect
arrears for a private collect period, the customer should contact
Centrelink as the arrears period needs to be manually updated to show it
is a Child Support collect period. This will prevent maintenance income
from being 'double counted' for the arrears period. See Centrelink
action when a Child Support collection customer is owed or receives
child support arrears.

Assessment of maintenance income

For FTB instalment customers that are Child Support collect, annual
maintenance income is estimated during the financial year using one of
two methods, the:

-   Modified Entitlement Method – this is the default method
-   Disbursement Method – customers not receiving their full child
    support entitlement may want this method to be used so their ongoing
    FTB Part A rate is not based on their child support entitlement
    amount

Child Support collect customers may change the assessment method being
used to estimate their maintenance income at any time.

At FTB reconciliation after the end of the financial year, child support
disbursements are used to work out maintenance income for Child Support
collect period. The customer may benefit from the Maintenance Income
Credit (MIC) during FTB reconciliation.

The Resources page contains Child Support contact details.

Related links

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Centrelink action when a Child Support collection customer is owed or
receives child support arrears

Child Support collection information for Centrelink staff

Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
