
Make decision and finalise Child Support objection 277-09170050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for making decision and finalising
objection.

Timeframes for completion

A decision on an objection should be made within 60 days of lodgement.
The timeframe is 120 days when 1 or both customers live in a
reciprocating jurisdiction.

Types of objection decisions

There are 3 possible outcomes to an objection:

-   allow – the objection is allowed in its entirety
-   part allow – one or more aspects of the objection are allowed but
    not all
-   disallow – the objection is disallowed in its entirety

See References for a link to the Child Support Guide 4.1.6: Making a
decision to allow or disallow an objection.

Contrary decisions

A contrary decision is one where the outcome puts the person who lodged
the objection in a less favourable situation than the one that resulted
from the original decision.

This is different from a decision being disallowed, which would leave
the customer in the same position as they were before they objected.

For example, a customer may object to a care percentage decision that
results in them having to pay more child support. An Objections Officer
may decide that the original care percentage decision was wrong. The new
care percentage they find to be correct results in the objecting
customer paying more child support than under the original decision.

Part 6A decisions

Part 6A objections are objections to Change of Assessment decisions.
They are made under Part 6A of the Child Support Assessment Act.

Roles and responsibilities

See Objection to Child Support decisions for information about roles and
responsibilities.

The Resources page of Child Support objections contains examples, forms,
macros and other resources relevant to processing Child Support
objections.

Related links

Child Support objections

Care objections

Review objection

Gather evidence relating to Child Support objection

Child Support objection received out of time - Extension of time and
Special Circumstance application

Summary disallow of Child Support Part 6A objections

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
