
Objections to Child Support decisions 277-09170000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for dealing with a Child Support
objection

Objections

An objection is a formal full merit review for customers who believe
Child Support have made a mistake or applied the law incorrectly. Most
objections must be lodged in writing.

The review is conducted by an Objection Officer who was not involved in
making the original decision. The Objection Officer will reconsider the
facts, law and policy aspects of the original decision and determine the
correct and/or preferable decision. There are 3 possible outcomes of an
objection, disallowed - allowed or allowed in part.

The objection process can take up to 60 days (120 days for customers in
reciprocating jurisdictions) and requires the open exchange of
information between all parties to the objection.

Since 1 July 2010 (3 March 2011 for WA ex-nups) customers may lodge an
objection to any care percentage decision made by Child Support or
Family Assistance. The objection can be lodged over the phone or in
writing. If a customer raises multiple issues in their objection, only
an objection to a care percentage decision is able to be taken over the
phone.

Objections to care percentage decisions where the notification date was
before 1 July 2010 (3 March 2011 for WA ex-nups) must follow the same
process as for other objections.

Effective 16 December 2014, decisions cannot be made on Change of
Assessment (COA) applications where the COA application was made AFTER
the case has ended. Where an objection to a COA decision is received
where the COA application was lodged after the case has ended, escalate
the case to the Child Support Program Advice Team to seek advice on any
action required on the original COA decision.

Note: if the objection relates to an overseas liability issued by an
overseas authority, the objection can be transmitted to the relevant
overseas authority.

Roles and responsibilities

General Objections Service Officer (SO4)

-   to consider and either grant or refuse applications for extensions
    of time to object to decisions
-   to consider and allow (in whole or part) or disallow an objection to
    a decision

General Objections Service Officer (SO5)

-   to consider - and either grant or refuse - applications for
    extensions of time to object to decisions
-   to consider and allow (in whole or part) or disallow an objection to
    a decision
-   allow or disallow an objection in relation to a care percentage
    determined pursuant to s52 of the Child Support (Assessment) Act

Part 6A Objections Service Officer (SO6)

-   as per Service Officers (SO4) and (SO5) above
-   to consider and disallow an objection to a COA decision
-   to consider and allow (in whole or part) an objection to a COA
    decision
-   to make a new Part 6A decision when allowing (in whole or part) an
    objection to a COA decision (where all parties were involved prior
    to the original decision being made)

Contents

Taking care objections by phone

Review objection

Contact customer regarding Child Support objection

Gather evidence relating to Child Support objection

Make decision and finalise Child Support objection

Child Support objection received out of time - Extension of time and
Special Circumstance application

Summary disallow of Child Support Part 6A objections

Related links

Centrelink - Child Support information exchange

Change in child support care levels (post 1 July 2010)

Change of Assessment Cuba Process Help

Child Support's information gathering powers

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

Letters for Child Support customers

Solutions Gateway Team (SGT)

Suspending disbursements of Child Support

Objections Cuba Process Help

Open exchange of information for Child Support customers

Sensitive issue management Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
