[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for separated parents relating to
child support. Services Australia delivers Child Support services and
programs to help parents receive extra financial assistance for children
from previous relationships.

Duty of parents to maintain their children

Families and individuals who have the financial capacity to support
themselves are generally expected to do so. Consistent with this
principle is the notion that government support, including the payment
of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is intended for those individuals and
families who most need assistance. Moreover, there is an expectation
that separated parents should take primary responsibility for the cost
of looking after their children to ensure the best outcome for their
family as soon as possible. This primary duty to maintain their children
has priority over all commitments apart from the necessary commitments
for self-support.

These principles apply irrespective of whether an individual is entitled
to receive or claim FTB. Becoming entitled to FTB should not be the
primary motivator for seeking child support.

Applying for child support through Centrelink

The Maintenance Action Test (MAT) ensures that reasonable action is
taken to obtain child support for a child from a previous relationship,
particularly where the customer is claiming more than the base rate of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for the child. FTB Part A for a child is
limited to the base rate if a customer, or their current partner, is
required to take action to obtain child support but fails to do so.

Service Officers first check that an application for child support
assessment is needed. In some cases, it is not applicable for a customer
to take action to obtain child support.

There are some situations when a customer is not required to take
reasonable action to obtain child support and satisfy the MAT. In these
cases, the customer may apply for a maintenance action test exemption.

Centrelink will provide information about child support and how a
customer should apply. Service Officers will advise customers that
receiving child support may affect their entitlement to family
assistance.

Service Officers will inform customers of their obligations for child
support when a change of circumstance occurs, including when a customer:

first claims FTB

claims FTB for an additional child (birth of child or change of care)

separates from the parent of a child in their care

shares the care of a child and their percentage of actual care increases
to 35% or more

first becomes entitled to apply for child support for other reasons. For
example, date or arrival:

-   in Australia for separated parent and their child irrespective of
    whether they are residentially qualified or not (date of event is
    the date of arrival)
-   in a reciprocal country, including Australia, where the payer has
    been in a non-reciprocal country (date of event is the date supplied
    by the customer or the date Services Australia becomes aware of the
    payer's change of residency, whichever is the earlier)

Initial application for child support

A customer’s request to apply for a child support assessment or to
register an overseas maintenance liability is the first interaction
newly separated parents or non-parent carers have with Child Support.
Child Support’s objective is to encourage parental responsibility and
self-reliance to establish appropriate and sustainable arrangements for
the financial support of their children.

Child Support will assess a newly separated parent's or non-parent
carer's entitlement to receive child support. Service Officers should
consider customer's individual circumstances to provide information
about available products, services and referrals that may assist parents
to manage their child support responsibilities.

Applications where 1 of the customers resides overseas are managed by
International New Customers, for more information see the Resources page
of Applications for a child support assessment, Overseas customers
table.

Child Support will assist customers claiming child support by:

-   conducting pre assessment interviews
-   providing information, products and referrals
-   making decisions on eligibility, income and care
-   establishing payment methods
-   processing a customer's application for child support assessment
-   resolving/actioning customer enquiries to achieve sustainable
    outcome

All customers must be encouraged to take action to obtain child support.

Non-parent carers

If a customer provides care for a child for whom they are not the
parent, they may be able to apply for child support from both of the
child's parents. Examples of non-parent carers include legal guardians,
grandparents or other family members.

There is no Maintenance Action Test (MAT) requirement for these
customers. If they elect not to apply for child support they will not
fail the MAT however they still may wish to apply for an assessment. If
an assessment is commenced for a non-parent carer the Maintenance Income
Test will apply as normal.

Customers can apply for a non-parent carer child support assessment if
they:

-   care for a child 128 nights or more a year (35% or more care), and
-   are not considered to be a member of a couple with 1 of the child's
    parents

For more information, see Application for assessment - non-parent carer.

Related links

Applications for a child support assessment

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Helping customers apply for child support

Identifying a package of services for customers recently separated or
divorced

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Application for assessment - non-parent carer

Application for assessment - online applications

Application or assessment - phone

The Child Support Scheme information for Centrelink

Who can apply for child support?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
