
Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend or end a child support assessment 277-51130050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Delegation to approve/reject request is Child Support Unit staff at APS3
level or higher.

Intranet links

Level 2 Policy Helpdesk

Contact details

Child Support

Social workers - referrals

Services Australia website

Online estimators

Q999 letter text for WA ex-nuptial cases before 15 May 2019

'I am writing to advise you of the outcome of your request to end your
child support assessment.

Approval to end a child support assessment can only be made in certain
circumstances.

In your case, you stated that

After carefully looking at the matters in your case as well as the
relevant parts of Family Assistance Law and Child Support Legislation, I
have decided to (approve/reject) your election to end your child support
assessment.'

(For reject cases)

'I have made this decision because

If you do not agree with this decision, please contact (DELEGATE TITLE
AND SURNAME) on (DELEGATE'S PHONE NUMBER)

If you still don't agree, you can ask for your case to be referred to an
Authorised Review Officer (senior independent officer), who will take a
fresh look at your case. The Authorised Review Officer can also tell you
about other rights of appeal that may be open to you.

Remember that you generally only have 52 weeks from the date you were
advised of the decision to ask us to review your case. Otherwise, you
can only have the decision changed from the date you ask.'

Q999 letter text for becoming partnered

'You have advised Services Australia that you have recently become
partnered.

Please contact us by (REVIEW DATE) on 136 150 to provide your partner's
details to ensure you are receiving the correct rate of payment. Please
ensure you have the following information about your partner when you
contact:

-   name and date of birth
-   Tax File Number
-   income estimate
-   date became partnered

If you do not provide this information by the requested due date, your
payment will be stopped/cancelled.

This is a request made under Section 158 of the A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999.'

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
