
Level 1 complaints - Child Support 277-09020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for managing a Level 1 complaint.

Level 1 complaints

A Level 1 complaint is the response to customers managed at first point
of contact. This includes complaints received via:

-   the Services Australia Feedback and Complaints line
-   a general business queue
-   an outbound call
-   face to face contact, or
-   from a customer writing a letter or communicating online

The Service Officer who receives the complaint takes ownership of the
complaint and attempts to resolve. This may require support from a
Service Support Officer or Team Leader. A Level 1 complaint is recorded
when a customer advises a Service Officer that they are not satisfied
with a Child Support process, decision or behaviour of an individual
staff member. Level 1 complaints may indicate where a service, policy or
systemic issues can be modified to enable future business improvements.

The way the agency answer calls on the Feedback and Complaints line
should be consistent across each service brand with an obvious reference
to the service area each customer has called. The greeting should be
‘Welcome to the Child Support Feedback and Complaints line, this is…”

The Complaints Escalation Reasons provides support and guidance for
escalating a customer complaint as a Level 2 complaint for
investigation.

When allocated a Level 1 complaint the Service Officer must:

-   review the case and consider referrals and options available to
    resolve the issues
-   seek Service Support Officer (SSO) advice if required
-   contact the customer and provide an introduction
-   confirm the customer’s issues, be prepared to discuss them and
    provide the relevant referrals and options

Note: ensure customer contact accords with their preferences.
See Contact with Child Support customers.

A Level 1 complaint must be finalised within 10 working days of receipt.

Difference between a general enquiry and a complaint

Consider the following criteria to assess if a customer is making a
general enquiry or a complaint:

-   the manner in which the customer communicates or expresses the
    issues
-   the urgency of the issues raised
-   the potential or actual impact of the identified issues on the
    customer
-   prior or ongoing attempts at resolution through regular business
    processes

General enquiries are contacts from customers for information or advice
and where the customer is not intending to make a complaint, compliment
or suggestion. Some examples of general enquiries may include when a
customer:

-   is not happy with a decision and wants to know their review rights
-   wants to know about a payment date or amount
-   requires assistance with completing a transaction online
-   seeks advice about collection options or the progress of an
    objection or Change of Assessment decision

Difference between an objection and a complaint

A complaint is not a review of the technical correctness of a decision.
Customers must pursue their review rights through the relevant channels
such as objection or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Contents

Written complaint received - Child Support

Related links

Managing customer complaints and feedback

Recording Child Support complaints and compliments in Cuba

Level 1 - Managing customer complaints and feedback

Level 2 complaints

Level 2 complaints - Child Support

Solutions Gateway Team

Parent Support Team

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
