
Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) 277-51190010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process whereby Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers who receive child support (collect) payments on an irregular
basis over more than one financial year receive the same amount of FTB
over time as customers who receive child support payments regularly.

On this Page:

Maintenance Income Credit

The MIC allows families with a child support entitlement registered for
collection by Child Support to access their unused Maintenance Income
Free Area (MIFA) from previous financial years to offset the effect of
child support arrears on FTB. Before the introduction of the MIC, any
unused MIFA was not carried forward from one year to the next.

The MIC first became available to customers during FTB reconciliation or
lump sum claim payment for the 2006-07 financial year. The MIC balance
is carried over from the previous financial year, starting from 2000-01.
From 1 July 2012 MIC calculations will extend to include children aged
16-19 years as the Maintenance Income Test (MIT) can also cover children
aged 16-19 years.

If the customer has received:

-   more than their child support entitlement, they can access their MIC
    balance to offset the effect of the child support arrears on FTB,
    and their MIC balance will be depleted
-   less than their child support entitlement, and the amount they
    received was less than their MIFA, their MIC balance will accrue for
    the following year. The MIC will accrue in relation to a child
    support child only.

The MIC has no effect during the financial year. It is only applied at
FTB reconciliation or as part of the Centrelink lump sum claim process.

Previous year FTB not reconciled

FTB reconciliation may occur where reconciliation for an earlier year
has not yet occurred but which could result in a MIC accrual or
depletion for that year, and so affect the current reconciliation
result. This can happen if tax returns are not lodged in sequence.

If the earlier financial year is 2005-06 or later, the time limit for
the 'potential MIC accrual' to occur is the time limit that applies for
lodging tax returns to satisfy the FTB reconciliation conditions.

Separation during the financial year

Parents who separate during the financial year each retain their MIC
balance from the previous financial year for their child support case.
The customer's MIC balance cannot be used to offset child support
received by their ex-partner during the period they were a couple. The
ex-partner's MIC balance may be depleted due to child support arrears
they received in that period.

The Resources page contains examples of MIC calculations and one example
of MIC calculations where reconciliation has not yet occurred for a
previous financial year.

Related links

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating and recording the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation

Maintenance Income Test for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Relevant period for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
