
External Complaints - Child Support investigations 277-17091400

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the External Complaints - Child Support
(ExCCS) team manages externally escalated complaints to Child Support.

On this Page:

Function of the ExCCS team

The ExCCS team is responsible for managing all externally escalated
complaints relating to Child Support service delivery. This includes
complaints via:

-   The Minister, CEO and Senior Executive Staff of Child Support Smart
    Centres
-   The Prime Minister and Members of Parliament, state and federal
-   The Commonwealth Ombudsman

The ExCCS team is also responsible for the investigation of media briefs
and executive minutes involving highly escalated and sensitive issues
and the identification and resolution of systemic issues that affect
quality outcomes for customers.

Apolitical interaction

The Australian Public Service (APS) is apolitical, performing its
function in an impartial and professional manner. Child Support staff
must remember that when dealing with Parliamentarians, Senators, the
Ombudsman or their staff they are an apolitical public servant
representing the agency. Any conflict of interest, real or apparent,
should be avoided. Staff must be aware of the APS Code of Conduct at all
times.

Note: any concerns about potential conflict of interest should be
discussed with the ExCCS Service Support Manager.

The Resources page contains links to the APS Code of Conduct and
conflict of interest information for staff.

Recording the correspondence

Correspondence is received by the ExCCS team in various ways. The ExCCS
Program Support Officer (PSO) scrutinises, records and allocates the
communication as per the ExCCS allocation principles.

All correspondence received by the Minister’s office is emailed to:

-   Ministerial Correspondence Team (MCT), or
-   APH mailbox
-   The MCT receives correspondence from the
-   Prime Minister’s office
-   CEO
-   Parliamentarians who write directly to the Minister, or
-   other agencies/departments, such as the Department of Social
    Services

The ExCCS PSO registers the correspondence onto the Parliamentary
Document Management System (PDMS). This process generates a
Parliamentary Document Record (PDR). PDMS is used to create, store and
manage the workflow of parliamentary documents between the agency and
the Minister’s office.

Customers sometimes email their complaint directly to Services Australia
SES Officer. These complaints are managed as Executive correspondence
and responses signed by the Multicultural and Tailored Services Branch
National Manager. All Executive correspondence is also recorded on PDMS.

Enquiries from the Commonwealth Ombudsman

Ombudsman Relationship Management Services (ORMS) is responsible for
coordinating timely responses to the Ombudsman’s office. All enquiries
from the Ombudsman containing Child Support-related issues are received
by ORMS and forwarded to either:

-   ExCCS team - only Child Support related issues, ORMS sends section 8
    enquiries (initial and further requests for information) section 7A
    (preliminary investigation) and section 12(4) Finalisation Notice
    with comments to the APH mailbox for allocation
-   External Complaints Resolution (ECR) team - both Centrelink and
    Child Support related issues, ORMS sends the Child Support component
    to the ECR mailbox and they forward to the APH mailbox for
    allocation

The ExCCS team also manages Ombudsman complaint transfers (OCT). OCTs
are sent from the Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman when the
Ombudsman's Investigation Officer (IO) identifies they will not proceed
with an investigation but would like the agency to assist the customer.
OCTs are received and forwarded to the ExCCS APH mailbox for allocation.

Requests from Customer Compensation Team

The Customer Compensation Team sends email requests to ExCCS mailbox
when ExCCS are required to review a Compensation Decision Statement.
Cases are referred when 1 or more of the following criteria are met:

-   Escalated complaints where the customer has recent/current
    escalations to the Minister and/or Ombudsman
-   Cases affected by a systemic issue, including systemic policy or ICT
    issues
-   Cases that need an administrative fix. For example, it is identified
    an error correction submission is required or customer incomes
    require updating
-   Cases where feedback is to be provided to staff and/or business area

The email will specify why the referral has made and the details of the
review required, for example, full review, review of a particular issue,
referral for an administrative remedy, feedback to be prepared. The
email will include a copy of the customer’s compensation claim and the
draft Compensation Decision Statement.

ExCCS PSO will allocate the compensation review to an ExCCS Service
Officer as per the allocation principles including outlining the due
date in the allocation email.

ExCCS Service Officer - review the Compensation Decision Statement

When reviewing the Compensation Decision Statement, the ExCCS Service
Officer must focus on:

-   technical aspects of the case and not the writing style, and
-   details relevant to the claimed defective administration and
    associated loss and not all interactions with the customer

Forward the original allocation email to the ExCCS Service Support
Manager, including copies of the reviewed Compensation Decision
Statement, customer’s compensation claim and any feedback prepared. In
the covering email, outline any additional information/findings relevant
to the review.

ExCCS SSM - Approve compensation review

Consider the compensation review and ensure all details outlined in the
request by the Customer Compensation Team have been addressed.

Forward the approved compensation review by email to the Customer
Compensation Team and the Compensation Service Officer who prepared the
decision. Copy in the ExCCS Service Officer and the ExCCS mailbox.

Requests from Waiver Team

The Child Support Programme Advice team sends email requests to the
ExCCS mailbox when ExCCS are required to prepare a Waiver Brief for a
customer. The email will include a copy of the Waiver Application and
outline the actions required by the ExCCS Service Officer, for example,
specific investigations required, identify any systemic issues, outline
any avenues for redress.

ExCCS PSO will allocate the Waiver Brief to a ExCCS Service Officer as
per the allocation principles. The email will outline the due date.

ExCCS Service Officer - Complete Waiver Investigation Brief Macro

See the table titled Customer Review - Investigate case in Waivers for
Child Support customers.

Media alerts and briefs

These are received via the Escalated Media Complaints mailbox or APH
mailbox. The ExCCS Program Support Officer (PSO) and other ExCCS staff
members periodically check these mailboxes throughout the day. Any Child
Support matters are referred to the ExCCS Service Support Manager (SSM)
in WA/VIC team, or in the absence of this officer to an ExCCS SSM in
another team.

The ExCCS SSM will determine how to manage the correspondence. They will
communicate with the ExCCS PSO about further action required.

Scrutinising the correspondence

ExCCS correspondence is scrutinised by the ExCCS Program Support Officer
before allocation to the appropriate ExCCS Service Officer for the
following reasons:

-   To ensure the correspondence is best responded to by ExCCS
-   To identify if the complainant is a customer and obtain details from
    CUBA for allocation, for example their child support reference
    number, case manager details and complaint history
-   To identify and escalate threats of self-harm and harm to others
-   To identify and refer media threats for investigation

Escalations within ExCCS management

Threats of harm and/or threats to escalate to the media

The ExCCS Program Support Officer supported by the ExCCS Program Manager
if required, identifies any threats contained in the complaint
correspondence. Any threats received during subsequent conversations
between complainant and the ExCCS Service Officer are managed by the
ExCCS Service Officer allocated to manage the complaint.

Privacy incidents an allegations of staff fraud

If any part of the complaint relates to an alleged privacy incident and
the incident has not been reported the ExCCS Service Officer will notify
the Privacy team. The Privacy team will liaise with the business area
where the privacy incident originated to investigate and manage the
incident. However, if the originating area cannot be identified the
ExCCS Service Officer will manage the privacy incident to conclusion

Failure to report a privacy incident in a timely manner can result in
serious consequences. Timely action can reduce the risk of physical harm
to customers or other negative consequences.

Allegations of staff fraud are discussed between the ExCCS Service
Officer and their Service Support Manager to determine how they will be
managed.

Allocation of the correspondence

Allocation is completed twice daily, in the morning and the afternoon.
This is to allow the ExCCS Program Support Officer to ascertain how much
work has been received before determining the allocation numbers. Once
the new daily workload has been calculated, allocating nationally in
accordance with individual Service Officer's and ExCCS team’s full time
FTE is more evenly distributed.

Delegations and authorisations

Delegations and authorisations

For more information about authorisations and delegations see Child
Support Services, Delegations and Authorisations.

The Resources page contains links to Services Australia Intranet, the
Document upload request macro, allocation email template for Ombudsman
complaints, a table outlining work allocation considering staff leave
and Social Work Services contact details.

Contents

Ministerial complaints regarding Child Support customers

Ombudsman complaints regarding Child Support customers

Parliamentarian complaints regarding Child Support customers

Executive complaints regarding Child Support customers

Related links

Social Work Services

Referring customers to and handling customer enquiries and
correspondence for Personalised Services

Level 2 complaints - Child Support

Waivers for Child Support customers

Intray Management Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
