
Tax Refund Intercept Process (TRIP) exceptions 277-04340000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when managing a TRIP
exception.

Overview

A customer may be entitled to a tax refund including:

-   Individual Tax Returns
-   First Home Super Saver Scheme payments
-   HELP
-   Business Activity Statement Returns
-   Miscellaneous

Tax refunds can only be applied against debts to the Commonwealth. Cuba
automatically intercepts most customers' tax refunds where there are:

-   child support arrears
-   consolidated revenue debt, or
-   overpayments

Note: Child Support legislation allows tax refunds to be applied to
estimate penalties, but Cuba does not have this functionality.

This is called the Tax Refund Intercept Process (TRIP). In some cases a
TRIP can be overridden. This is known as a TRIP exception.

ATO advises refund incorrectly intercepted

Return the TRIP to the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if it was
intercepted in error due to:

-   a mistake, or
-   fraudulent activity by any person

If the TRIP has not been disbursed, the customer who owed the debt will
still owe the outstanding amount. That is, the debt will be returned to
their account.

If the TRIP has been disbursed, create a consolidated revenue debt for
the customer who received the funds in error.

TRIP exceptions

This document advises how to manage a TRIP exception. For more
information, see Automatic Tax Refund Intercept Process.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer (SO2)

To intercept a customer's tax refund.

Service Officer (SO3)

To not intercept a customer's tax refund when there is no child support
debt.

Service Officer (SO4)

To not apply a customer's tax refund against a debt.

Service Officer (SO6)

To decide to accept a hardship application in part or in full under
hardship grounds.

Staff who require authorisation must use the TRIP - Submission and
decision to intercept or release macro to refer to a Service Officer at
the appropriate delegation level and route a Pending Approval intray.

The Resources page contains contact details, information about the
Automatic TRIP and a link for the Submission to release TRIP macro.

Related links

Agreements between Child Support customers

Applications for a child support assessment

Bankruptcy for Child Support Customers

Change In Child Support care levels (post 1 July 2010)

Child support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Child support estimates review (post 1 July 2010)

Contact with Child Support customers

Court varied assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders

Customer location (Tracing)

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Debt offset

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information

Ending a Child Support assessment

Financial hardship

Income processing for Child Support customers

Minimum annual rate to nil - Reducing child support assessments

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Stage 1 - registrations

Stage 1 - variations

Stay orders

Terminating events (Stage 2)

Updating Child Support customer and assessment information

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Discharge arrears Cuba Process Help

Intray management Cuba Process Help

Applying a special recovery condition in Pluto and Cuba

Tax Refund Intercept Process (TRIP) Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
