
Centrelink action when a Child Support collection customer is owed or receives child support arrears 277-51040030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for when a customer who receives
child support arrears via Child Support or is advised that their
application to collect arrears for a private collect period has been
accepted, may contact Centrelink about the effect of the arrears on
their Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate.

On this Page:

Assessing child support arrears

For mutual customers, Child Support electronically transfers child
support entitlement and disbursement details to Centrelink via the data
exchange. Disbursement details include regular child support payments as
well as arrears payments collected by Child Support.

For FTB instalment customers, child support arrears are assessed in the
financial year in which the customer receives them. For customers
claiming FTB as a lump sum after the end of the financial year, all
child support received in the relevant financial year will be assessed
when working out their FTB Part A rate.

FTB instalment customers

The customer's ongoing fortnightly FTB Part A rate may be affected by
child support received during a financial year. All payments collected
by Child Support will be reported to Centrelink electronically. This
includes regular disbursements, non-agency payments that have been
reported by either the customer or the person liable to pay child
support, and arrears that are owed from previous Child Support
collection periods:

-   If the customer has opted for the Disbursement Method to be used,
    any child support arrears will be included in the customer's annual
    maintenance income in the year to date total. Each time a payment is
    disbursed to a customer, annual maintenance income for the financial
    year is recalculated and may change the customer's ongoing FTB Part
    A rate. It is possible that the customer will have been overpaid FTB
    if a lower estimate of annual maintenance income has been used to
    date.
-   Under the Modified Entitlement Method the system automatically
    applies the assessment method (Entitlement or Disbursement) that
    results in the higher estimate of annual maintenance income. This
    helps to offset any overpayment of FTB that has already occurred and
    reduces the risk of an overpayment during the reconciliation process
    after the end of the financial year.

At FTB reconciliation, maintenance income for a Child Support collect
period is based on the actual child support amounts received, including
any arrears. Customers may benefit from the Maintenance Income Credit
(MIC) which is calculated during FTB reconciliation.

Customers may incur an overpayment of FTB Part A if the maintenance
income applied throughout the year is lower than the actual maintenance
amount received when calculated at reconciliation after any MIC
depletion is applied. This may occur, for example, if arrears are paid
for a period in the relevant financial year or a retrospective
assessment is applied.

Customer changes from private collect to Child Support collection

If a customer transfers from private collect to Child Support collect
and is owed child support payments, they may ask Child Support to
collect an amount owed from the private collect period. Generally, Child
Support will only collect arrears in respect of the three month period
immediately before the customer transfers to Child Support collect. Due
to the customer already being deemed to have received their full child
support assessed amount, if Child Support then collects the arrears for
the private collect period, the maintenance income details should be
adjusted for that period to reflect the amount the customer actually
received, as any arrears will be included in disbursement information
transferred by Child Support. This ensures that maintenance income is
assessed correctly at FTB reconciliation.

Child support arrears received for a child who is no longer an FTB child
or who only attracts no more the base rate of FTB Part A are not
assessed as maintenance income.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
Child Support information.

Related links

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

Child Support collection customer wants to change the assessment method:
effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
