-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Section 107 (s107) and Section
143 (s143) orders.

On this Page:

Legislative amendments

From 1 July 2018 amendments have been made to allow more types of
recovery orders to be registered:

-   As well as recovery orders made if an s107 order has been made,
    Child Support may register for collection recovery orders made if
    s106A order has been overturned. (A 106A order is a declaration that
    a person should be assessed in respect of the costs of a child)
-   Recovery orders made with respect to amounts under a registered
    maintenance liability that were Child Support collect and were
    overpaid because of a variation that resulted in the case being
    cancelled or a child being removed from the case from the start date
    of the liability

For recovery orders made other than in relation to an s107 order, the
order must have been made under the amended s143 before it could be
registered.

About s107 orders

Section 107 of the Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989 provides that a
person can apply to a court for a declaration that the person should not
be assessed in respect of the costs of the child because the person is
not a parent of the child. The reason for a person to make a s107
application is where the person disputes paternity of the child
concerned.

An application for a declaration under s107 should not be made if a
court has already declared under section 106A that the payer should be
assessed in respect of the costs of the child. The payer has the option
to lodge an appeal against the section 106A declaration. However, if the
court does make a declaration under s107 in these circumstances Child
Support will give effect to the order.

From 1 July 2018 if a payer is successful in having a section 106A
declaration overturned on appeal, and where a court has made an order
under Child Support (Assessment) Act section 143 requiring the former
payee to repay an amount to the former payer, the Registrar can register
the order and recover these amounts.

Requirement to serve

A person applying for a s107 declaration is obliged to serve a copy of
their application upon Child Support, as well as serving a copy upon the
respondent i.e. the payee. If a person applies for a declaration Child
Support must suspend payments to the payee for that child until the
court makes a decision. See the Child Support Guide 4.3.2: Applications
and orders about decisions under the Assessment Act.

About s143 orders

From 1 January 2007 where a court has made a declaration under s107 and
child support has been paid to the payee for that child, the court must
immediately consider making a s143 order (a Parentage Overpayment
Order). A s143 order allows the person to recover some or all of the
child support paid to the payee. See the Child Support Guide 3.1.2:
Parentage overpayment orders.

Where a s143 order is made, it will be registrable as a maintenance
liability and can be collected by Child Support. These monies can be
collected in the same way as most child support liabilities including
tax refund intercepts.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer 2 (SO2)

-   responsible for recording and actioning the s107 application
-   receipt and record a s107 or s143 application

Service Officer 3 (SO3) and above

-   register or refuse a s143 - Overpayment Order
-   action the outcome of the application, because of the complexity, it
    should be usual practice that s143 applications and decisions are
    actioned by a SO4 or above

Service Officer 5 (SO5)

-   action the outcome of a s107 application

Service Support Officer (SSO)

-   providing advice on complex issues or when Service Officer(s)
    require assistance ensuring that applications and decisions of the
    court are adhered to and actioned correctly

Contents

Section 107 order received by Child Support

Section 143 order received by Child Support

Related links

Debt offset

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Payment options for Child Support

Penalties for Child Support debts

Stay orders

Suspending disbursements of Child Support

Technical Support in Child Support

Accounting Cuba Process Help

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Assessments Cuba Process Help

Debt offset Cuba Process Help

Disbursement Cuba Process Help

Elections for Employer Withholding (EW) not to apply Cuba Process Help

Eligibility Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Non-agency payment (NAP) Cuba Process Help

Overpayments Cuba Process Help

Refunds Cuba Process Help

Relationship Cuba Process Help

Communication Window Help

Eligibility Window Help

Bank details Window Help

Periodic Amounts Window Help

View Correspondence Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
