
Fixed annual rate not to apply applications 277-03090000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the decision making process for applications for
the fixed annual rate (FAR) not to apply.

Fixed annual rate (FAR)

From 1 July 2008, a FAR applies to parents in certain circumstances will
be assessed to pay a FAR.

The FAR is payable by a parent for a child if:

-   the parent did not receive an income support payment in the last
    relevant year of income, and
-   that parent's adjusted taxable income for the last relevant year of
    income is less than the Parenting Payment - single maximum basic
    amount as at 1 January of that year, or the Registrar has accepted
    an estimate of the parent's current income and the estimated income
    is less than Parenting Payment - single maximum basic amount as at 1
    January of that year, and
-   that parent has less than shared care of the child

Note: if a parent's adjusted taxable income has been set at a particular
amount through an income amount order as part of a change of assessment
process (Child Support Assessment Act S98S(1)(g)), the fixed annual rate
will not apply. This is because their adjusted taxable income has not
been calculated under Child Support Assessment Act S43 (Child Support
Assessment Act S65A(1)(b)(i)) See References page for links.

Parents assessed to pay the FAR can apply to have the FAR not apply to
their assessment. If they are successful, their assessment will be
either the Minimum Annual Rate (MAR) or nil, depending on the parent's
percentage of care of the children.

If a parent is assessed but not required to pay the FAR, as the other
parent is assessed to pay a higher rate, they can still apply for the
FAR not to apply to them.

For example, Marian and Donald are the parents of Mary and David. Marian
cares for Mary full time and Donald cares for David full time. Marian is
assessed to pay the FAR for David and Donald has been assessed to pay
$3,000 for Mary, so Donald has the overall liability. Marian can still
apply to have the FAR not apply in respect of David.

Note: if a parent applies to reduce their assessment from the MAR to
nil, see Minimum annual rate to nil - Reducing child support
assessments.

Authorisation

The authorisation for a decision to accept, refuse or amend an
application for a 'fixed annual rate not to apply' is at the SO3 level.

The Resources page contains links to macros, external websites, letters
and case studies of common fixed annual rate (FAR) not to apply
scenarios.

Related links

Change in child support care levels (post 1 July 2010)

Child Support's information gathering powers

Contact with Child Support customers

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information in Cuba

External Searches Guide

Income processing for Child Support customers

Minimum annual rate to nil - Reducing child support assessments

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Fixed annual rate (FAR) not to apply Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
