
Identifying a package of services for customers recently separated or divorced 277-50010000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information for staff helping customers who have
recently separated or divorced. Customers should be offered income
support, family assistance, help to apply for child support, and
referral/s to support services.

Change in circumstances due to separation or divorce

Separating or divorcing is a major change in a customer's life. For some
customers, the main focus will be to care for their children. For
others, especially customers without children, looking for work or
planning to study or undertake training may be a priority.

Customers may describe other issues like previously being financially
dependent on their partner, especially customers who separate later in
life. Some customers may be dealing with family and domestic violence or
other crisis and need special assistance.

Customers caring for dependent children

For these customers:

-   check entitlement to family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
    scheme payments
-   check if they may be entitled to an income support payment such as
    Parenting Payment (PP) or JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Help customers to obtain child support: to receive more than base
    rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for a child. Customers entitled
    to child support must take reasonable action to obtain child support
    or be granted an exemption from seeking child support
-   check shared care arrangements for children as this may affect
    entitlement to family assistance, income support, and child support

Customers with no dependents

A common situation customers may describe is no longer having financial
support due to separation or divorce and they now need to support
themselves. This means customers could be seeking help to look for work.
Determine the appropriate payment to assist for example, JSP, Youth
Allowance (YA) or Austudy if a student.

Family and domestic violence

Services Australia is committed to providing a high quality service to
customers experiencing family and domestic violence. When a customer is
identified as having family and domestic violence concerns, see the
Family and Domestic Violence procedure for appropriate payments and
services. If appropriate, assistance can be provided by an agency social
worker.

Counselling

Personal or family counselling can be provided by a Services Australia
social worker. Social workers may also refer customers to appropriate
community support services.

Financial matters

Customers needing help with financial matters, including how to make
better use of their resources, may be referred to the Financial
Information Service (FIS) or externally to a financial counsellor.

Legal matters

Customers seeking assistance with legal matters can be given details of
a Legal Aid Commissions. For help with Family Law issues, customers can
contact the Family Relationship Advice Line.

Emergency relief

See Referral to external support services for customers needing
emergency relief.

Security of information

Customers may have concerns with the security of their information given
to Services Australia. Advise customers they can use a password to
protect their information.

The Resources page contains information on working to help people
experiencing family and domestic violence. It also contains links to the
Services Australia website for access to the Payment and Service Finder
and information for customers.

Related links

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Contact in relation to an intended claim

Member of a Couple and Separated under one roof assessments

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (jobseeker)

Family and Domestic Violence

Family Relationship Centres and the Family Relationship Advice Line

Financial Information Service

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS)

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact by customers claiming Age Pension

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Austudy

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

Referral to external support services

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Social Work Services

Standards for helping customers complete claims and forms

Who can apply for child support?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
