
Debt Enforcement referrals 277-04220000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines the debt enforcement process commencing from the
initial management of a case once referred to Debt Enforcement, to the
ultimate recovery of debts following the finalisation of court
proceedings.

Referral for Debt Enforcement

Once Services Australia registers a registrable maintenance liability
for collection, the amounts payable are debts due to the Commonwealth by
the payer. Recoverable overpayments are also debts due to the
Commonwealth. The debt is enforceable by Services Australia and may be
recovered through court proceedings pursuant to section 113(1) of the
Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988.

Cases are referred to Debt Enforcement for recovery of the amounts
through the initiation of legal proceedings if a customer has:

-   an outstanding child support or overpayment debt, and
-   a demonstrated financial capacity exists to repay those outstanding
    amounts

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer

Responsible for referring cases to Debt Enforcement.

Debt Enforcement Gateway Officers

Conducts an initial review of the referral, reviews cases prior to any
letter of demand and reviews transfers to the Debt Enforcement Team.

Debt Enforcement SO3/SO4

Located in the Debt Enforcement Team, responsible for making last chance
phone calls, holistic case management and liaising with the agency’s
Legal Service Provider recommending that a Letter of Demand to be sent.

Debt Enforcement SO5

Responsible for preparing briefing material, working with Litigation and
Information Release Branch (LIR) to decide on action to be taken,
liaising with the appointed Legal Service Provider through the provision
of verbal and written instructions and representing the agency in court.

Debt Enforcement Team Leader

Responsible for the general operations of the Debt Enforcement Team
including, quality assurance of briefs, providing direct support to Debt
Enforcement Officers and managing the stakeholder relationships with
Legal Service Providers.

Debt Enforcement Program Support Manager

Responsible for operational support to the Debt Enforcement Teams,
conducting quality assurance for referrals out of Debt Enforcement and
managing the stakeholder relationships with Legal Service Providers.

Legal Service Provider

A reference to a Law Firm engaged by the agency to perform legal
services on its behalf. LIR is responsible for approving profiles,
providing direction/instructions on legal matters, managing the
activities of the Legal Service Providers, approving referrals to the
sheriff or official receiver and authorising legal expenditure to
progress the matter through court.

Contents

Guidelines prior to referring Child Support customers for debt
enforcement

Taking a Child Support customer to court

Monitoring orders and case management, including enforcing orders (CS)

Managing Child Support customer debt enforcement referrals

Related links

Bankruptcy

Change of assessment in special circumstances

Customer location (Tracing)

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support customers

Debt repayment

Departure Prohibition Orders (DPO) for Child support customers

Child Support estimates (post 1 July 2010)

Child Support estimates - Reconcile (from 1 July 2011)

Non-pursuit of individual Child Support debts

Objections to Child Support decisions

Collecting Child Support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Penalties for child support debts

Section 107 and Section 143 orders for Child Support customers

Income processing for Child Support customers

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information

Child support overpayments and other payee debt

Family and domestic violence

Accounting Cuba Process Help

Costs and fines Cuba Process Help

Documentation Cuba Process Help

Debt Enforcement Cuba Process Help

Transfer or lock a customer Cuba Process Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
