-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the manual assessment of capitalised maintenance
income (CMI) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers.

Lump sum payment

Capitalised maintenance is maintenance income provided by a lump sum
payment or transfer of an asset or property settlement, where the amount
or value exceeds $1500. To be assessed as maintenance income, it must be
provided specifically as spousal maintenance or child support.

Customers with a child support agreement

Customers may wish to register a child support agreement to include the
lump sum payment or asset transfer.

If the customer has a child support agreement with the payer that has a
start date of 1 July 2008 or later, the agreement is assessed by Child
Support. No manual assessment or coding is required by Centrelink. There
is an automated process for these agreements.

Child Support collect customers

If the customer's child support case is registered for collection by
Child Support, they should contact Child Support if they receive a lump
sum payment or transfer or settlement of property from a payer and it is
specified as child support as it may be credited towards the child
support liability.

Child Support may treat it as a direct payment (often referred to as a
non-agency payment) and will transfer details to Centrelink. If Child
Support credits the direct payment:

-   against child support arrears, the full amount of the direct payment
    is assessed for FTB in the year in which it is received
-   towards future child support liability (only if the one off payment
    or value of the asset exceeds $1500), it may be treated as
    capitalised maintenance income for FTB and assessed over a longer
    period. In this case, the effect of the direct payment transferred
    to Centrelink will need to be manually adjusted

Customers with a child support entitlement registered for collection by
Child Support may benefit from the Maintenance Income Credit (MIC) at
FTB reconciliation.

Private collect customers

If a customer has a child support assessment that is collected
privately, they do not need to contact Child Support about a lump sum
payment. However, they need to contact Centrelink if the payee and payer
agree the lump sum amount is not in lieu of the customer's normal child
support entitlement but is over and above the normal entitlement. The
amount can be recorded as capitalised maintenance income if its value
exceeds $1,500.

Assessment

Like all maintenance income, capitalised maintenance is apportioned over
the period it applies, and the amount attributed to a financial year is
annualised so that the Maintenance Income Test can be applied.

The capitalisation period starts when the child support was received and
lasts until each child turns 18 years (or in the case of spousal
maintenance, until the customer turns 65 years) unless a different
period is stated in a court order or an agreement.

The Resources page contains an example of capitalised maintenance income
assessment.

Related links

Amending maintenance income details on the Override Maintenance Income
(MNOI) screen

Child Support collection customer advises Centrelink of direct payments
from paying parent (non-agency payments)

Determining if a payment is child support/ maintenance income for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer wants to register a child support
agreement

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
