
Ending a Child Support agreement 277-02010040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about ending agreements between Child
Support customers. This includes ending binding, transitional binding
and limited agreements. If customers wish to end their agreement, the
process will be different depending on whether the agreement is binding
or limited. The agreement end date will vary according to the individual
circumstances of the case.

Note: Service Officers must refer any action to end an agreement to the
Agreement and Court Order team.

Section 12 terminating events

An agreement may end if a Section 12 terminating event has occurred. If
a Section 12 terminating event has occurred, see Terminating Events
(Stage 2).

For further information about how Section 12 terminating events affect
Child Support agreements, see Managing changes affecting a Child Support
agreement and Effect of a terminating event on a child support
agreement.

Suspending or ending an agreement due to care

An agreement may end if the payee under the agreement ceases to be an
eligible carer. If the payee under the agreement has ceased to be an
eligible carer, see Suspending or Ending a Child Support agreement due
to care.

Expiring Agreement letters

Customers may respond to automatically generated ‘Expiring Agreement’
letters that are sent to remind them that their agreement is due to
expire. For domestic customers, these letters are sent out 6 weeks
before the end date (and 12 weeks for international customers).

Roles and responsibilities

The procedure for ending Child Support Agreement is managed by the
Agreement and Court Order team.

Authorisations

A decision to end a Child Support agreement must be authorised by a
Service Officer (SO4) or above.

Related links

Administering agreements and court varied assessments (CVA) lodged post
1 July 2008 that include pre and post 1 July 2008 periods

Agreements between Child Support customers

Assessing a new Child Support agreement

Court varied assessments (CVA) including lump sum orders

Interpreting and making a decision on a Child Support agreement

Managing changes affecting a Child Support agreement

Suspending or ending a Child Support agreement due to care

Notional assessment relating to child support agreements

Recording a Child Support agreement

Terminating Events (Stage 2)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
