
WA Ex-nuptial child support cases - Section 107 and Section 143 orders for Child Support customers 277-18061544

-   Background
-   
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure contains instruction for WA Ex-nuptial child support
cases only.

This document outlines information about Section 107 (s107) and Section
143 (s143) orders for WA ex-nuptial Child Support customers. Links on
this page may be unavailable to external audiences.

On this Page:

About s107 orders

Section 107 of the Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989 provides that a
person can apply to a court for a declaration that the person should not
be assessed in respect of the costs of the child because the person is
not a parent of the child. The reason for a person to make a s107
application is where the person disputes paternity of the child
concerned.

An application for a declaration under s107 should not be made if a
court has already declared under section 106A that the payer should be
assessed in respect of the costs of the child. The payer has the option
to lodge an appeal against the section 106A declaration. However, if the
court does make a declaration under s107 in these circumstances Child
Support will give effect to the order.

Requirement to serve

A person applying for a s107 declaration is obliged to serve a copy of
their application upon Child Support, as well as serving a copy upon the
respondent i.e. the payee. If a person applies for a declaration Child
Support must suspend payments to the payee for that child until the
court makes a decision. See the Child Support Guide 4.3.2: Applications
and orders about decisions under the Assessment Act.

About s143 orders

From 1 January 2007 where a court has made a declaration under s107 and
child support has been paid to the payee for that child, the court must
immediately consider making a s143 order (a Parentage Overpayment
Order). A s143 order allows the person to recover some or all of the
child support paid to the payee. See the Child Support Guide 3.1.2:
Parentage overpayment orders.

Where a s143 order is made, it will be registrable as a maintenance
liability and can be collected by Child Support. These monies can be
collected in the same way as most child support liabilities including
tax refund intercepts.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer (SO2)

-   receipt and record a s107 or s143 application

Service Officer (SO3) and above

-   register or refuse a s143 - Overpayment Order
-   action the outcome of the application. Due to the complexity, SO4 or
    above usually action s143 applications and decisions

Service Officer (SO5)

-   action the outcome of a s107 application

Service Support Officer (SSO)

-   responsible for providing advice on complex issues or when Service
    Officer(s) require assistance ensuring that applications and
    decisions of the court are adhered to and actioned correctly

Related links

WA Ex-nuptial child support cases - Section 143 order received by Child
Support

Debt offset

Debt repayment

Documenting Child Support information

Employer Withholding (linking) for Child Support customers

Payment options for customers

Penalties for Child Support debts

Stay orders

Suspending disbursements of child support

Technical Support in Child Support

Accounting Cuba Process Help

Agreements Cuba Process Help

Assessments Cuba Process Help

Debt offset Cuba Process Help

Disbursement Cuba Process Help

Elections for Employer Withholding (EW) not to apply Cuba Process Help

Eligibility Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Non Agency Payments (NAP) Cuba Process Help

Overpayments Cuba Process Help

Refunds Cuba Process Help

Relationship Cuba Process Help

Communication Window Help

Eligibility Window Help

Bank Details Window Help

Periodic Amounts Window Help

View Correspondence Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
