-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine if a payment or benefit received
by a person is child support/maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) purposes.

Types of maintenance income

Maintenance income can be received as regular or irregular payments, as
a non-cash benefit, or as a lump sum payment or transfer of assets.

A payment or benefit received by a person or child can be maintenance
income if:

-   it is from a person liable to pay child support or spousal
    maintenance and
-   it is provided as child support for an FTB child or as partner
    (spousal) maintenance

If the customer receives child support and:

-   they have registered their child support case for collection by
    Child Support, they should be referred to Child Support if they
    receive child support directly from the paying parent
-   they have chosen private collection, from 1 July 2012, the customer
    will be deemed to receive their full child support entitlement
-   it is part of a child support agreement accepted by Child Support,
    assessment is automatic from 1 July 2008. For agreements with a
    start date before 1 July 2008 any non-cash maintenance income may
    need to be manually coded by Child Support Unit staff. See
    Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Prior to 1 July 2012

If a customer elected to privately collect their child support,
Centrelink assumed the customer received their full child support
entitlement. If a customer privately collected less than their full
child support entitlement, they would fail the Maintenance Action Test
and their FTB Part A would be restricted to the base rate for the
child/ren, unless the customer was granted an exemption or changed to
child support collection.

Spousal maintenance

Spousal maintenance may also be included as maintenance income under the
Maintenance Income Test and may affect the rate of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A, if it is received from a person who is liable to pay child
support. Spousal maintenance is usually paid privately. Child Support
can only collect spousal maintenance in limited situations.

Effect of maintenance income on FTB and income support payments

Maintenance income, including spousal maintenance, is not ordinary
income for income support payments (assets transferred as spousal
maintenance are not exempt assets). If spousal maintenance is received
from a person who is not liable to pay child support, the amount is not
recorded on the customer's record and will not affect the customer's FTB
or their income support payments.

Child no longer FTB child or 18 years of age

Child support received for a child after the child is no longer an FTB
child is not treated as maintenance income. If the child has turned 18,
the case should be referred to the Child Support Unit.

The Resources page contains contact details for Child Support and link
to Office Locator.

Related links

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Disbursement Method

Entitlement Method

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer receives spousal maintenance

Maintenance Income Test for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Modified Entitlement Method

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording private maintenance income on Centrelink systems

Relevant period for maintenance for Maintenance Income Test (MIT)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
