
Child Support collection customer wants to change assessment method: effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 277-51130090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer who
receives child support via Child Support can choose how annual
maintenance income from a payer is estimated during the financial year.

On this Page:

Modified entitlement method

The default method for estimating maintenance income for a Child Support
collect case is the Modified Entitlement Method. The modified
entitlement method compares the amounts worked out using the entitlement
method and the disbursement method and uses the method that results in
the higher amount of maintenance income. This reduces the risk of being
overpaid FTB Part A due to changes in maintenance income during the
financial year.

Disbursement method

Child Support collect customers can ask Centrelink to use the
Disbursement Method, which is based on the disbursements (child support
payments) the customer receives from Child Support. Customers not
receiving their full child support entitlement may want this method to
be used so that their ongoing FTB Part A rate is not based on their
child support entitlement amount. However, if child support arrears are
received during the financial year, it is likely that the customer will
have been overpaid FTB Part A unless they have taken up a More Choice
for Families option.

Customers do not have to specifically ask for the Disbursement Method
before it is discussed, it can be discussed as an option at any time.
This method should also be discussed with Private collect customers who
advise they are unable to collect their full child support entitlement.
These customers should be advised they can consider changing to Child
Support collect, and if they do change to Child Support collect, the
Disbursement Method is then available to them.

Changing assessment method - pros and cons

The pros and cons of changing assessment methods should be discussed
with customers that are not collecting their full child support
entitlement.

When discussing the most appropriate assessment method (Entitlement or
Disbursement) with a customer, based on their circumstances, particular
consideration should be given to the following reasons for requesting a
change. FTB customers who:

-   May need more FTB during the year to assist with managing their
    budget due to child support regularly being underpaid (or not paid
    at all), may benefit from being assessed under the Disbursement
    Method. Customers should be made aware of the risk of overpayment
    associated with the Disbursement Method if they receive arrears of
    child support later in the financial year
-   Tend to receive arrears of child support later in the financial year
    may benefit from the Entitlement Method, to try to minimise the risk
    of an overpayment
-   Receive irregular payments of child support but who find it more
    difficult to manage/budget with fluctuating rates of FTB may be
    better off on the Entitlement Method
-   Receive regular child support payments which are less than their
    assessed amount, but then receive arrears later in the financial
    year may be better off remaining on the Entitlement Method to
    minimise the risk of overpayment

The Resources page contains examples using the Disbursement and
Entitlement methods.

Reconciliation process

After the end of the financial year, during the reconciliation process,
regardless of which method was used during the year, maintenance income
for Child Support collect period is recalculated using the actual
disbursements received. FTB reconciliation may result in an adjustment
to the customer's FTB Part A rate if the actual maintenance income
received is different to the maintenance income estimated during the
financial year.

When a customer asks to change the assessment method being used, their
FTB Part A rate may change from the start of their next fortnightly
payment, depending on the new annual maintenance income calculation.

The assessment method can be changed at any time for Child Support
collect customers.

The Resources page contains examples showing how child support is
estimated during the financial year (using Disbursement and Entitlement
method calculations) for Child Support collect customers.

Related links

Child Support collection for Centrelink staff

Modified Entitlement Method

Entitlement Method

Disbursement Method

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
