
Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers 277-51070000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document what action is required to satisfy the MAT for a child
from a previous relationship, or for a child who is not the biological
child of the FTB customer or their partner.

Child support

Child support, also known as maintenance, refers to financial and
material support for children from their separated non-custodial
parent(s). The terms maintenance and child support are often used
interchangeably and generally have the same meaning. Maintenance is a
term used by Centrelink and includes child support as well as support
for a partner from a previous relationship (spousal maintenance).

It is important to remember that regardless of a customer's personal
income, both parents are responsible for providing financial support for
their children.

Generally, a customer is considered to be taking maintenance action and
will meet the MAT if:

-   an application is made for a child support assessment for a child
-   a customer has a child support assessment for a child
-   an application is made for a child support agreement to be accepted
    for a child
-   a customer has a child support agreement accepted for a child
-   a customer has an exemption from taking maintenance action

Even if a customer's personal income means they will only receive base
rate FTB Part A, they should be encouraged to take reasonable action to
obtain child support. If the customer's income later reduces and they
already have a child support assessment in place, they can automatically
receive more than base rate FTB.

A child support assessment will usually end when the child turns 18
years of age. To continue meeting the MAT after an FTB child turns 18,
customers with a child support case in place prior to the child turning
18 must apply to Child Support to extend the child support assessment if
the child will be in full-time secondary education on/after their 18th
birthday. They must do this before the child turns 18 years of age.

Information is exchanged automatically between Child Support and
Centrelink. For further information, see Centrelink-Child Support
information exchange.

Norfolk Island, Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas Islands

Since 1 July 2016, residents of Norfolk, Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas
Islands have been eligible to apply for a child support assessment.

Due to legislative changes effective from 1 July 2016, child support
assessments can be made where the paying parent is a resident of the
Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Christmas Island or Norfolk Island.

Child Support data loading errors or mismatch of information

A customer may advise that they have a child support assessment but the
data on their record is not present or is incorrect. To action these
cases, refer to Child Support data has not loaded onto Centrelink system
or is incorrectly affecting customer's record.

Customer or partner under age of consent with a dependent child in their care

If the customer and/or their partner is under the age of consent, then
the customer is treated as single under family assistance law. The
customer is not required to take reasonable action to obtain child
support against the other parent. See Customer or partner under age of
consent with a dependent child in their care.

However, as there is no minimum age for claiming child support, if the
customer and/or their partner are under the age of consent and later
separate, reasonable action to obtain child support is required.

Taking action to obtain child support

The MAT ensures that reasonable action is taken to obtain child support
for a child from a previous relationship particularly where the customer
is claiming more than the base rate of FTB Part A for the child. FTB
Part A for a child is limited to the base rate if a customer (or their
current partner) is required to take action to obtain child support but
fails to do so.

First check that an application for child support assessment is needed.
In some cases, it is not applicable for a customer to take action to
obtain child support.

There are some situations when a customer is not required to take
reasonable action to obtain child support and satisfy the MAT. In these
cases, the customer may apply for a maintenance action test exemption.

If the customer has children from more than 1 relationship, they need to
take separate action for each child from each previous relationship.

In most cases, the customer will need to apply for a child support
assessment.

Customers may:

-   collect their child support entitlement privately, or
-   elect for Child Support to collect child support payments on their
    behalf

If the customer's partner is the natural or adoptive parent and the
customer is not, their partner will need to take reasonable maintenance
action to obtain child support, regardless of who is claiming FTB for
the child.

Deciding Maintenance Action (DMA) periods

If the customer is required to take action to obtain child support, they
must do so within 13 weeks (91 days) of the latest of:

-   date child was born
-   date they separated from the child's other parent
-   date child entered care
-   date their percentage of actual care increased to 35% or more
-   such later date that they first become entitled to apply for
    maintenance. For example:
-   date of arrival in Australia
-   date the other parent of the child moves to a reciprocal country
    (including Australia) from a non-reciprocal country. The date of
    event is the date given by the customer or the date Services
    Australia becomes aware of the payer's change of residency,
    whichever is earlier

The Resources page contains examples.

If the customer does not take action to obtain child support within the
91 day DMA period, they cannot be paid more than base rate FTB Part A
for the child/ren.

Note:

-   The Pseudo DMA Event (PDE) MAT code can be recorded manually to
    simulate a 91 day DMA period. This will generally be required when
    the above 5th DMA dot point applies as this event is not automated
    like the other 4 DMA events. See the Process page for further
    information
-   A customer may claim FTB after their DMA period. This may occur when
    a customer arrives from overseas and is not yet residentially
    qualified for FTB Part A due to serving a NARWP. Consider whether it
    is reasonable to expect the customer to have known to take
    maintenance action upon arriving in Australia. If the answer is no,
    consider extending the DMA period

At every chance, advise customers of their obligation to take reasonable
action to obtain child support.

A Maintenance Action Requirement Notification (MARNL) letter will
generally issue to a customer or their current partner if they are
required to take maintenance action for a child in their care and they
are within their 91 day DMA period. A reminder MARNL issues 21 days
later if:

-   they are still within the DMA period
-   no child support assessment data has been received from Child
    Support, and
-   the initial MARNL was sent on or before day 63 of the DMA period

The MARNL letter displays as a 'NOTFAOOSC' letter on the History Summary
(HS) screen.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport and further information.

Exemptions

Customers may apply for an exemption from seeking child support, for
example, when the other parent's identity is unknown, or there is a risk
family and domestic violence. The customer may need to speak to a
Centrelink social worker to apply for an exemption. However, some
parentage of unknown (PNK) exemptions are assessed by Service Officers.

Customers unable to collect their full child support entitlement
privately may need to ask Child Support to collect their child support
payments on their behalf, or seek a partial exemption. Any decision
about how a customer elects to receive their child support must be made
by the customer, taking into consideration their family circumstances
and information provided by Child Support.

Refer to Family and domestic violence for the proactive Risk
Identification Question that can be asked when a customer is seeking an
exemption.

Customer provides a court order that states neither parent is to seek child support

In this case, the customer is not required to start a child support case
to meet the MAT as it would not be appropriate to force the customer to
apply.

The customer is exempt from the MAT. To select the correct exemption
code, see MAT codes.

Favourable Section 24 (Social Security Act 1991) assessment

Once there is a favourable decision on a Section 24 assessment, the
recipient is considered single.

The applicable MAT code is Child Support refused registration (CRR) for
children of the current relationship. Affected children should be
included in an entitlement (ENT) group.

For lump sum claimants, another carer exemption (OCX) should be applied
with a group type of other (OTH).

Same-sex relationships

Since 1 July 2009, FTB customers or their partner who have children from
a same-sex relationship may be required to take reasonable action to
obtain child support from the child's other parent.

For more information see Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for
children born as a result of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial
conception procedure (including children of same-sex couples).

Share the care of a child or each have one or more children in their care

A separate procedure applies for customers who share the care of a child
or each have 1 or more children in their care.

Payer in a child support agreement increases their level of care to more than 65%

If a child support payer's level of care increases to more than 65% and
they are receiving FTB for the child/ren, they must take reasonable
steps to obtain child support for the child/ren otherwise they may be
deemed to fail the MAT.

For MAT implications where there has been a care change resulting in a:

-   child support care suspension period, see Table 1 on the Process
    page
-   child support care terminating event, see Table 3 on the Process
    page

Children aged 16 years or over

Customers who have care of a child from a previous relationship must
take reasonable steps to obtain child support to be eligible for more
than the base rate of FTB Part A.

To continue to receive more than the base rate of FTB Part A for a
full-time secondary student once the child turns 18 years of age, the
payee in a child support case must apply to Child Support for an
extension to their child support assessment prior to the child's 18th
birthday. The assessment can be extended until the last day of the
secondary school year that falls within 365 days of the child's 18th
birthday. In some cases, an extension is not required/appropriate. See
the Process page for examples and coding required to ensure the customer
continues to pass the MAT in these cases.

If the child support payee does not obtain an extension to the child
support assessment prior to the child turning 18, the MAT will not be
met and only the base rate of FTB Part A will be payable from the
child's 18th birthday until the last day of secondary school for the
year in which their child turns 18 years of age. MAT requirements cease
at the end of the school year in which the child turns 18 years of age,
but FTB can be paid until the end of the calendar year in which the
child turns 19 years of age if they satisfy education/training
requirements.

Note: if the application to extend the child support case is not made
prior to the child's 18th birthday, the extension to the assessment will
only be granted if there were exceptional circumstances which prevented
the application being made before the child's 18th birthday. The
References page contains a link to the Child Support Guide 2.5.5:
Application to have an assessment continue past a child's 18th birthday.

If the payee does not obtain an extension to the child support
assessment prior to the child's 18^(th) birthday, or they do apply for
an extension and it is rejected, the MAT requirement will not be met and
only the base rate of FTB Part A will be payable from the child's 18th
birthday. If the payee has not applied for an extension to the child
support assessment, Service Officers are to refer them to Child Support
to apply/discuss, even if the child has turned 18 years of age.

If Child Support has refused the payee's application for an extension to
the child support assessment, the customer can lodge an objection to the
decision with Child Support.

Customer claims FTB for a child who has already turned 18

If a customer claims FTB for a child who has already turned 18 years of
age and is a full-time secondary student, maintenance action is not
applicable. A child support application cannot be made after a child has
turned 18 years of age.

Separation of parents or a child comes into a customer's care up to 13 weeks prior to the child turning 18 years of age

Where a Deciding Maintenance Action (DMA) event occurs within 13 weeks
of the child's 18th birthday and the child is a full-time secondary
student (FTSS) or exempt from FTSS, the customer would not have had
access to their full 13 week DMA period in which to take reasonable
maintenance action for the respective child prior to the child's 18th
birthday.

As the customer has not had access to their full DMA period, they are
not required to meet the MAT and will not be required to seek an
extension for the respective child prior to the child's 18th birthday.

However, if a customer starts a child support case for the child within
the reduced DMA period, they will be required to seek an extension to
the child support assessment for the child, past the child's 18th
birthday, as they have already taken maintenance action. It would often
be the case that this would occur at the same time the child support
assessment application was undertaken with Child Support.

Adoption

When a person adopts a child they become a parent for all legal
purposes.

Therefore, if another person adopts the child, taking maintenance action
against the biological parent is not applicable.

However, if a couple adopt a child and later separate, maintenance
action is required against the other parent listed on the birth
certificate or adoption papers.

Artificial conception procedures (ACP)

Generally donors of semen used in artificial insemination by single
woman have no rights and incur no liabilities in respect of a child born
as a result of that pregnancy. Customers may not need to take action to
obtain child support from the donor and can apply for an exemption from
seeking child support.

A number of factors/scenarios will be considered in determining whether
an exemption is appropriate. The Resources page in Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) and child support for children born as a result of a surrogacy
arrangement or via artificial conception procedure (including children
of same-sex couples) has a table to help clarify the maintenance action
requirements for a number of ACP scenarios.

If an exemption is not granted, the customer should be referred to Child
Support to make a decision on whether a child support application can be
accepted.

Surrogacy

If there is a court order in place naming the parents of a child born as
a result of a surrogacy arrangement, the intended parents will be those
listed (the customer and their partner whether same-sex or
opposite-sex).

If the parents were in a same-sex relationship when the child was born
as a result of a surrogacy arrangement and the parents later separate,
MAT requirements will depend on whether or not the surrogacy arrangement
is recognised under the Family Law Act. For more information, see FTB
and child support for children born as a result of a surrogacy
arrangement or via artificial conception procedure (including children
of same-sex couples).

Grandparents/third party carers not partnered to a biological parent of the child

Grandparents/third party carers not partnered to a biological parent of
the child are not required to take action to obtain child support to
receive more than the base rate of FTB Part A. However, any child
support received may affect their rate of FTB Part A under the
Maintenance Income Test.

How to apply for child support

Customers must contact Child Support to apply for a child support
assessment.

[] Customers may make an application for a child support assessment
online via the Services Australia website. Online is the preferred
option for child support applications. If this option does not suit the
customer's circumstances, customers can be warm transferred to Child
Support via Interaction Workspace (iWS) Softphone. Warm transfer may be
more appropriate when the customer has no immediate online access and is
already receiving FTB A at base rate due to no maintenance action. For
contact details, see Child Support.

Rent Assistance and Health Care Cards (HCC)

If an income support customer receives Rent Assistance (RA) with FTB and
they fail the MAT, RA can be paid with the income support payment until
the MAT is satisfied. This will occur automatically, both changing RA
over to the income support payment and back to FTB when they met the
MAT.

If the customer fails the MAT for:

-   all children in care, the customer’s existing HCC may be cancelled.
    Refer to Health Care Card (HCC) as the customer may be able to
    retain their HCC
-   only some of the children in care, the customer may continue to be
    eligible for a HCC for all children, including the one/s who failed
    the MAT

For more information about the MAT and HCC eligibility, see Health Care
Card (HCC).

Obtaining information about child support

If the customer has not already provided this information for each FTB
child in their care from a previous relationship in their care, they can
provide the information verbally.

FTB claims should not be made not-effective due to no child support
details provided. Attempts should be made to contact the customer to
obtain the necessary details and to discuss the MAT.

The Resources page contains examples of the maintenance action timeline,
scenarios where the fifth DMA event apply, as well as links to the Level
2 Policy Helpdesk homepage, the National ICT Referrals page, mySupport,
the Services Australia website, Child Support and Families Override
Contacts.

Contents

Conducting a Child Support non-parent carer assessment

Deceased Chid Support Customer Management

Conducting a social work child support exemption due to fear of family
and domestic violence or other circumstances

Recording Child Support Scheme (CSS) exemption referrals - social work

Action to obtain child support when the paying parent is overseas -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to
receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous year

Checking reasonable action has been taken to obtain child support for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) past period claims

Customer cannot make a private arrangement for a Stage 1 child -
Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and child support for children born as a result
of a surrogacy arrangement or via artificial conception procedure
(including children of same-sex couples)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer not receiving full child support
entitlement privately

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with court order or a court order
registered agreement

Increasing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A after action has been taken
to obtain child support

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) codes

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for customers with shared care

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

Referrals to legal advice for action to obtain child support to satisfy
the Maintenance Action Test (MAT)

Related links

Agreements between Child Support customers

Applications for child support assessment through Centrelink

Applying for Child Support collection and effect on Family Tax Benefit
(FTB)

Help for grandparents caring for children

Centrelink action on proving parentage for child support

Centrelink action when an application for child support assessment is
rejected by Child Support

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Child Support data has not loaded onto or is incorrectly affecting
customer's record

Health Care Card (HCC)

Helping customers apply for child support through Centrelink

How to group children on a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) record

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Recording child support details for a previous year Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) claim

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
