-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer can register an agreement for
child support for a child and explains the initial assessment for FTB
Part A customers.

Court ordered/court registered agreement

These orders/agreements are not 'Child Support' agreements as child
support agreements cannot be made by court order. Generally, these
orders are a consent order that includes an agreement about child
support between the 2 parties.

The 'Application for a Consent Order', not the consent order, is the
'Agreement' document that can be registered with Child Support.

Do not confuse these orders/agreements with child support agreements
registered with a court or with an informal, private arrangement for
child support. FTB customers with court order or a court registered
agreement contains further information.

Agreements with start date before 1 July 2008

Centrelink was responsible for assessing whether the agreement met the
Maintenance Action Test (MAT) if the customer was entitled to more than
base rate FTB Part A.

An agreement could only be accepted if it was at least equal to the
Child Support formula assessment amount or within $60. Note: Centrelink
was only required to assess the period from the start date up to and
including 30 June 2008.

Agreements with a start date on or after 1 July 2008

Child Support is responsible for assessing the agreement. If the
agreement is approved, it meets the Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for
FTB purposes.

The type of child support agreement does not affect assessment for FTB.
For FTB, the agreement is assessed using the Notional Assessment (NA)
provided by Child Support or, if there is no Notional Assessment in
place, an Administrative Assessment is used.

The agreement can include regular payments, irregular payments, lump
sums or non-cash benefits. Customers can choose to collect the agreement
privately or opt for Child Support collection.

Payer in a child support agreement increases care above 65%

If a child support payer’s level of care increases to more than 65% and
they are receiving FTB for the child/ren. they must take reasonable
steps to obtain child support for the child/ren. Otherwise, they may be
deemed to fail the Maintenance Action Test (MAT).

MAT for FTB customers has more details on reasonable maintenance action
in these cases.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information about child support options for parents, forms and
publications, and text to use in the letter to both parties to advise
the decision about an agreement with a start date before 1 July 2008.

Related links

Child support agreements and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers with a court order or a court
registered agreement

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Non-cash maintenance income assessment for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing capitalised maintenance income for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
