
Child support estimates 277-07040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to take a child support income estimate and
includes checking the estimate, customer contact and estimate decision
making.

Estimates of income

Customers can make an election for the child support assessment to be
based on their estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) for the relevant
financial year. The election is made for:

the full financial year if lodged on 1 July, or

the remainder of the financial year if lodged after 1 July. If lodged
after 1 July, the estimate is made up of the:

-   Year to Date (YTD) ATI, and
-   estimated ATI for the remaining period of the financial year

Note: for Child support estimates (pre 1 July 2010), a different
procedure applies.

An estimate will be valid if:

there is a current Child Support assessment (Stage 2 case)

there is no Income Amount Order (IAO) relating to the estimating parent
in force on the day of election or any part of the remainder of the
financial year for any children of the assessment

the income used in the assessment at the time of the initial estimate is
either:

-   an Australian Taxation Office (ATO) taxable income
-   an Income Tax Declaration (ITD), or
-   an income advised by an overseas authority

the first election is not more than 85% of the person’s ATI for the Last
Relevant Year of Income (LRYI)

the YTD ATI has been provided if initial estimate with start date after
1 July, and

it has been lodged by the customer or a person with legal power of
attorney or other legal authority to act for the customer

Lodging and updating an estimate

Customers can lodge and update their estimate:

online. Encourage and assist customers to use:

-   their Child Support online account via myGov > Income > Update your
    current income, or
-   Express Plus Child Support mobile app

by phone, using the Child Support Enquiry Line

in writing. Customers can post or fax a completed Estimate of income for
use in Child Support Assessment form (CS1670) and submit it:

-   via their Child Support online account through myGov
-   by post or fax
-   in person at a service centre

From April each year, customers can lodge an estimate to start in the
new financial year on 1 July. If an estimate is lodged to start on a
date between 1 April and 30 June, it may also be appropriate for an
estimate to be taken for the new financial year starting on 1 July.

An initial estimate may also be lodged from:

-   the first date of a new Child Support Period (CSP) if notified on or
    before that date. For example, a new CSP using a higher income is
    due to start on 1 September. The customer calls in August and elects
    to start their estimate from the first date of the CSP (1 September)
-   the date of notification. For example, a customer first notifies of
    their estimated income on 20 December saying their income reduced in
    November. The estimate start date is 20 December, or
-   a retrospective date only in circumstances where Child Support has
    deemed the notification date to have been earlier, see Estimate
    Deeming Policies.

A customer can update their estimate:

-   within the relevant year of income at any time, for a higher or
    lower estimated amount than the previous estimate, or
-   after the year of income has ended, if the new estimate is higher
    than the last estimate (only if the previous estimate has not yet
    been reconciled)

Note: when a new child support period begins in a financial year with an
accepted estimate already in place, the assessment will continue to be
based on that estimate. The assessment only reverts to using the LYRI
for the child support period when the next financial year starts. This
will be different to the LRYI that applied when the estimate was lodged
in the previous child support period. The customer may then be able to
lodge a new estimate for that new financial year if appropriate.

Reviewing estimates

If Child Support becomes aware that an estimate has become inaccurate,
an estimate review may be required. An estimate review may update the
income used in the child support assessment to more accurately reflect
the customer’s actual income.

Note: if the customer can make a subsequent estimate for the financial
year, this is the preferred option.

Reconciling estimates

At the end of the financial year, the customer’s estimate is checked for
accuracy against their tax return. If the customer does not lodge their
tax return by 30 June of the following financial year, the Registrar may
determine the customer’s actual income.

If the customer has:

underestimated their income:

-   the child support assessment may be amended
-   this may create a debt that the customer will be required to pay
-   if the actual income is 10% higher than the estimated amount, the
    customer may also be charged an estimate penalty

overestimated their income:

-   the estimate cannot be backdated
-   the child support income assessment cannot be reduced to reflect the
    lower income

Options other than an estimate

Options other than an estimate which may be appropriate for the customer
include:

-   an application (including international customers) to have extra
    income earned following separation excluded from their child support
    assessment. See Post separation income for Child Support customers
-   where the assessment is a Fixed Annual Rate (FAR) the customer
    (including international customers) can apply to have the fixed
    annual rate not apply
-   where the assessment is the Minimum Annual Rate (MAR) of child
    support, an application to have their assessment reduced to nil if
    their income is less than the minimum annual rate
-   in limited circumstances lodging a Change of assessment in special
    circumstances
-   updating a default income currently used in the assessment. For
    example, taking an Income Tax Declaration

Note: for information on lodging an estimate for a notional assessment,
see Notional assessment relating to child support agreements.

The Resources page contains links to macros, estimate deeming policies,
contact details and the Services Australia website.

Contents

Initial Estimate in Pluto

Related links

Child Support estimates review (post 1 July 2010)

Child Support information gathering powers

Contact with Child Support customers

Documenting Child Support information

Fixed annual rate not to apply applications

Income processing for Child Support customers

Minimum annual rate to nil - Reducing Child Support assessments

Using Child Support self service

Post separation income for Child Support customers

Residency decisions for Child Support customers

Technical support in Child Support

Assessments Cuba Process Help

CSAOnline secure message Cuba Process Help

Estimates Cuba Process Help

Intray management Cuba Process Help

Letters Cuba Process Help

Client Income Window Help

Estimate income Window Help

Income Details Window Help

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
