-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the arrangements for the disclosure of
information between Centrelink and Child Support.

Information exchange between Centrelink and Child Support

Information can be exchanged between Centrelink and Child Support only
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Privacy Act 1988,
Social Security Law, Family Assistance Law and other relevant
legislation, and is necessary to allow Centrelink or Child Support to
fulfil their legislative requirements.

For customers matched via the mutual customer matching process, data is
transferred electronically between Centrelink and Child Support.

Child Support can provide information to Centrelink for administration
of Family Assistance and Social Security Law. Typically, information
about child support entitlement and child support disbursements for
mutual customers is provided to administer the Maintenance Action Test
(MAT) and Maintenance Income Test for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A.
This information is transferred to Centrelink in the entitlement file
and the disbursement file.

Information can be disclosed in accordance with the Centrelink and Child
Support 2016 Governance Agreement.

Alignment of care data exchange issues

Customers may contact Centrelink to notify that a care change has been
processed by Child Support but has not yet been updated by Centrelink.
In these cases, confirm the care details directly with Child Support in
the first instance. A known issue may arise with the data exchange if
the FTB claimant is the step-parent (partnered to a biological parent).
The issue arises when Child Support update the care details for the
biological parent but no data transfer occurs because the biological
parent is not a mutual customer.

If:

-   a customer contacts Services Australia about an issue concerning the
    Child Support data exchange, or
-   staff identify any potential issues with the data exchange,
    including issues relating to review of care decisions

Create a Fast Note (region code CSJ). For Alignment of Care enquiries
use the Alignment of Care Fast Note or for child support case issues use
the Maintenance Enquiry Fast Note.

The Process page contains information about the Electronic transfer of
information process.

Data exchange system issues must be referred by a Service Support
Officer (SSO) to the National ICT Referral Process, and not directly to
the ICT Service Desk. The Resources page has a link to more information.

Mutual customers

A mutual customer can notify either Centrelink or Child Support of
changes to their care arrangements. This process streamlines customer
contact. The care information will be transferred between Centrelink and
Child Support to assess family assistance and child support
entitlements.

Child Support will provide advice to Centrelink:

-   when a customer with a child support assessment has their
    entitlement suspended
-   about agreements that are accepted, as well as those agreements that
    are rejected

Centrelink is required to disclose information to Child Support to allow
for the administration of child support law governing registration,
assessment and collection of child support. Centrelink transmits to
Child Support in the daily file certain changes in circumstances and
information relating to deductions to collect child support from social
security and FTB payments.

If information is not exchanged electronically, protocols exist between
Centrelink and Child Support to allow for other information to be
requested.

Service Officers need to be aware of the Centrelink process and action
relating to child support.

Alignment of care determinations between Child Support and Centrelink mutual customers

This measure:

-   was implemented 1 July 2010, and 3 March 2011 for WA Ex-Nuptial
    cases, and
-   provides for a single determination of care for both child support
    and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) purposes

Aligning the care determination provides for consistency in decisions
for customers dealing with the agency. Applying a single care
determination for both child support and FTB purposes also reduces
duplication of processes and decisions. The care information is
automatically transferred between Centrelink and Child Support to assess
family assistance and child support entitlements, thereby removing the
need for customers to notify changes of care twice. Further to this, a
customer can seek a review of a care percentage decisions that has been
aligned by contacting either Centrelink or Child Support. Generally, the
program that made the original decision will undertake the review. See
Review of care decisions for further details.

The Resources page contains examples of when the care determination will
and will not align.

Customer enquiries

For Child Support contact details for customers, see Child Support.

The Resources page contains links for system issues referral processes,
Child Support and Families and Child Care - Business Process Branch
contact details, as well as examples of when a care determination will
and will not align.

Related links

Alignment of Care Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Centrelink-Child Support information exchange

Centrelink processes and action relating to child support

Child Support data has not loaded onto Centrelink system or is
incorrectly affecting customer's record

Child support Manual Follow-up (MFU) activities and automatic reviews

Disclosing information to third parties

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Mutual customer matching with Child Support

Retrospective Child Support assessments and Family Tax Benefit

Review of care decisions

Issuing Payment Summaries

Tier 2 technical support - Service Support Officer (SSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
