-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process on information gathering as an
essential part of ensuring that Child Support customers' assessments are
accurate and child support is paid.

Child Support's powers to seek information from third parties

Child Support has broad powers to seek information and require third
parties to provide information. This does not allow Child Support to
seek information casually or for just any purpose. Information may only
be sought to administer the child support legislation.

Child Support can also require a person to attend a location, for
example a Services Australia office, to provide information in person.

Child Support's proactive information gathering powers whether exercised
formally or informally relies on 2 sections of legislation:

-   s120 of the Child Support (Registration and Collection) Act 1988,
    and
-   s161 of the Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989

Each section allows information to be sought for the purposes of the Act
in which it appears. For example:

-   s120 is used to seek information that will help to enforce
    collection, or to determine the outcome of an internal review
    (objection) of a decision. It cannot be used to seek information
    about incomes to amend a formula assessment (not under review)
    because formula assessments fall under the Assessment Act
-   s161 is used to seek information that will help to make amendments
    to the particulars of a formula assessment, such as incomes. It
    cannot be used to seek information to help enforce collection or
    determine an objection as these fall under the Registration and
    Collection Act

Other sections do not provide proactive information gathering powers,
but require customers to advise of certain changes, such as s160 of the
Assessment Act and s111 of the Registration and Collection Act.

Information gathering must comply with the Australian Privacy
Principles.

Note: the AAT can ask Child Support to use information gathering powers
under s120 and s161 on their behalf.

In proceedings involving the recovery of child support debts by payees
or overpayments by payers, the Court can issue notices under s120 in its
own right.

Information provided by children

Child Support will not try to get information from a child about any of
the parents' child support issues.

Child Support will not accept statements made by a child in writing or
verbally even if the statements are volunteered by the child. See
References for a link to The Child Support Guide 6.2.2: Taking
information from children.

Evidence can be considered if provided by the child/ren of the
assessment who are at least 18 years of age for matters that relate to
their own child support assessments.

International cases

S120 or s161 notices cannot be issued in relation to a customer who is a
resident in a reciprocating jurisdiction and in respect of whom an
international maintenance arrangement applies.

S121A of the Registration and Collection Act and s162A of the Assessment
Act provide the same types of powers as s120 and 161 respectively, but
they apply to the obtaining of information and evidence in relation to
residents of reciprocating jurisdictions. If a s121A notice is required,
contact a Service Support Officer (SSO) for support. See Technical
support in Child Support. For information on issuing a s162A notice, see
Income Processing for Child Support customers (International Parents).

Incarcerated customers

S120 and s161 notices can be issued in relation to a customer who is
incarcerated.

Remove prisoner identification from the About customer and Customer
address sections to maintain the customer’s privacy. See Step 14 in the
Issue s120/161 notice table to action this in Cuba.

If the third party requires an address to identify the correct customer,
in Customer address manually add the previous address (address prior to
incarceration).

Payment for information

Some authorities may ask for a fee be paid, before they comply with the
request for information. These may be government authorities or
information brokers, such as Equifax. In this case, look for other ways
to get the information. If unsuccessful, ask a Service Support Officer
(SSO) to help decide if the information is critical to justify the fee.

Not all organisations are entitled to charge a fee for complying with
Child Support notices. For example, accountants, lawyers and medical
professionals ordinarily charge their clients at a scheduled rate for
their services. These professionals may ask Child Support to pay at a
similar rate for what they see as a service. Complying with Child
Support notices is their legal obligation. Child Support will not pay
for their compliance.

Service Officers should not make unreasonable requests for information
in these cases. For example, a request for information from an
accountant should not require the accountant to produce 'special purpose
financial statements' – documents created solely for the purpose of
complying with a Child Support notice.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officer

-   Seek information through service of a notice or informally
-   Document information gathered

Service Support Officer (SSO)

-   Provide advice in the event of complex issues

The Resources page contains related links to privacy information, manual
schedules, external searches information and a template attachment.

Related links

Bank and organisation listing

Collection of child support debts through third parties (s72A and s72AC)

Contact with Child Support customers

Customer location (Tracing)

Customer Management Approach (CMA) for Child Support

Direct requests for Information from Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA)

Documenting Child Support information

External searches guide

Finalisation guidelines for Child Support staff

Incarcerated customers

Income Processing for Child Support customers (International Parents)

Letters for Child Support customers

National Redress Scheme overview

Technical support in Child Support

Service Officer role in setting up Employer Withholding (EW) linking

Status Resolution Support Services payment

Section 120/161 notice Cuba Process Help

Updating Child Support customer information

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
