
Change in relationship status from partnered to single 277-50080000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before processing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speakerphone or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, see the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information and updates required when a customer
currently in receipt of payments or services separates from their
partner.

Customers at risk of family and domestic violence

There are specific procedures for customers who separate and are
affected by family and domestic violence.

Updating a customer's relationship status

If a customer indicates they and/or their children are at risk of family
and domestic violence and are concerned for their safety, their
relationship status can be updated immediately and verification supplied
within 14 days.

Before updating the customer's relationship status, tell them that if
their partner is in receipt of payment and/or has an online account,
their partner's marital status will automatically update to a
non-partnered (for example, separated) relationship status. Their
partner will be able to view the updated status in their Centrelink
online account and Express Plus Centrelink App.

Updating the relationship may also flow on to impact the ex-partner's
entitlements if they are receiving any Centrelink payments. Make sure
the customer is aware of this.

Giving the customer this information allows them to make an informed
decision of the risk and make any necessary safety preparations.

Updating nominee arrangements

When a customer who has their partner appointed as their nominee advises
they have separated, ask them at the first point of contact if they wish
to cancel the nominee arrangement.

Action the request for cancellation of the arrangement immediately. The
request does not have to be in writing.

Updating Person Permission to Enquire (PPE)

If the partner has permission to enquire, the coding of the separation
will automatically cease the PPE authority.

Updating personal details

Note: when completing the 'unlinking' activity (via the Marital Status
(MS) screen) to update the relationship status due to separation, take
care when updating any personal details to ensure updates do not flow
onto their ex-partner's record. The update to the MS screen will
automatically navigate to the Customer Details Task (CDTS) screen in
Customer First where Service Officers must change the default of
updating both records to updating the customer's record only. This is
done by changing the 'B' to 'S' at relevant fields such as the Address,
Accommodation and Telephone fields.

A code of Unlink of two customers - ULK will display in the Rent
Verification: field. The code will ripple automatically to the
ex-partner's record when the customer's MS screen is updated. The code
must be updated on the customer's record only or Rent Assistance (RA)
(if applicable) will stop. Do not update the ex-partner's record. If the
ex-partner is in receipt of Rent Assistance, this payment will cease, as
a direct result of the ULK code being auto applied, until Services
Australia receive notification from this person about their change in
circumstances. If the customer has advised of any family and domestic
violence concerns, ensure they are aware their ex-partner may experience
a change in rate if they are receiving any RA entitlements so they can
make any necessary safety preparations.

Recording a voiceprint - voice biometrics technology makes a customer's
records more secure. See Voiceprints for phone self-service

Process contains further information on the specific actions required
when customers advise they have separated from their partner and are at
risk of family and domestic violence.

Customer advises a change in relationship status

Member of a couple definition

A person is considered a member of a couple if they are:

legally married

in a registered relationship

in a de facto relationship and

-   not in a prohibited relationship
-   both over the age of consent in the state or territory they live in

not living separately and apart on a permanent or indefinite basis

If a marriage, registered relationship or a de facto relationship ceases
to exist, the partners of that relationship are no longer members of a
couple.

Living separately and apart

To be considered to be living separately and apart, it must be
established that:

-   they are living apart either permanently or indefinitely, (physical
    separation) and
-   there has been an estrangement or breakdown in their relationship
    (emotional separation)

Living separately and apart does not require the customer to have
physically moved out of shared accommodation. The customer must
establish there is a genuine separation in the relationship and they are
living separate lives.

Generally, living separately and apart should not be accepted if the
couple are living apart because of ill health. Explore all other options
before determining that a couple are living separately and apart.

Types of separation

Two people who were previously a member of a couple may be:

-   separated and no longer live together under the same roof (a member
    of a couple separates)
-   separated and continuing to live together under the same roof with
    their ex-partner (SUOR). This may be a temporary or permanent
    arrangement however, there must be a genuine separation with no
    plans to resume the relationship

Other separations include customers who separate however still consider
themselves a couple. Different processes apply to these customers. For
customers who separate due to:

-   imprisonment or psychiatric confinement, see Assessment of
    circumstances for customers with partner in prison
-   illness, see Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due
    to illness
-   one or both members of the couple accessing approved respite care,
    see Customer is separated from their partner due to respite care

Customers not currently in receipt of payments

Customer and ex-partner not in receipt of payments or services

Updating relationship details for customers wishing to claim, but not
currently receiving Centrelink payments or services is not required. If
a new claim for income support or another payment/concession card is
being lodged, updates will be done as part of the new claim.

If a non-current customer notifies of a separation (via a MOD S) their
record must still be updated. If they contact by phone to advise they
are separated, the same procedures apply as if they were receiving
payments or service. Tell them to lodge a completed MOD S. This makes
sure the agency holds information about the customer that is accurate,
up-to-date and complete, as required under the Australian Privacy
Principles. There is no need to obtain verification of separation for
non-current customers.

Ex-partner is in receipt of payments or services

If the ex-partner is in receipt of payments or services:

-   a MOD S or online relationship details update is required from the
    ex-partner
-   the ex-partner is required to advise a change of circumstances
    within 14 days

Exception: there is no need to obtain details of the separation from the
ex-partner if the customer has provided the details via:

-   a completed MOD S form for current customers
-   the online Update relationship details service (if eligible to use
    this service)
-   the online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow for
    customers making a claim

Details on follow up with the ex-partner where they are in receipt of
payments or services is outlined on the Process page.

Note: if the ex-partner is in receipt of Parenting Payment Partnered
(PPP), the ex-partner can either lodge an online claim for the most
relevant payment (generally Parenting Payment Single (PPS)), or complete
a MOD S.

If it has been determined the ex-partner is required to provide
separation details, send a Request for Information from the ex-partner's
record.

A MOD S is not required for parents/guardians of dependent YA/ABY
customers who have separated where the parents/guardians are not
receiving an income support payment. See Changes which may affect the
Parental Income Test (PIT) for further information.

Circumstances when the MOD S is required

When a partnered customer in receipt of income support payments and/or
services separates, they must advise Services Australia of the change in
relationship status.

Separation details are generally provided via:

-   a completed MOD S form for current customers
-   the online Update relationship details service, (if eligible to use
    this service)
-   the online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow for
    customers making a claim

A MOD S is not required when the customer is:

at risk of family and domestic violence and information has been
collected verbally and their relationship status updated immediately

advising of a separation within an online or paper claim. Separation
details are in their claim. Note: this includes Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment Single (PPS) benefit transfers

advising of a separation by using the online Update relationship details
service

their partner has passed away

living overseas, a separate procedure applies, see Change in
relationship status for a customer residing outside Australia

separated from their partner due to:

-   imprisonment or in psychiatric confinement
-   illness
-   respite care

receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) only
unless:

-   there is any doubt about the separation
-   the customer is separated under one roof (in which case the customer
    will be required to complete the SS293)

receiving Carer Allowance (CA) only

receiving Mobility Allowance (MOB) only

a holder of a Commonwealth Seniors Health Card (CSHC), Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC) or Ex Carer Allowance Health Care Card (EHC) only

Note: if both the customer and their ex-partner are in receipt of
payments/services, separation details are only needed from one member of
the couple for unlinking to occur. Details on follow up with the other
person is outlined on the Process page.

If a non-income support customer separates and their ex-partner is in
receipt of an income support payment, a MOD S and verification of
separation is required before updating the customer's relationship
status and unlinking records. This includes customers that only receive
FTB/CCS but the partner is receiving an income support payment.

Separated Under One Roof (SUOR)

Current customers who separate but continue to reside with their
ex-partner must lodge a:

-   MOD S form and completed SS293 form(s), or
-   use the online Update relationship details service (if eligible) and
    completed SS293 form(s)

Note: customers who only receive FTB/CCS that separate and continue to
live with their ex-partner must lodge completed SS293 form(s). See
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
separates.

Where a partnered customer advises of a separation but continues to live
under the same roof as their ex-partner, assess both:

-   the online Update relationship details service/MOD S, and
-   the SS293

The online Update relationship details service submission or MOD S must
be processed first, including verification of separation. After that, a
Member of a Couple assessment must take place for a full assessment of
the customer's living arrangements. A Risk Based MoC assessment may be
applied if appropriate.

Note: where a concurrent separation and SUOR assessment is required, do
not unlink the records on receipt of MOD S/online separation update. The
SUOR assessment must be conducted to determine whether the customer is
assessed as single or partnered.

An SUOR assessment is not required where the customer contacts to advise
they no longer live with their ex-partner, and they stopped living
together within 14 days of the date of separation.

The SUOR assessment must be put on hold if:

an SS293 is received, and

the customer is currently linked to their partner, and:

-   has not lodged a MOD S, or
-   completed an update using the Update relationship details service

Advise the customer to submit an online Update relationship details
service or lodge a MOD S. This must be done to make sure any other
change in circumstances the customer notifies are also updated.

SUOR customer is no longer living with their ex-partner

If a customer who is currently assessed as separated under one roof
advises they or their ex-partner have now moved out of the shared
residence, this is not a separation. They are already considered
separated, so an assessment of their relationship status is not
required. The customer's record must be updated and the 'Separated Under
One Roof' Relationship Qualifier Code removed on the Marital Status (MS)
screen.

Verifying separation

When a customer separates, the separation must be verified.

However, in certain circumstances the verification of separation may not
be able to be completed before the relationship status is updated. This
applies to customers experiencing family and domestic violence where an
immediate update of the relationship status to single will allow an
immediate transfer to a higher single rate of payment. In these cases,
verification of separation will still be required after the granting of
the single rate.

Verification of separation is not required for customers who advise of
separation within a claim.

Customer and ex-partner not in receipt of payments or services

Verification of separation is not required for non-current customers. If
a non-current customer notifies of a separation (via a MOD S) their
record must be updated. If they contact by phone to advise they have
separated, the same procedures apply as if they were receiving payments
or services. Tell them to lodge a completed MOD S. This makes sure the
agency holds information about the customer that is accurate, up-to-date
and complete, as required under the Australian Privacy Principles. There
is no need to obtain verification of separation for non-current
customers.

Documents to verify separation

Separation may be verified by documentation already supplied and stored
on the customer's record. See Sufficient written documentation to verify
that a bona fide separation has occurred.

The customer must provide objective evidence they have separated on a
permanent or indefinite basis. When making the assessment, greater
weight is to be given to independent indicators of separation.
Statements made about the separation are to be based on independent
observations of the relationship, rather than a restatement of what the
person has been told by the customer.

Proof of divorce is not required but can be used to verify separation.
If a customer has been separated for 12 months or longer and they advise
they are now divorced, verification should not be requested unless there
is doubt about the customer's relationship status.

Insufficient documents to verify separation

Where there is not sufficient written documentation to verify that a
bona fide separation has occurred, contact with a referee may be
required.

Customer used the MOD S to advise of separation

If a customer advises of their separation via a MOD S form, they need to
have an appropriate referee complete section 2 of the form to verify
separation. This is sufficient and there is no other verification
needed, unless the customer has used an inappropriate referee.

If a referee has not confirmed the customer is separated, no further
contact with the referee is required and the customer is to continue to
be assessed as partnered.

Customer used the online Update relationship details service to advise
of separation

If a customer has used the online Update relationship details service to
advise of separation, contact with a referee provided by the customer
may be required if there is not already sufficient verification of
separation available on the customer's record.

Requesting information from a referee

Under Section 192 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999, all
requests for information from third parties must be made in writing
using a Q270 Online Advice to the customers' nominated referee. However,
Section 63 of the Act allows verbal requests for information from
claimants/recipients. A verbal request for referee contact details can
be made to the customer. Service Officers can also verbally accept the
response from a referee to the Q270.

Referee contacts in response to Q270 request

If the referee is contacting in response to a Q270 Online Advice/request
to verify separation, there are a list of questions that are to be
asked. These are similar to the questions asked on the Q270 Online
Advice.

Unable to verify separation

The customer is not regarded as being separated if:

-   there is insufficient documentation to verify the separation and a
    customer is unable to provide the details of a referee, or
-   a referee has indicated the customer is not single

If the customer is in receipt of a payment, they are to continue to be
assessed as a member of a couple and paid at the partnered rate.

Nominee advising of separation

Information in relation to separation provided by the appointed
correspondence nominee should be accepted and actioned as if the
customer provided it. For more information, see Accepting information
from nominees.

Updating customer details

When a customer advises of a separation, several updates to their record
may be required.

Address and accommodation details, where no family and domestic violence
is present

If a customer separates from their partner, the customer remains linked
until they provide separation details and their separation is verified.
A Tmp Sep/Left Home qualifier code must be recorded on the MS screen
when advising of a change of address due to separation. This ensures the
address and accommodation details for the customer can be updated
independently.

Note: the 'Tmp Sep/Both Left Home' and 'Tmp Sep/Ptnr Left Home' must not
be used as updates to the partner's address as updates cannot be made
based on the customer advising separation.

Nominee

When a customer who has their partner appointed as their nominee advises
they have separated, they must be asked at first point of contact if
they wish to cancel the nominee arrangement. A request for cancellation
of the arrangement must be actioned immediately. The request does not
have to be in writing.

Person Permission to enquire (PPE)

If the ex-partner has permission to enquire, the customer must be asked
at first point of contact if they wish to end this arrangement. The
coding of the separation will automatically cease the PPE authority.

Other updates to consider

Other updates Service Officers must also consider when updating the
customer's record include (but not limited to):

-   changes to bank account details (noting that customers may have had
    a joint account previously and the ex-partner may still have access)
-   changes to income and assets
-   changes to the level of care of children for FTB/CCS and ISP
    purposes

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer or their ex-partner advises of the separation

If the PPP customer or their ex-partner advises of the separation, by
lodging a MOD S, by phone, in person or via an online claim/Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC), there must be no action taken to unlink the
records prior to the transfer activity. The unlinking must occur within
the benefit transfer activity see Transfer from Parenting Payment
Partnered to Parenting Payment Single.

If the records are unlinked, it will result in the automatic
cancellation of PPP in which case the customer may suffer hardship while
waiting for their new claim to be processed.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer separates

There is no requirement to verify separation when a non-income support
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer separates
unless:

-   there is any doubt about the separation
-   the customer is still living with their ex-partner. A separated
    under one roof assessment is required (customer must complete an
    SS293)

These customers are not eligible to use the online Update relationship
details service.

If a non-income support FTB/CCS customer separates and their ex-partner
is in receipt of income support payment, the ex-partner must advise a
change of circumstances by:

-   an online update of their relationship details, or
-   MOD S and verification of separation

They must notify the agency within 14 days of the separation. These are
required before updating the customer's relationship status and
unlinking records.

These customers must either provide an estimate or revise an existing
estimate of income.

If separating from a parent of an FTB child, maintenance action and
income details must be checked and discussed. For more information, see
Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers.

If separating from a parent of a CCS child, discuss who will be liable
for the child care fees. See Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Concession card holder separates

There is no requirement to verify separation when a non-income support
concession card holder customer separates. For Commonwealth Seniors
Health Card (CSHC), Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) and Ex Carer
Allowance Health Care Card (EHC), Service Officers will need to update
the marital status and the date of separation. Evidence of the new
income may need to be supplied for CSHC and LIC, as marital status and
dependents impacts on the applicable income threshold. See Change in a
customer's circumstances and effect on concession card entitlement for
process to follow when a concession card holder separates.

Ongoing entitlements following separation

If it is determined the customer is separated from their partner, care
must be taken to check the most appropriate payment and rate is made to
the customer and the ex-partner's continuing entitlement to their
payment is also checked. For example, where the customer is in receipt
of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and it has been determined they are the
principal carer of a child under 8 years of age, the customer may choose
to apply for PPS by lodging an online claim.

To determine the most appropriate service offer, see Payment and Service
Finder to help customers find out what payments they may be eligible
for.

Considerations in multiple relationships

When updating a customer's relationship status, additional cultural
considerations may need to be taken into account to make an accurate
determination. If a customer discloses more than 1 partner - a multiple
relationship - Service Officers must establish with the customer exactly
who they are in a relationship with to determine the central couple.

A multiple relationship is where a person has more than one concurrent
member of a couple relationship. Multiple relationships are not
recognised under social security law, therefore all parties to the
relationship, outside the central couple, must be assessed for
entitlements under Section 24 provisions. See Treatment of a partnered
person as single under Section 24 new determinations for more
information.

If a customer in a multiple relationship advises of a separation from
one of their partners, care must be taken when undertaking updates to
ensure the correct partner's details are updated. This may include
changing partner links to another member of the multiple relationship if
the customer is currently linked in the system to the partner from whom
they have now separated.

Customers living overseas

This procedure does not apply to customers living overseas. There is a
separate procedure where a Centrelink International Services (CIS)
customer living outside Australia advises they have separated.

The Resources page contains links to Office Locator, Services Australia,
forms and letter templates.

Contents

Change in relationship status to single for a customer residing outside
Australia

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
separates

Youth Allowance (YA) or ABSTUDY customer separates

Related links

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered to Parenting Payment Single

Assessing the Separation details MOD S and online updates

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

ABSTUDY customer in de facto relationship

Assessment of circumstances for a couple separated due to illness

Changing the Legal name of customers or their children

Updating address details

Permanent vacation of principal home

Payment destination

Family and domestic violence

Assets hardship provisions - Pensions

Cancelling a nominee arrangement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
