
New Employment Services Model - Workforce Australia

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

​​​​​​​​​​​​​The New Employment Services Model (NESM) will replace the jobactive
program from 1 July 2022. This page provides reso​urces to support you
through these changes. 

What are you looking for​​ 

  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  []Messages              [resources              [Resources
                          link]Training           link]Resources

  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

  ​[update icon]Page last updated: 26​/05/2022

[Expand all sections]

What you need to know

Existing job seekers (including Disability Support Pension recipients
with participation requirements) will transition to the relevant
Workforce Australia service on 1 July 2022. The Department of Education,
Skills and Employment will contact them to confirm arrangements prior to
1 July.

Changes starting from 1 July 2022 include:

Rebranding
Workforce Australia will replace Jobactive. Existing references to the
current jobactive Employment Services Model and associated providers
will be replaced in all Services Australia & DESE staff and customer
facing applications such as Websites, customer online services, myGov,
Centrelink and DESE systems etc. Services Australia staff will not see
these changes applied until 1 July 2022.

A new points-based system
Jobseekers with compulsory Mutual Obligation or Participation
Requirements will be subject to a new points target. This will replace
the current activities based model and will allow job seekers greater
flexibility to choose how and when they fulfil their mutual obligation
requirements. The Targeted Compliance Framework will remain unchanged,
however the focus will shift to a points-based requirement. The Job
Seeker Compliance Framework for CDP jobseekers will remain business as
usual.

Jobseeker Snapshot
The Jobseeker Snapshot will replace the JSCI. The snapshot will be more
dynamic with questions targeted to individual customer circumstances.

Workforce Australia Online
This is a new digital platform for all Australians. It will provide
services including resume tools, online learning and job matching
services.

Workforce Australia​ Provider Services
They will provide an enhanced and more tailored services by focusing on
job seekers who need more support. Community Development Program and
Disability Employment Service Program will continue to be available.

Job Plans
Will be simplified and streamlined with reference to job seekers
achieving a monthly points target. The points target will replace
activities described in the job plan. Job Plans will be simplified for
job seekers and Centrelink Managed cohorts.

Transition to Work
Enhancements to the Transition to Work programme, including expansion of
eligibility and extension of programme length for some disadvantaged
participants (from 18 months to 24months).

Jobseeker registration and referral processes
New registration and referral processes will be introduced for volunteer
jobseekers. These job seekers will be referred to the new ‘BASE’ digital
service. There will be no maximum timeframe that these jobseekers will
be able to access this service. 

​Data exchange
Improved technology and data exchange between Services Australia and the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment (DESE) will ensure staff
see updated information in near real time. This will also ensure Job
seekers do not need to provide the same information multiple times to
Services Australia and their Employment Service Provider.

Messages

-   Workforce Australia is replacing jobactive from 1 July 2022 -
    Updated​
-   New Employment Services Model - contact with job seekers​

Training

-   ​W​ill start from the end of May 2022.
-   Training for existing staff is currently under development.
-   For new staff, existing training products will be updated to include
    the changes under NESM.
-   A new overarching high level training product will be developed for
    most staff, with more targeted products developed for operational
    and processing staff (i.e. Participation Solutions Team).

Resources

Process Direct Entry hub 

-   Process Direct support​

Additional Resources

-   NESM information pack
-   New Employment Services Model (NESM) - Workforce Australia
-   Staff talking points

-   ​ [Workforce Australia - Job Seeker Transition Letters May - June
    2022]Workforce Australia - Job Seeker Transition Letters May - June
    2022​

​

Public information (Services Australia/external websites)

-   Department of Education, Skills and Employment - Workforce Australia
-   Help to get work with jobactive - JobSeeker Payment - Services
    Australia
-   Looking for work and job hunting - Looking for work - Services
    Australia
-   Mutual obligation requirements - Services Australia
-   Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers - Services
    Australia

VODs 

-   [Workforce Australia Video]Workforce Australia Video
-   ​[Workforce Australia Staff Transcript]Workforce Australia Staff
    Transcript

​

Feedback

​​

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
