
Work for the Dole (WFD) under jobactive 001-09080000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the eligibility criteria and requirements of a
job seeker when participating in Work for the Dole (WFD) under jobactive
employment services.

About Work for the Dole

Entry into the WFD program provides job seekers with an opportunity to
improve their job prospects, get valuable work experience and help their
local community.

Note: for information regarding requirements under Community Development
Program, see Community Development Program (CDP).

Job seekers undertaking WFD will have their activities negotiated by
their jobactive provider. Providers use the Targeted Compliance
Framework to manage WFD requirements.

Services Australia does not refer job seekers to WFD, but is responsible
for informing job seekers of their mutual obligation requirements and
determining if financial penalties apply for mutual obligation failures
committed by job seekers in the financial penalty zone.

The job seeker continues to be subject to the usual requirements to
comply with requests from Services Australia and to meet their mutual
obligation requirements throughout their placement on WFD.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website regarding Work for the Dole (WFD) as well
as WFD provider contacts in each state and territory.

Annual Activity Requirement (AAR) and the Work for the Dole Phase

Job seekers aged 18 and over participating in jobactive and receiving
income support have mutual obligation requirements, which includes
meeting an Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive. An AAR is the set
number of hours that eligible job seekers must complete in approved
activities when they are in the Work for the Dole Phase. The Work for
the Dole Phase is a six-month consecutive period each year. The number
of hours each week that job seekers participate in Work for the Dole
(WFD) or other approved activities will vary according to their age and
work capacity.

While job seekers are undertaking WFD, they must continue to meet their
mutual obligation requirements, including undertaking job search
activities and attending provider appointments.

See Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive for additional
information.

Note: for information regarding WFD requirements under the Community
Development Program (CDP), see Community Development Program (CDP).

Work for the Dole activities

Work for the Dole is for job seekers participating in jobactive. It is a
work experience program which places job seekers in activities where
they can build new skills, experience and confidence to move from
welfare to work while giving back to their community. A variety of WFD
activities and placements are available. Some examples include:

-   computer graphics work
-   animal or wildlife shelter activities
-   retail work
-   rehabilitation of public parks
-   office administration
-   warehouse duties
-   gardening and maintenance

Activities must provide benefit to the broader community, improve
employment prospects of participants and reduce alienation of unemployed
people from their community.

WFD referrals

The jobactive provider has full responsibility for referring job seekers
to a WFD activity.

Service Officers cannot make direct referrals to WFD and must direct job
seekers interested in participating in WFD to their provider to discuss
referral and placement.

Compulsory Work for the Dole requirements

Job seekers aged 18 to 49 years who are receiving a full rate of income
support payment will normally have Work for the Dole as the principal
activity to meet their Annual Activity Requirements unless they:

-   have arranged with their provider to meet their AAR through another
    approved activity that will start at the time they become subject to
    the AAR, or
-   are already undertaking other approved activities at the time they
    enter the Work for the Dole Phase

Job seekers aged 50 and over may choose to undertake Work for the Dole
or other approved activities to meet their AAR. Job seekers aged 50 and
over can choose not to undertake WFD to meet their AAR, but must
undertake other compulsory approved activities that must be included in
their Job Plan. The provider cannot compel them to undertake WFD to meet
their AAR.

When the job seeker commences in an activity to meet their AAR, the
jobactive provider will enter it into the job seeker's Job Plan and
advise the job seeker that they must comply with the activity. The
activity will automatically display on the Activities and Exemptions
Summary Screen (AEX), showing the start and end dates as per the Job
Plan.

Voluntary participation

Job seekers under 18 years of age cannot participate in WFD, even if
they wish to volunteer.

Job seekers receiving employment assistance as a volunteer (Stream A
Voluntary) are not eligible to do WFD.

Principal Carer Parents and those assessed as having a Partial Capacity
to Work who do not have compulsory participation requirements of any age
can volunteer for Work for the Dole.

Job seekers aged 50 and over with full-time mutual obligation
requirements must undertake approved activities to meet their mutual
obligation requirements (including any AAR), and may volunteer to
undertake Work for the Dole as part of these activities.

Job seekers, aged 50 and over, with full-time mutual obligation
requirements, cannot be compelled to undertake Work for the Dole.
However, if they choose to voluntarily undertake Work for the Dole to
meet their requirements, and not just during the Work for the Dole phase
to meet AAR, the activity must be entered as a compulsory activity in
the Job Plan by their jobactive provider.

A job seeker receiving a part-rate income support cannot be compelled to
participate in Work for the Dole or another approved program of work.
These job seekers can participate in Work for the Dole as a voluntary
participant.

Payments, supplement and services during Work for the Dole

Work for the Dole participants remain entitled to their income support
payment (that is, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Special Benefit (SpB), Youth
Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment
(PP)) and receive an additional fortnightly supplement to assist with
the costs of their WFD placement. Job seekers are eligible for the
supplement regardless of the WFD activity being undertaken on a
compulsory or voluntary base, to help with the costs of attendance.

Job seekers are not able to be in receipt of the WFD supplement and the
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) at the same time.

Job seekers may be eligible for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
(Transition to Work) whilst participating in work for the dole.

Suspension of WFD supplement

Job seekers who are exempt from their mutual obligation requirements and
who do not continue to voluntarily participate during the exemption
period, at any stage during an entitlement period, will have their WFD
supplement suspended. The suspension will be applied from the exemption
start date for job seekers with mutual obligation requirements. The
supplement will be reinstated on the following day after the exemption
has ended, unless the job seeker volunteered to participate within the
exemption period. In this case, the supplement will only be paid if
there was participation during the entitlement period.

Work for the Dole requirements under CDP

For information regarding requirements under Community Development
Program, see Community Development Program (CDP).

Participation in Work for the Dole

As part of negotiating a WFD requirement:

-   job seekers are expected to take personal responsibility for working
    with their provider to identify circumstances that have the
    potential to impact on their ability to participate so that
    requirements are appropriate to their circumstances
-   providers must ensure that the compulsory requirement is consistent
    with relevant legislation and policies, do not exceed prescribed
    maximum limits set out in social security law and that they have
    considered the job seeker's personal circumstances and assessed
    capacity

The Job Plan includes the WFD requirement, the individual days and
locations the job seeker is required to attend. These are scheduled by
the provider.

Providers are responsible for managing compliance of these requirements
under the Targeted Compliance Framework. For further information, see
Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory
activity.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website regarding Work for the Dole (WFD).

Contents

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Community Development Program (CDP)

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Job seeker change of address

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
