
Job Seeker Snapshot 001-02050000

-   Background
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what the Job Seeker Snapshot is and how it
supports job seekers.

Access requirements

Post 1 July 2022, all staff who register customers as a job seeker, view
or update the Job Seeker Snapshot must have registered (if not already
done so) in the ESSWeb 2.0 system before running the workflow in Process
Direct.

To register, follow the process outlined in the Registering access to
ESSWEB 2.0 taskcard on the Resources page.

Primary function of the Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot is used to identify a job seeker's ability to
find suitable employment and determine the level of employment
assistance they may require. The job seeker is asked a series of
questions regarding their individual circumstances to determine their
eligibility to access employment services (for example from a Workforce
Australia Employment Services Provider or Transition to Work). The Job
Seeker Snapshot operates by allocating a score or weighting against
individual factors relating to a job seeker's risk of long-term
unemployment.

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations administers the Job
Seeker Snapshot policy and periodically reassesses these factors and
their weighting. The Services Australia requirement to accurately apply
the Job Seeker Snapshot is set out in the Business Partnership Agreement
(BPA) between Services Australia and Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations.

The primary function of the Job Seeker Snapshot is to determine a job
seeker's eligibility for services available through Workforce Australia
providers.

Application of the Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot may be completed by:

-   the agency either during the job seeker's initial contact or when
    the Job Seeker Snapshot is re-run as a result of a change in
    circumstances
-   the job seeker, online as part of the new claim process and prior to
    the Participation Interview
-   a Workforce Australia or Transition to Work (TtW) provider, as part
    of the direct registration process for a job seeker with no mutual
    obligation requirements or for job seekers who have already
    commenced with them
-   a Time to Work Employment Service (TWES) provider, as part of the
    TWES programme

The job seeker’s responses to Job Seeker Snapshot questions are used to
determine the most appropriate referral based on answers relating to the
Job Seeker Snapshot factors. Service Officers consider any personal and
sensitive issues that may affect the job seeker. One important
consideration is to identify job seekers who are refugees that may have
experienced torture or trauma.

Run the Job Seeker Registration workflow for customers who:

-   submitted an online claim or a Service Officer has completed the
    Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow
-   are currently receiving a payment, or
-   want to register as a Volunteer jobseeker

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

In some cases a further assessment will be required in addition to the
Job Seeker Snapshot. This is known as an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt) and is undertaken by an Assessor. This interview will further
explore the barriers faced with gaining employment and address the job
seeker's needs. It may also result in the allocation of an additional
score to the Job Seeker Snapshot. The outcomes of the ESAt will also
determine the customer's suitability for other programs, including
disability employment assistance services such as Disability Employment
Services (DES).

When a Job Seeker Snapshot initiated ESAt is triggered, a JSR UPD
activity is created and will remain on the job seeker's record until an
ESAt appointment is booked. Until the ESAt is submitted the Job Seeker
Snapshot will remain unfinalised or pending on the record preventing
referral to an Employment Services Provider, except for job seekers who
are identified as Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student)
(VY(S)). VY or VY(S) can be referred to an Employment Services Provider
for immediate access to employment services even when the ESAt outcome
is still pending.

Note: where an ESAt has been conducted as part of the Time to Work
Employment Service (TWES) programme another one does not need to be
completed unless there has been a change in circumstances that may
affect the result.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website for information on the rationale behind
the factors that make up the Job Seeker Snapshot.

Contents

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot

Job Seeker Snapshot and short term illness/incapacity

Job Seeker Snapshot factors

Job Seeker Snapshot factors for torture and trauma

Requirement for a Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) as a result of an Employment Services Provider update

Job Seeker Snapshot Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
flags

Related links

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Participation Interview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
