
Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) 001-09070170

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document outlines approved activities which satisfy mutual
obligation requirements for customers who have been assessed as having a
temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) by an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt).

On this Page:

TRWC bandwidths

The ESAt assesses temporary reduced work capacity according to the
following bandwidths:

-   0-7 hours per week
-   8-14 hours per week
-   15-22 hours per week
-   23-29 hours per week

Work Capacity (WC) screen

Services Australia uses information about the customer's temporary
reduced work capacity from the Work Capacity section of the ESAt report
to place the job seeker into the appropriate TRWC participation
category. Once the ESAt report is accepted, this information is
displayed on the Work Capacity (WC) screen.

Note: job seekers whose Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) was finalised
prior to 6 March 2009 and the outcome was TRWC of 0-14 hours per week,
will not have this information displayed on the WC screen due to system
limitations. Refer to Step 6 in the Quarterly Participation Interviews
for Partial Capacity to Work and Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0 - 7
or 8 - 14 hours per week) job seekers table.

Connection to Employment Services Provider

Customers with an assessed temporary reduced work capacity of 0-7 hours
per week are not eligible to participate in Disability Employment
Services (DES). However, these customers may still choose to volunteer
to participate with an Employment Services Provider.

Job Plan requirement

Services Australia must negotiate a Job Plan for job seekers assessed as
having a TRWC of between 0-14 hours per week by an ESAt. These job
seekers may volunteer to be connected with a provider who may add
voluntary activities to the Job Plan. Regardless of whether the job
seeker is connected to a provider, they will be managed by Services
Australia and Service Australia will be required to negotiate the
initial Job Plan.

Participation in drug or alcohol treatment may contribute to a job
seeker meeting their mutual obligation and Annual Activity Requirements
if they are provider managed.

If they are Centrelink managed, treatment activities may be included in
their Job Plan. However, the job seeker must still undertake the
required compulsory activities that have been approved by Services
Australia and included in their Job Plan, for example part-time work,
voluntary work, Quarterly Participation Interviews.

Job Plan activities

Customers undertaking part-time work or self-employment to meet their
requirements will have this included in their Job Plan as a compulsory
activity. For all other customers where the TRWC is for 12 weeks or more
the Job Plan must include the compulsory 'Attend Quarterly Appointment'
activity. Where a TRWC is for less than 12 weeks, the Service Officer
must include the 'Reduced Capacity Requirements' activity which will
require a customer to attend any Services Australia scheduled
appointments. All job seekers with a TRWC of less than 15 hours per week
may choose to continue to participate in their current activity during
this period but it may only be included in their Job Plan as a voluntary
activity.

Requirement to report

Job seekers with a TRWC will be expected to lodge a Reporting Statement
via Self Service (online or phone), in person or in writing (SU19) and
comply with the terms of their Job Plan.

TRWC of 15 hours or more per week

Job seekers assessed with a temporary reduced work capacity of 15 hours
or more per week (and who do not have an assessed partial capacity to
work of less than 15 hours per week and do not have an exemption from
their mutual obligation requirements) must undertake compulsory
activities to satisfy their requirements, and will be required to be
connected with an Employment Services Provider. A job seeker can
participate in suitable part-time work or self-employment of at least 15
hours per week to fully satisfy their requirements. Job seekers who are
working more than 15 hours per week may voluntarily leave employment to
commence suitable work of only 15 hours per week without incurring a
financial penalty for unemployment due to a voluntary act. If the job
seeker is not undertaking an approved activity which fully meets their
requirements, they must have job search included in their Job Plan. The
Job Plan will be negotiated by the provider unless the job seeker is
considered to be Centrelink managed.

Related links

Job Plans

Assessment Services

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview

Reporting overview

Reporting requirements for job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
