-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the payment and reporting arrangements over
national public holidays.

On this Page:

Holiday processing arrangements

Special arrangements are made when national public holiday periods occur
(such as Easter, Christmas, Anzac Day and Australia Day) to minimise
inconvenience to those customers who would:

-   be prevented from reporting their employment income, mutual
    obligation requirements and any change of circumstances on their
    normal reporting date, or
-   have delayed payment delivery due to public holidays.

Holiday processing arrangements take into account, and balance the
needs, of both the customer and staff. Each holiday cycle is different
and arrangements change each year. Where there are no reporting or
processing arrangements for a one day public holiday, customers who are
due to report their employment income, mutual obligation requirements
and change of circumstances are expected to report on the first
available working day after the public holiday.

Early reporting

[] Reporting by self service (online, Express Plus application or phone
self service) is available during national holidays.

Depending on when payments are due, and the customer's reporting
requirements, some Pensions, Parenting Payment (PP), Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) and other payments will be paid in advance of their due date.

Weekly payments

Customers in receipt of weekly payments will be subject to the normal
reporting arrangements over the Easter and Christmas public holiday
periods.

Electronic reporting reminders

Where there are reporting or processing arrangements in place for a
national public holiday, an SMS reminder will be sent to the customer.
Where a customer's payment requires stimulus prior to payment delivery
and their reporting due date falls on a National Public Holiday, an SMS
or email message reminder will be sent the day before the customer is
due to report, advising of the temporary arrangements. This only applies
to customers who are registered for electronic messaging SMS alerts and
have a valid mobile phone number recorded, or are registered for email
alerts and have a valid email address recorded.

The online account summary page of reporting periods:

-   highlights changed dates as a result of reporting arrangements over
    national public holidays, and
-   displays a warning message to customers

The Resources page contains further information on issues related to
reporting arrangements over national public holidays, a link to the
Holiday Processing information page, and a link to Centrelink online
accounts on the Services Australia website.

Related links

Reporting overview

Reporting employment income online

Checking, locking and unlocking Centrelink self service access

Accessing and using Centrelink self service

Reporting using phone self service

Centrelink documents and appointments options online

Reporting statements for job seekers

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Telephone lodgement of Reporting Statement when customer has a
compliance investigation

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
