[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines transitional rules for customers transferring
from Wife Pension (WP) to JobSeeker Payment (JSP), including eligibility
for the JobSeeker Payment Transitional Rate (JTR) and when access to JTR
is lost.

Wife Pension

WP was a non-activity tested income support payment for female partners
of Age Pension and Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers. It was
paid at the rate equivalent to Age Pension.

WP was closed to new entrants on 1 July 1995. WP ceased being paid on 20
March 2020. Transitional arrangements applied to those customers
receiving WP on 19 March 2020. Eligible WP customers transitioned to new
payments as follows:

-   JSP if under Age Pension age and not receiving Carer Allowance (CA)
-   Carer Payment if receiving CA, or
-   Age Pension if Age Pension age and not receiving CA

Wife Pension customers under Age Pension age who were not residing in
Australia were cancelled.

Transitional arrangements

The transitional arrangements for WP customers affected by the
introduction of JSP are:

-   Customers will maintain their former rate of payment until the
    amount payable under JSP exceeds the rate they would have received
    under WP for at least 42 consecutive days
-   The WP payment rate that applied on 19 March 2020 is the maximum
    transitional rate payable and will be frozen for JSP customers who
    qualify for the transitional arrangement
-   A comparison is made between the rate worked out using the frozen WP
    amounts and the current rate of JSP. The customer will receive
    whichever rate of payment is higher, known as the JobSeeker Payment
    Transitional Rate (JTR)
-   The JTR ensures that if the customer’s circumstances do not change
    and they met eligibility requirements they transfer to JSP at their
    existing payment rate
-   Customers getting the JTR can get a Pension Concession Card

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment Transitional Rate (JTR)

Transitional rules apply to WP customers who transfer to JSP on 20 March
2020. Wife Pensioners were transferred to JSP if they were:

-   not Age Pension age
-   an Australian resident
-   getting WP on 19 March 2020
-   not getting Carer Allowance on 19 March 2020

Transitional rate method

There are 2 methods used to calculate the transition WP rate for JSP.
This is determined by the customer's circumstances on 19 March 2020.
Once the method of rate calculation has been determined, it will not
change, even if there are changes in the customer's circumstances.

Method 1

Applies to WP customers who on 19 March 2020 had:

-   income and assets below the pensions income and assets free areas,
    and
-   income below the Newstart income test free area each day during the
    period 6 February 2020 to 19 March 2020 inclusive

Method 1 customers WP transition rate is calculated using:

-   Pension basic rate frozen at 19 March 2020
-   Pension Supplement frozen at 19 March 2020
-   Pension assets frozen at 19 March 2020
-   JSP income test (not frozen)

Method 2

Applies to WP customers who on 19 March 2020 had:

-   income or assets above the pension income and assets tests free
    areas and there is a payment reduction, or
-   income above the Newstart income test free area on at least one day
    during the period 6 February 2020 to 19 March 2020 inclusive

Method 2 customers WP transition rate is calculated by using the frozen
rates on19 March 2020 of:

-   Pension basic rate
-   Pension Supplement
-   Pension assets test
-   Pension income test
    Note: WP customers paid under the 2009 transitional rate rules have
    the above amounts frozen under those rules

Calculating the JTR

To calculate the transition rate for former WP customers who transfer to
JSP:

-   Calculate the JSP rate on transition day (Note: income test only -
    assets are disregarded)
-   Calculate the WP transition rate – using method 1 or 2
-   Compare the two rates
-   The higher of the two is the JobSeeker Payment Transitional Rate
    (JTR)

Transitional rate and Rent Assistance

For the purpose of calculating the transitional rate for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), customers who are eligible for the JobSeeker Payment
Transitional Rate (JTR) will also receive Rent Assistance (RA), where
eligible. RA will continue to be calculated at half the maximum
partnered rate, as if the customer was still receiving Wife Pension.

The Age Pension or Disability Support Pension partner of a JTR recipient
has Rent Assistance (where eligible) calculated as per the existing
process for pension/benefit couples. This means that the couple receives
150% of the couple RA entitlement for the period that the customer
receives JTR.

Loss of eligibility to JTR

The JobSeeker Payment Transitional Rate (JTR) grandfathered the WP rate
for customers who transferred to JSP. The transitional rate can continue
to be paid while the customer remains on JSP.

Eligibility to JTR ends when:

-   the customer's JTR is the same as the JSP rate on transition day for
    42 consecutive days and assets do not exceed the jobseeker assets
    test free area
-   the customer would no longer qualify for WP on or after 20 March
    2020, for example, they are no longer partnered, partner no longer
    receives Age Pension or Disability Support Pension or income or
    assets exceed the pension cut-out amounts
-   JSP is cancelled. If the customer applies again they will not be
    eligible for JTR

When the customer ceases to be eligible for JTR, the JSP rate is
assessed in the usual manner and the Allowance Assets test applies. See
Rates and Thresholds.

Rate comparison information in PD

The Rate Comparison screen is on the Circumstance Data (CDC) screen.

-   Enter Start in the Super Key field.
-   Select the Rate Comparison JSP and WP task and select Start.
-   The Rate Comparison screen allows Service Officers to apply date
    filters.

Related links

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Pension Concession Card

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
