-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess an exemption from mutual obligation
or participation requirements for a job seeker or a ParentsNext
participant with a serious illness. This may apply to customers
receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Parenting
Payment (PP) or Special Benefit (SpB).

Temporary Incapacity - Serious Illness

Job seekers and participants with mutual obligation or participation
requirements who are temporarily incapacitated as the result of an
illness, injury or medical condition may be eligible for a temporary
incapacity exemption. See Assessing and coding medical evidence for
temporary incapacity exemptions.

A Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption may be granted for customers who
are suffering from a serious illness. A serious illness or injury is
expected to impact on a customer's ability to undertake work, study or
meet their mutual obligation requirements for 8 hours or more per week
for an extended period (more than 13 weeks and less than 24 months).
This exemption can be applied for periods greater than 13 weeks under a
single medical certificate.

Note: as a result of their condition, seriously ill customers may be
temporarily incapacitated for extended periods of time. However, it is
often the case that they will not qualify for Disability Support Pension
(DSP) because their condition is:

-   not yet diagnosed, reasonably treated and stabilised, or
-   temporary (is likely to persist for less than 2 years)

Exemption Period

The Temp-Incap - Serious Illness exemption may initially be granted for
up to 12 months, according to the dates advised by a medical
practitioner on the medical certificate, or following contact with a
Service Officer.

If further evidence is provided and it can be determined that the same
serious illness condition persists at the end of the initial 12 month
exemption, an extension of up to 6 months may be applied. The allowable
exemption period will be determined by the dates advised by the medical
practitioner on a new medical certificate.

Job seekers granted a Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption:

-   will not be required to provide additional medical certificates for
    the duration of the exemption, and
-   will have modified reporting requirements during the exemption

If a job seeker is still clearly temporarily incapacitated for all work
after being granted a total period of 18 months exemption for the same
medical condition, they may be granted a further exemption of up to 13
weeks at a time. A new medical certificate will be required for each new
exemption period and will be assessed under the temporary incapacity
exemption provisions.

Exemption criteria

To be eligible for a temporary incapacity - serious illness exemption,
the following criteria must be met:

the job seeker must:

-   meet all the criteria required for a temporary incapacity exemption
-   be temporarily incapacitated as a result of having a serious illness
-   be undergoing/recovering from intensive medical treatment (for
    example, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, etc.) or undertaking
    rehabilitation for the serious illness

it is unlikely that the job seeker will experience significant
improvement in their medical condition over the period stated on the
medical certificate, and

requiring the job seeker to repeatedly obtain a new medical certificate
every 13 weeks would place unreasonable physical and/or mental burden or
stress on the job seeker

Note: this exemption should not be used as a way to reduce the number of
contacts with job seekers.

Serious illness conditions

Some examples of medical conditions that may indicate a job seeker or
participant is seriously ill include:

-   cancer/leukaemia
-   severe stroke
-   acquired brain injuries
-   serious burns
-   serious physical injuries requiring long recovery periods
-   severe mental health conditions for which the person is receiving
    treatment in an institutional setting

If a job seeker's medical evidence verifies they have a terminal
illness, they may be manifestly eligible for Disability Support Pension
(DSP).

Note: if the serious illness is primarily as a result of drug or alcohol
misuse or dependency, a Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption cannot be
granted unless the job seeker is a Community Development Program (CDP)
participant. The job seeker can volunteer to undertake drug dependency
treatments or interventions.

Medical evidence for Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption

A valid medical certificate is preferred, however, any medical
documentation which contains the information required for a valid
medical certificate will satisfy this requirement.

Where the information contained in a valid medical certificate requires
clarification, or if a serious illness is otherwise indicated, it may be
appropriate to contact the medical practitioner to make sure that all
relevant information is considered in the decision. Additional
information obtained via contact with the medical practitioner must be
appropriately documented on the customer's record.

ESAt and Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemptions

Job seekers with a serious illness who clearly meet the criteria for the
Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption do not need to be referred for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) to determine whether an exemption
can be granted.

A referral for an ESAt in addition to granting a Temp-Incap Serious
Illness exemption may be appropriate to determine:

-   if a job seeker has a Partial Capacity to Work (PCW)
-   identify if another payment is more appropriate
-   determine eligibility for Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) or
    independence, or
-   where a job seeker has been suspended for failing to attend a
    previous ESAt appointment

If the Job Seeker Snapshot identifies the requirement for an ESAt for a
job seeker who meets the criteria for the Temp Incap - Serious Illness
exemption, and it is determined that an ESAt is not also required, the
ESAt flag may be withdrawn so the pending Job Seeker Snapshot can be
completed without referring the job seeker for an ESAt.

Note: Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) do not apply to ParentsNext
participants.

Assessment of Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption by Assessment Services staff

Assessment Services staff may grant Temp-Incap Serious Illness
exemptions for job seekers in place of conducting an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt), where the evidence indicates that this is
appropriate. An Assessor may obtain further evidence by contacting the
medical practitioner via phone. Further evidence must be documented
appropriately. In some circumstances, it may be in the job seeker's best
interest to complete the ESAt where a Temp-Incap Serious Illness
exemption could be applied. This is to be determined at the Assessor's
discretion and is likely only relevant for a small cohort of job
seekers.

Reporting requirements during a Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption

Job seekers

Job seekers who have been granted the Temp Incap Serious Illness
exemption can be manually placed on variable reporting and are required
to report every 12 weeks using self-managed services or via Reporting
Statement (SU19).

ParentsNext

From 5 May 2023, compulsory participation requirements were removed for
ParentsNext. This means participants in ParentsNext no longer have
reporting requirements unless they or their partner have earnings to
declare.

A Temp -Incap Serious Illness exemption may still be applied if
customers are unable to participate in the program due to a serious
illness. If a customer is unable to provide medical evidence, see
ParentsNext exemptions and exits.

Modified SU19

Where a customer has been placed on variable reporting due to a
Temp-Incap Serious Illness exemption, the SU19 is modified to include
questions about their medical condition. The exemption will be
reconsidered if the customer states on the SU19 their condition has
significantly improved or deteriorated. See Reporting requirements and
Temp Incap - Serious Illness exemptions in Reporting requirements for
job seekers.

Authorising a person to act on behalf of a seriously ill customer

Customers who are seriously ill and have been granted a Temp-Incap
Serious Illness exemption may find it difficult to conduct their
business with the Agency for extended periods. It may be beneficial for
them to have a nominee to act on their behalf during the period of
incapacity.

Service Officer suspects medical certificate may be fraudulent

If the Service Officer is not satisfied with the integrity of the
information on the medical certificate, a temporary incapacity exemption
should not be granted. See Suspected fraud in Centrelink Medical
Certificate (SU415 or SU683).

Related links

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Job Seeker Snapshot Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
flags

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Adding or rejecting a nominee request

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
