
Rejecting a compliance action 001-10040090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Background

The key purpose of the job seeker compliance system is to encourage job
seekers and ParentsNext participants, to meet their compulsory
requirements and remain engaged with employment services.

The job seeker compliance system ensures job seekers who do not meet
their requirements and do not have a reasonable excuse are appropriately
held to account for their actions. At the same time, job seekers who
have a good reason for not meeting their requirements are not penalised.

All job seeker compliance decisions undertaken by Services Australia
must be evidence-based decisions that apply legislation and policy
consistently in a firm but fair manner. When established facts
substantiate that a non-compliance event did not occur or a job seeker
had reasonable excuse, and met prior contact requirements if required,
then compliance action will not be applied.

Compliance action automatically rejected

When a non-compliance event is reported, both a Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations validity check and a Services Australia validity
check are completed. This helps to ensure compliance investigations are
only generated when a failure would be legislatively valid.

While a compliance investigation is pending, the Services Australia
system continues to work in the background to ensure the compliance
investigation is still required. When updates are made to the job
seeker's record that mean the non-compliance event no longer needs to be
investigated, the system will automatically finalise compliance action
when it can. For example, outstanding compliance investigations may be
automatically finalised by the Services Australia system when a
retrospective exemption from compulsory requirements is granted or the
job seeker's payment is suspended due to imprisonment.

Automatic processing ensures when a compliance investigation displays in
the Participation Compliance hub under 'Outstanding', decisions makers
can be confident action will be required.

Making a decision to reject compliance action

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers (WNPPD or
PFDEC) and service centre Service Officers with UNPP security resource
have responsibility for job seeker compliance decisions.

A decision to reject, or not apply compliance action, must only be made
by a Service Officer who has responsibility for undertaking compliance
investigations for the type of compliance action being considered.

Decision makers must ensure any decision to reject compliance action is
an evidence-based and impartial decision so legislation and policy is
applied in a firm but fair manner.

Matters that are not relevant to a decision cannot be considered during
the decision making process. Relevant matters will depend on the type of
compliance action and the job seeker's and other circumstances that
directly and significantly impacted their capacity to comply at the time
of the non-compliance event.

Recording a decision to reject compliance action

All compliance investigations are recorded in the Compliance
Investigation workflow.

All key facts and evidence that supports these must be included and,
when a decision is made that compliance action will not be applied, the
Service Officer is responsible for selecting the rejection reason that
most accurately reflects the decision.

The documented summary of the decision must include sufficient level of
detail to ensure someone reviewing the decision will be able to

-   identify the facts of the case
-   the evidence that was gathered to support these facts, and
-   precisely how these were used to arrive at the decision to reject
    compliance action

Explaining a decision to reject compliance action

The decision maker's role includes ensuring job seekers are
appropriately informed about their personal responsibilities and the
consequences of non-compliance. Job seeker circumstances that are
impacting compliance must be reviewed.

All decision makers must ensure messages communicated when making a
decision to reject compliance action do not undermine the policy intent
or the working relationship between the provider and the job seeker.

The Resources page contains links to summaries of current valid and
historical codes for recording a decision to reject a failure or not
apply compliance action.

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Non-compliance events

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Gathering information and weighing evidence to establish facts for a
compliance investigation

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised

Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers

Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers
affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

Participation Compliance Manual Follow Up Review guide

Participation Compliance Workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
