
This document outlines the processes for approving drug or alcohol
dependency treatment programs, or interventions as approved activities
for job seekers.

Drug and alcohol treatments/interventions (treatment activities) as an approved activity

Drug and alcohol treatment programs/interventions (treatment activities)
can be undertaken as approved activities by job seekers in some
circumstances.

Treatment activities may or may not contribute to mutual obligation
requirements, depending on whether a job seeker is Centrelink managed or
managed by a:

-   Workforce Australia provider
-   Disability Employment Service (DES) provider
-   Community Development Program (CDP) provider

Provider managed job seekers – Workforce Australia only

Workforce Australia managed job seekers can discuss appropriate and
available treatment programs or interventions with their provider for
consideration in developing their points target.

If the job seeker is undertaking intensive treatment (such as
residential rehabilitation) and is unable to participate in other
activities, the treatment activity will fully meet their mutual
obligation requirements.

The job seeker will remain provider managed.

If they are undertaking less intensive treatment activities (such as a
fortnightly counselling session), this may contribute to meeting their
mutual obligation requirements. The job seeker will need to undertake
other activities, such as job search or training to meet their
requirements. However, the provider may reduce their requirements as
appropriate, based on the job seeker's individual circumstances.

Workforce Australia Employment Services Providers have access to the
Employment Fund. This can be used to help job seekers by paying for
professional services, such as drug and alcohol counselling or
rehabilitation.

If a job seeker fails to meet their compulsory requirements, they may be
subject to compliance action under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Provider managed participants – CDP only

CDP job seekers are not subject to the same Drug and/or Alcohol
reasonable excuse provisions that apply to Workforce Australia managed
job seekers.

CDP participants can discuss appropriate and available treatment
programs or interventions with their provider for consideration.
However, any treatment programs they choose to participate in are
voluntary and no compliance action is taken if they:

-   fail to attend the program, or
-   choose to leave the program

If the participant remains CDP provider managed, they must still meet
the mutual obligation requirements set out in their signed and
negotiated job plan.

A CDP participant is eligible for a temporary incapacity exemption if
they:

-   supply a medical certificate that indicates drug or alcohol
    dependency/misuse as the primary condition, or
-   advise they are undertaking a drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation
    program

DES managed job seekers

DES managed job seekers who are undertaking drug and alcohol
rehabilitation in a residential program only:

-   are fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements, and
-   are not required to undertake job search activities

The job seeker remains DES provider managed and must still attend
provider appointments.

It is recommended the job seeker has an authorised correspondence
nominee. The nominee will receive all correspondence and notifications
sent from the provider to the job seeker.

The nominee can advise the provider the job seeker is in a residential
program and may not have access to a phone or a computer.

DES Providers can use their service fees to pay for appropriate types of
help for an individual job seeker based on their circumstances. This
help may include interventions such as drug and alcohol counselling or
rehabilitation.

Centrelink managed job seekers

Centrelink managed job seekers may undertake treatment activities;
however, they are additional, voluntary activities only. Participation
in these treatment activities must not impact or reduce the job seeker’s
mutual obligation requirements.

Centrelink managed job seekers must still undertake the required
compulsory activities that have been approved by Services Australia, for
example:

-   part-time or voluntary work, or
-   quarterly participation interviews

If the job seeker wishes to reduce or fully satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements through participation in a drug/alcohol
treatment activity, they should be referred to an Employment Services
Provider for help. Providers can access a greater network of services
and resources to support job seekers to overcome their barriers to
employment.

Services Australia does not have access to funding to pay for treatment
activities. If a job seeker wishes to discuss treatment options, they
should be told to speak with their treating health professional.

Treatment activities

Provider managed job seekers

If a provider contacts to discuss treatment activities for a job seeker,
they should be told to contact their Account Manager for assistance.

Centrelink managed job seekers

If the job seeker wants to add a treatment activity as an additional,
voluntary activity, staff do not need to recommend or determine
appropriate treatment activities.

Inclusion of a treatment activity in the job seeker's requirements is
guided by evidence from treating health professionals and/or disclosure
by the job seeker.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances..

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
