
Serious failure hardship provisions 001-10120070

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the hardship provisions where payment may be
reinstated during a serious failure period.

Serious failures may be incurred by Community Development Program (CDP)
job seekers who either refuse or fail to accept suitable employment, or
are persistently non-compliant.

Serious failure hardship provisions

Payment may be reinstated during a serious failure period under hardship
provisions when a CDP job seeker:

-   does not have the capacity to undertake any Compliance Activity, and
-   serving the serious failure period would cause the CDP job seeker to
    be in severe financial hardship

Incapacity to undertake any Compliance Activity

CDP job seekers are only eligible for payment under hardship provisions
during a serious failure period if they do not have any capacity to
participate in a Compliance Activity. Capacity must be assessed for the
entire duration of the Compliance Activity and should be based on the
CDP job seeker’s current circumstances, including current exemptions
from mutual obligation requirements.

As a general rule, a CDP job seeker has some capacity to undertake a
Compliance Activity if they do not have an exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for the entire duration of the Compliance
Activity. If an exemption is appropriate but it is yet to be granted, a
waiver should only be recorded under hardship provisions after the
exemption is granted for the entire duration of the Compliance Activity.

Note: the CDP job seeker is not required to agree to participate in a
Compliance Activity in order for an assessment under serious failure
hardship provisions to take place.

Severe financial hardship

Severe financial hardship means a CDP job seeker:

-   has a dependent child or is a member of a couple and has liquid
    assets below $5000 (including their partner's liquid assets), or
-   is not a member of a couple and has liquid assets below $2500

Making payment under hardship provisions

CDP job seekers may test their eligibility for payment under hardship
provisions at any time during a serious failure period.

When a CDP job seeker is assessed as eligible for payment under hardship
provisions, payment will be fully reinstated from the date the
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
determines the waiver should take effect. As general rule the waiver
will take effect from the date it is requested by the CDP job seeker.

When payment is reinstated under hardship provisions, the CDP job seeker
will be considered a fully eligible CDP job seeker for the purpose of
accessing employment services. These CDP job seekers will not be
required to comply with their mutual obligation requirements for the
period they are exempt from mutual obligation requirements.

Liquid assets preclude payment

When a CDP job seeker does not qualify for payment under hardship
provisions in the first instance due to their level of liquid assets,
they can approach Services Australia at any time during the course of
the Serious Failure period for a reassessment of hardship.

The rules that relate to unavoidable or reasonable expenditure for the
Liquid Assets test will be applied in these situations. Prior to
applying the reasonable expenditure test, the Participation Solutions
Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD) may be required to ascertain
whether the CDP job seeker still has no capacity to participate in a
Compliance Activity.

Roles and responsibilities

The Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
is responsible for:

-   determining whether a CDP job seeker is eligible for payment under
    hardship provisions during a serious failure period, and
-   ending the serious failure period if hardship provisions apply

The assessment of hardship by the PST-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD)
may occur either during the course of finalising the determination to
apply a serious failure or at any other stage while the CDP job seeker
is serving the serious failure period.

Related links

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Serious failure penalties

Job Seeker Compliance Model waiver and hardship provisions

Waiving a serious failure period

Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not
attended

Assessment of hardship for Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP)

Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers
affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
