
Job seeker online claim appointment 001-17070600

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to find, action and process a job seeker
online claim appointment.

Background

Customers who claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) job
seeker must book an appointment with us to talk about their
circumstances. The Book Appointment Required task presents to the
customer prior to submitting the claim. When the appointment has been
booked, the task will display as Done.

The customer's job seeker online claim appointment must be completed
with Services Australia within 14 days of submitting their claim. If the
customers appointment status is changed to 'Did not Attend' they will
receive an immediate notification (SMS or email) telling them to sign
into their Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile
app and complete an online task to rebook their appointment. An
appointment task will be added to the customer's task list and the claim
tracker will show as 'On hold' until the customer completes the task.

The JSP or YA job seeker claim will reject as Failed to Attend Interview
(FAI) if the customer:

-   fails to rebook the job seeker online claim appointment, or
-   fails to attend the second appointment

In this case, the customer will be required to lodge a new claim and
book a new appointment.

Requirements

When conducting the Job seeker online claim appointment Service Officers
must:

-   attempt to contact the customer using all available numbers within
    their scheduled appointment time
-   be satisfied the customer record being accessed belongs to the
    correct person prior to assisting with the enquiry or before
    providing any personal information
-   reschedule the job seeker online claim appointment if requested

Failure to attend job seeker online claim appointment

First appointment

If the customer fails to attend the first appointment as they could not
be contacted on the first and second outbound contact attempts, the
customer will be sent a notification to Rebook Appointment via an online
task in their Centrelink online account.

Second appointment

If the customer fails to attend the second appointment as they could not
be contacted on the first and second outbound contact attempts, the
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker new claim
will automatically reject Failed to Attend Interview (FAI) once the
Service Officer has selected 'Not Answered' (either 'message left' or
'no message left') on the Change Appointment screen. The customer will
be required to lodge a new online claim.

Failure to rebook second appointment

If the customer does not action the second Rebook Appointment Required
online task by midnight the next working day, the claim will
automatically reject Fail to Book Interview (FBI) or Failed to Attend
Interview (FAI). The customer will be required to lodge a new online
claim and book a new appointment.

Early claim

A customer can start a claim 13 weeks before they are eligible for the
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) but they cannot submit the claim until they are
within 14 days of their eligibility date. Different processes apply for
customers who are transferring from Carer Payment (CA) to JSP, see
Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment.

Streamlined claims

Eligible customers who are offered a task in their Centrelink online
account up to 28 days before their current income support payment
ceases, can use the streamlined claim process to submit a JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) claim when they transfer to JSP from another payment.

The student to job seeker transfer or Participation transfer appointment
can be booked (within the streamlined claim) for a date after the
customer ceases to be eligible for a current payment.

For customers transferring from Student or Parenting Payment to JSP, the
Participation Interview will be conducted during the PTT appointment.
The Participation Interview must be accessed via the claim transaction,
before completing the job seeker registration and Job Seeker Snapshot.

Customers transferring from Youth Allowance (YA) student to YA (job
seeker) will have the job seeker registration and Job Seeker Snapshot,
accessed via the standalone Participation Summary, completed during the
SJT appointment.

Claim previously rejected or cancelled

The customer can request a reassessment of their JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), or Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker claim within 13 weeks of
rejection. Where the claim was rejected for Failing to Supply Documents
(FSD), before re-indexing the original claim, ensure all outstanding
documents have been supplied. If the customer has failed to supply all
documents at the time of the request for reassessment, Service Officers
must not re-index the original claim.

Where a customer's claim has been rejected for reason, failed to attend
interview (FAI), or failed to book interview (FBI), customer's must
submit a new claim, and book a new claim appointment before claim
submission.

Every JSP or YA (job seeker) claim must have the Participation Interview
completed before finalising the claim activity.

For more information regarding rejection and cancellation reasons see
Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS).

Correspondence nominee

[] Correspondence nominees can submit an online claim on behalf of the
principal and complete the Participation Interview.

Customer First settings

At times, Service Officers may be directed to Customer First to search
for a job seeker online claim appointments where Process Direct is
unavailable. The Resources page contains the settings required to
complete this process.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
Payment Finder, Centrelink online accounts, and information for job
seekers. This page also contains a Participation interview script,
Progress of Claim (PoC) Note and Customer First settings for Service
Officers.

Related links

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Death of care receiver (CLK)

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Social Applications

Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
