
Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not attended 001-10120080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes and procedures that apply when a
serious failure period has been conditionally waived but the Community
Development Program (CDP) job seeker fails to attend a serious failure
waiver re-engagement appointment with their provider. Serious failures
may be applied when CDP job seekers either refuse or fail to accept
suitable employment, or are persistently non-compliant.

Reinstating a serious failure period

When a serious failure period is conditionally waived, the CDP job
seeker is required to attend a waiver re-engagement appointment with
their CDP provider. If the provider decides to set other serious failure
requirements in addition to attendance at the waiver re-engagement
requirement, they will discuss these requirements with the job seeker.

If the CDP job seeker does not attend the waiver re-engagement
appointment or does not meet other serious failure requirements that
have been agreed with the provider, their serious failure period will be
reinstated from the later of:

-   the original serious failure period start date, or
-   the serious failure re-engagement appointment date

When the serious failure period is reinstated, the payment will stop the
day after the waiver re-engagement appointment. This can occur when the
CDP job seeker has already reported for the period in which the
appointment occurred.

The re-application of the serious failure period because of
non-attendance at the waiver re-engagement appointment is not a decision
under the legislation. However, CDP job seekers can ask for:

-   a formal review of the decision to apply the serious failure period
-   a waiver of the remainder of the serious failure period through
    attendance at a subsequent waiver re-engagement appointment

Roles and Responsibilities

CDP providers are responsible for advising Services Australia that a CDP
job seeker did not attend the waiver re-engagement appointment.

They will do this by recording an appointment result for the serious
failure re-engagement appointment. This will result in Services
Australia's system automatically reinstating the serious failure period.

Related links

Serious failure penalties

Job Seeker Compliance Framework waiver and hardship provisions

Waiving a serious failure period

Serious failure hardship provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
