
Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) 001-19051556

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for JobSeeker Payment
(JSP). This includes principal carers of a dependent child aged under
16, those unable to work or study due to illness or injury that have a
job to return to and customers assessed as having a Partial Capacity to
Work (PCW).

Eligibility criteria

To qualify for JSP a person must:

be of qualifying age for JSP

meet Australian residence requirements for JSP

not be in receipt of any other social security benefit, social security
pension or a Service Pension, Income Support Payment (ISP) or Veteran
Payment

not be receiving ABSTUDY Living Allowance

be unemployed, or

-   unable to look for work due to a medical condition, illness or
    injury, or
-   employed or studying full time and are unable to undertake these due
    to a medical condition, illness or injury and have a job or study to
    return to

be prepared to negotiate and enter into a Job Plan if required, or
comply with or renegotiate an existing Job Plan

satisfy the requirements of a Job Plan

Principal carers of a dependent child

A person who is regarded as the principal carer of a dependent child may
qualify for additional entitlements or reduced mutual obligation
requirements in respect of their JSP.

Only one member of a couple can be regarded as a principal carer of a
dependent child. If care of a child is shared with another person (other
than the customer's partner) a determination needs to be made as to who
is the principal carer. A child can be a dependent child of more than
one person, but only one person can be the principal carer for a child.
This determination may affect the person's rate of payment as well as
hours and activities that meet their mutual obligation requirements.

A non-principal carer parent may access the JSP 'single with child' rate
if they have shared care of 14% or more of a dependent child.

Students

In general, full-time students are not considered unemployed as they
cannot satisfy the mutual obligation requirements. Students that are
willing to cease or modify their studies to accept suitable work if it
is offered, may qualify for JSP subject to normal mutual obligation
requirements. The customers' individual circumstances should be taken
into consideration to determine if the course is structured in a way
that would allow the customer to satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements by undertaking another activity. Customers may be eligible
if they are a former student in receipt of either Austudy or ABSTUDY
have deferred their study due to illness or injury. For more
information, see JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to
full-time study.

Partial capacity to work

If a person is assessed as having a partial capacity to work (PCW) they
may qualify for additional entitlements or reduced mutual obligation
requirements for their JSP.

Contents

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) for sports people

Age eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job
seeker)

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Principal carer of a dependent child

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Unemployed Due to Industrial Action (UDIA)

Unemployed due to stand down

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
