
Generating and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA) 001-18030212

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to generate and prepare for a
Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA).

CCA and the Job Seeker Compliance Framework

CCAs underpin the integrity of the Job Seeker Compliance Framework by
ensuring that serious failure penalties are applied appropriately in the
case of persistent non-compliance, and provide the flexibility to ensure
vulnerable Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers are
appropriately supported and protected.

A CCA is generally automatically triggered by a CDP job seeker's
apparent persistent non-compliance but may also be used as an early
intervention tool.

While the CCA is the legislated safety net to ensure serious failures
are applied appropriately, the CCA is also a critical opportunity to
improve a CDP job seeker's likelihood of future compliance by:

-   enabling an opportunity to identify and/or assess issues for
    vulnerable CDP job seekers, who may be experiencing a range of
    complex needs, and whose circumstances affect their ability to meet
    their mutual obligation requirements, and
-   recommending suitable alternative intervention strategies and
    pathways for CDP job seekers with vulnerabilities

CCA triggers and appointments

A CCA is automatically triggered once the number of No Show, No Pay
failures, non-attendance failures, connection or reconnection failures
applied indicates a pattern of non-compliance.

CDP providers (providers) or Services Australia may also manually
trigger a CCA where there are indicators that a CDP job seeker may have
barriers to compliance.

There are no limits to the number of CCAs that can be undertaken for a
CDP job seeker and no time frames for how often a CCA can be undertaken
during a CDP job seeker's period of employment assistance.

Attendance at the CCA is a compulsory requirement. CDP job seekers who
fail to attend a CCA will be unable to report until contact occurs with
a Participation Solutions Team-skilled Service Officer to discuss the
CCA.

An outstanding CCA will not affect the investigation of serious failures
for refusing or failing to accept a suitable offer of employment or
Unemployment Non-Payment Periods (UNPP).

Automatic CCAs

Each time a No Show, No Pay, non-attendance, connection or reconnection
failure is applied the system checks the failure history to see if a CCA
should be automatically triggered.

A CCA is automatically triggered where there are 3 applied failures of
the same 'type' (that is, either 3
connection/non-attendance/reconnection failures, or 3 No Show, No Pay
failures) with incident dates in either:

-   the 6 month period prior to the system date, or
-   since the last finalised CCA where the outcome was either to apply a
    serious failure or finalise without penalty

Automatic CCAs are generated as part of overnight processing.

Where a failure is applied that will result in the automatic generation
of a CCA, a Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer
can choose to generate the CCA immediately so that the CCA can be
conducted while the CDP job seeker is on the phone.

Note: rejected CCAs do not count as a finalised CCA. Where a CCA has
been rejected, another CCA will automatically generate when a further
'triggering' failure is applied with an event date after the date the
previous CCA was rejected.

CCAs (automatic or manual) cannot be generated before a new serious failure assessment period begins

A Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker's serious failure
penalty ends when either:

-   the CDP job seeker has served the serious failure period in full, or
-   the penalty for the serious failure has been permanently waived,
    which is generally when the CDP job seeker attends a compliance
    activity re-engagement appointment with their provider

As a result, the system will prevent either the manual or automatic
generation of a CCA where the applied failures have occurred after a
serious failure has been applied but the potential event date of the
CCA:

-   falls within a period of conditional waiver, or
-   is prior to the start date of the existing serious failure period
    (where the CDP job seeker is serving the serious failure period)

In these circumstances, a new serious failure assessment period has not
started.

Manual CCAs

Providers and Services Australia may manually request a CCA where there
are indicators a CDP job seeker may have suspected circumstances
impacting compliance with their mutual obligation requirements.

A pattern of non-compliance is not a pre-requisite for a manually
triggered CCA. However, a manual CCA will usually be generated following
one or more non-compliance events.

The aim of a manual CCA is to:

-   assess the CDP job seeker's capacity to comply with their mutual
    obligation requirements, and
-   review the types of employment assistance they are receiving

A manual CCA request should contain sufficient supporting material to
form the basis for initiating a CCA, including:

-   why the CCA was requested, and
-   a summary of any suspected barriers to employment and current
    personal circumstances

Services Australia initiated manual CCAs

Service Australia generated CCAs are only generated by PST-skilled
Service Officers. Before generating a manual CCA, the PST-skilled
Service Officer considers whether any of the following are more
appropriate:

-   updating the Job Seeker Snapshot
-   referring the CDP job seeker for an ESAt, or
-   granting a mutual obligation exemption

Provider initiated manual CCA

A provider may request a manual CCA for a CDP job seeker with mutual
obligation requirements. Prior to making this request, the provider is
expected to consider whether the following is more appropriate:

-   a Job Seeker Snapshot Change of Circumstances assessment, or
-   referral to Services Australia for an exemption from mutual
    obligation requirements

If a manual CCA is preceded by multiple rejected Participation Reports,
the provider's decision to lodge a CCA would generally be based on a
belief that:

-   unidentified circumstances are impacting the CDP job seeker's
    compliance, and
-   a CCA is required to uncover and assess the impacts of these
    barriers

A manual CCA is not appropriate when:

-   it's used by the CDP provider as a means of simply attempting to
    contact a CDP job seeker who is difficult to engage, or
-   the CDP provider has identified a significant change in the CDP job
    seeker's circumstances, and consequently an assessment is required
    to determine the CDP job seeker's participation requirements,
    including assessment of work capacity, barriers to employment,
    mutual obligation requirements and suitable employment assistance
    services. In this circumstance an ESAt is the correct assessment

Even though a serious failure may be an appropriate outcome, a manual
CCA should not be generated as a means to determine whether a serious
failure should be applied.

Note: a provider cannot manually generate a CCA where there is an
outstanding ESAt.

CCA Preparation

After the generation of a CCA (either manual or automatic) PST-skilled
Service Officers undertake preparatory work before transferring the CDP
job seeker to a CCA Specialist.

CCA preparatory work involves:

-   Validating the CCA
-   Explaining the purpose of a CCA to the CDP job seeker
-   Identifying the most appropriate CCA specialist
-   Notifying the CDP job seeker of the requirement to attend the CCA
-   Recording relevant information on the CCA Details page for the CCA
    Specialist
-   Reviewing outstanding reconnection requirements and ending
    reconnection failure periods
-   Finalising outstanding compliance actions where appropriate

Determining how and when the CCA will be conducted

PST-skilled Service Officers are responsible for determining which CCA
Specialist is the most appropriate based on the CDP job seeker's
individual circumstances.

CCA Specialist identification

A CCA may be conducted by the following specialists (referred to as a
CCA Specialist):

-   a PST-skilled social worker or
-   a Participation Solutions Team SO5

CCAs are conducted by PST-skilled social workers where the CCA is the
job seeker's first CCA, or the first CCA conducted in a twelve month
period (referred to as an 'initial CCA'), and the job seeker:

is in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA) or

has a presenting or recorded current circumstance impacting compliance
of either:

-   medical condition - mental health
-   family relationship/domestic violence, or

is identified as being in crisis and there are exceptional circumstances
identified that indicate social work assessment skills are required
during the CCA

CCAs are conducted by SO5s where:

-   the CCA is the second or subsequent CCA in a twelve month period
    (referred to as a 'review CCA'), OR
-   the CCA is an initial CCA, and the job seeker does not meet any of
    the criteria above to indicate a PST-skilled social worker is the
    most appropriate specialist to conduct the CCA

Note: while these specialist streaming guidelines are intended to
support staff to make consistent decisions regarding the most
appropriate specialist to conduct the CCA, they are intended as a guide
rather than a set of rules, to be used with flexibility, discretion and
consideration of individual circumstances on a case-by-case basis.

A CCA may either occur via an immediate transfer or the CDP job seeker
may be advised to contact by midday on the following business day. This
is also known as a deferred contact notice.

Notification of requirements to attend a CCA

The PST-skilled Service Officer is responsible for explaining the
purpose of a CCA.

Attendance at a CCA is compulsory for CDP job seekers with mutual
obligation requirements. As part of preparatory work, the PST-skilled
Service Officer is responsible for notifying the CDP job seeker of the
requirement to attend the CCA and the consequences of non-attendance.

Effect of CCAs on reconnection requirements, non-attendance failure and reconnection failure period

Validation of a CCA will:

-   finalise any outstanding NAR including any outstanding NAR
    reconnection requirements
-   remove any outstanding reconnection requirements

When the CDP job seeker is formally notified of a requirement to attend
a CCA, this ends any current non-attendance failure and reconnection
failure periods.

Finalising of outstanding compliance investigation

Once a CCA has been generated and is determined to be valid, outstanding
failures on the CDP job seeker's record will automatically be finalised.
Where the automatic process has not been able to occur all
non-attendance failure, connection, reconnection or No Show, No Pay
compliance investigations are to be rejected.

CCA attendance

Attendance at a CCA is a compulsory mutual obligation requirement.

The requirement to attend a CCA includes:

-   where a deferred notice has been issued, contacting before midday on
    the scheduled business day. In some cases, a CDP job seeker may be
    given longer to contact following a deferred notice being issued,
    and
-   contacting before 5 pm on the same business day if disconnected
    while being transferred to a CCA Specialist or while the CCA is
    being conducted

CDP job seeker fails to attend the CCA

Where a CDP job seeker fails to attend the CCA, or fails to comply with
a CCA requirement by close of business of the day of the requirement, a
contact trigger will be placed on the CCA. The contact trigger will
prevent the CDP job seeker from reporting. The CDP job seeker will be
required to contact the PST to complete the CCA before the next report
can be accepted and payment made.

The Resources page contains links to attachments for Comprehensive
Compliance Assessment (CCA) save and exit reasons, circumstances where a
CCA should not be conducted and using an interpreter during a CCA.

Related links

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Completing a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Waiving a serious failure period

Accessing a PST-skilled social worker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
