
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirement to negotiate a Job Plan.

Requirement for a Job Plan

A Job Plan is an Employment Pathway Plan for the purpose of Social
Security Law.

Under Social Security Law, job seekers with mutual obligation
requirements are required to agree to a Job Plan. A Job Plan records the
requirements that are negotiated between a job seeker and their
Employment Services Provider or Services Australia that will satisfy the
job seeker's mutual obligation requirements. Job seekers who are
Centrelink Managed and volunteer to receive employment assistance are
also required to agree to a Job Plan.

A Job Plan should be negotiated for Centrelink managed job seekers
within 4 days of receiving their first regular payment.

Negotiation of the Job Plan

Job seekers will negotiate their Job Plan with their Employment Services
Provider if they are provider managed or in the Workforce Australia
Online website if they are referred to that service.

A Job Plan will be negotiated by Services Australia for job seekers who
are managed by Centrelink. This includes:

-   job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are fully
    meeting their requirements and are not required to be connected with
    a Workforce Australia provider
-   job seekers who are in Community Development Program (CDP) areas and
    who are managed by Centrelink
-   most newly arrived refugees. See Negotiating Job Plans for newly
    arrived refugees following the 'Refugee in First 13 Weeks' (REF)
    exemption for more information

Job seekers who are Centrelink managed may volunteer to participate with
an Employment Services Provider. In this case, Services Australia will
remain responsible for negotiating a Job Plan and ensuring all
requirements, including any Provider added requirements are appropriate.

Services Australia is responsible for ensuring job seekers managed by
Centrelink have appropriate requirements. A Job Plan must be negotiated
by Services Australia irrespective of the existence of any previously
negotiated Job Plans.

Job seekers in the Workforce Australia online employment service who are
subject to RapidConnect must complete a Career Profile (known as Your
Profile in the Workforce Australia system) before their Job Plan will be
presented to them. Their payment will be granted when they agree to
their Job Plan.

For more information, see Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans and
Approved mutual obligation requirements for Centrelink managed Job
Plans.

Contents

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans for under 18 year old at risk job seekers

Negotiating Job Plans for incapacitated persons

Approved Activity Review Job Plan Contact

Reviewing Job Plans for under 18 year old at risk job seekers

28 day review of Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans for newly arrived refugees following the 'Refugee
in First 13 Weeks' (REF) exemption

Related links

Participation with Workforce Australia

Community Development Program (CDP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
