
Tasmanian Jobs Programme 001-02260000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the Tasmanian Jobs
Programme.

On this Page:

The Tasmanian Jobs Programme

The Tasmanian Jobs Programme commenced on 1 January 2014 and provides
much needed support to the Tasmanian labour market by providing
financial assistance to employers who employ eligible job seekers on a
part time or full time basis for at least six months. The programme
provides a one off payment, administered by the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment.

The aim of the programme is to encourage businesses to provide jobs to
unemployed Tasmanians. Employers have the opportunity to expand their
business and employ new staff, which will help increase workforce
participation in Tasmania.

Programme incentives

The Tasmanian Jobs Programme incentive is paid as a lump sum. The
payment is made directly to the employer once an eligible job seeker has
been employed in a full time position for a period of six months.

From 13 May 2015, higher subsidy payments have been available. Any
Tasmanian business that employs eligible job seekers on a full time
basis for at least six months will be eligible to receive $6,500 (GST
inclusive).

Additionally, any Tasmanian business that employs eligible job seekers
in part-time work, with a minimum of 25 hours per week for at least six
months, will be eligible to receive $3,250 (GST inclusive).

Employment Services Providers will also deliver ongoing support to
employers and job seekers during the first six months of employment.

Programme eligibility - employers and job seekers

To be eligible to take part in the programme an employer must:

-   have a physical business location in Tasmania with an Australian
    Business Number
-   place the job seeker in a full-time position which is expected to be
    ongoing and sustainable and in accordance with the relevant award,
    with reference to the Fair Work Act and the National Employment
    Standards
-   enter into a Tasmanian Jobs Programme Agreement with an Employment
    Services Provider
-   continue to employ the job seeker in the position with the intention
    that the job will continue after the one-off payment has been made,
    and
-   submit satisfactory evidence of employment to their employment
    services provider after which payment will be paid directly to the
    employer

An eligible Job Seeker must:

-   have been a resident in Tasmania for the previous 6 months before
    the job commences;
-   have been unemployed for at least six months;
-   be registered with a jobactive organisation or Disability Employment
    Services provider, and
-   be in receipt of an eligible income support payment with Mutual
    Obligation Requirements

For more information

Jobactive organisations will support the Tasmanian labour market by
assisting employers to expand their business and employ new staff.
Additional information is available from the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website or via the Tasmanian Jobs Programme Fact
Sheet.

Employers

Employers wanting more information should speak to their local jobactive
or Disability Employment Services provider or call 13 17 15.

Job Seekers

Job Seekers wanting more information should speak to their local
jobactive or Disability Employment Services provider or call 13 62 68.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
