
Fully compliant job seekers returning to the green zone 001-18030211

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how job seekers in the warning zone or financial
penalty zone who demonstrate full compliance return to the green zone.

Meeting compulsory requirements - the green zone

The Targeted Compliance Framework has a strong emphasis on personal
responsibility for meeting compulsory requirements and engagement with
providers.

All job seekers, including ParentsNext participants, begin in the green
zone when they commence receiving a participation payment. They will
remain in this zone as long as they are meeting all of their compulsory
requirements.

Job seekers who commit mutual obligation failures may also return to the
green zone after demonstrating active participation or where a
Capability Interview or Capability Assessment identifies that the job
seeker is not capable of meeting their compulsory requirements.

Moving between zones

Job seekers enter the warning zone when they commence accruing demerits
for mutual obligation failures without a valid reason. Demerits expire
after 6 active months. The Employment Services System (ESS)
automatically returns job seekers to the green zone when all demerits
have expired.

Capability Interviews and Capability Assessments evaluate whether a Job
Plan or Participation Plan is appropriate based on personal
circumstances and assessed capacity. If either of these capability
reviews find that the job seeker is not capable of meeting their
requirements, demerits are reset to zero and the job seeker is returned
to the green zone automatically by ESS.

Job seekers enter the financial penalty zone after they have had a
Capability Assessment and have been found capable of meeting their
compulsory requirements. In this zone, participation payments are
dependent on the job seeker fully meeting all compulsory requirements.
Job seekers incur financial penalties where they do not have a
reasonable excuse for failing to comply with compulsory requirements.
Job seekers in the financial penalty zone who demonstrate full
compliance by actively participating and successfully meeting all
compulsory requirements for 3 active months return to the green zone.

Active participation

Where a job seeker has moved to the financial penalty zone because they
have been persistently and deliberately non-compliant, they must
demonstrate full compliance with requirements for 3 active months in
order to return to the green zone.

Active participation means the job seeker or ParentsNext participant is
engaged in employment services and is required to meet compulsory
requirements.

Active participation includes:

-   re-negotiating and agreeing to a Job Plan when notified of a
    requirement to do so
-   attending and behaving appropriately at provider appointments, third
    party appointments, activities and job interviews
-   meeting the job search requirement on time
-   meeting the monthly points target (Workforce Australia job seekers)
-   acting on job referrals
-   recording or reporting their own attendance, and
-   giving their provider prior notice of an acceptable reason if unable
    to meet a requirement

Active months

Active months generally refer to periods where a job seeker is in
receipt of a participation payment and has compulsory requirements.
Active months may also include periods where the job seeker is not
receiving payment where this does not relate to a penalty for
non-compliance, for example where the job seeker is not receiving
payment due to employment. This is because these are periods where a job
seeker is supporting themselves. Similarly, time off payment will be
included in the count as the job seeker is supporting themselves, except
for any period that the job seeker is serving a compliance
non-payment/preclusion period.

Active months do not include periods when the job seeker is not
demonstrating compliance. For example:

-   the time between notification of the requirement to contact the
    Services Australia to arrange a Capability Assessment and completion
    of the Capability Assessment
-   periods the job seeker is exempt from compulsory requirements, or
-   non-payment periods due to non-compliance with compulsory
    requirements

3 active months and 6 active months

Demerits expire after 6 active months. This is a minimum of 182 days.

Where a job seeker is in financial penalty zone, they return to the
green zone after demonstrating full compliance for 3 active months. This
is a minimum period of 91 days of active participation.

For both the 6 active months and 3 active months, exemptions from
compulsory requirements, non-payment periods due to non-compliance and
the time between a referral to a Capability Assessment and its
completion do not count towards active months. This may prolong the
length of the period required to return to the green zone.

Returning to the green zone

The Employment Services System (ESS) calculates the active months and
automatically returns job seekers to the green zone where they meet
requirements. Job seekers can view their current participation status
from their job seeker account accessed through myGov, the Job Seeker app
or can check with their provider.

Job seekers who wish to discuss their current zone, or disagree with how
the active months have been calculated, should be referred to their
provider.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
