
Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive 001-02020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information about job seeker eligibility to
access employment assistance through jobactive.

Tailored services and programmes for job seekers

jobactive provides tailored services and programmes to help job seekers
in their transition to employment based on their needs. This could
include:

-   help with looking for work, writing a resume and preparing for
    interviews
-   referrals to jobs in their local area
-   training that is suited to the skills that local employers need
-   case management so they are ready to take up and keep a job
-   helping job seekers into work, education, apprenticeships and
    traineeships
-   support to complete Work for the Dole or other eligible activities
    to provide them with work-like experiences, to help them learn new
    skills and improve their chances of finding a job

All job seekers can access self service terminals in most Services
Australia Service Centres and some Medicare Service Centres, Agents and
Access Points. The terminals have been provided to enable customers to
access self services.

jobactive provides a range of services to job seekers, according to
their circumstances and needs. A job seeker registering for services
will be referred to online jobactive services and may then be referred
onto a jobactive provider.

Job seekers can be registered as job seekers by the agency. There are 3
types of job seeker registration available to customers, according to
their circumstances and needs.

Fully Eligible Participants (FEPs)

FEP job seekers are able to access the full services as assessed by a
Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) or, if required, an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). Job seekers receiving payments
with mutual obligation requirements are normally registered by the
agency as FEP.

Non-protected SCV holders granted JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or YA under
the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption are eligible to be
registered as FEP job seekers while receiving JSP or YA. These customers
will be eligible for full services from jobactive, but are not eligible
for referral to Disability Employment Services (DES), New Enterprise
Incentive Scheme (NEIS) or Adult Migrant Education Programme (AMEP).

Volunteer job seekers

Job seekers who do not have mutual obligation requirements or who are
not receiving income support may be eligible to be registered as a
volunteer job seeker.

All job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are not eligible
for registration as a No Stream Services Referral Required (NSSRR) job
seeker must be registered as Fully Eligible Participants (FEP).

All Stream A volunteer job seekers are referred to online jobactive
services.

No Stream Services Referral Required (NSSRR)

Some customers are required to be registered as job seekers in order to
access other assistance, but do not require a referral to jobactive.
Customers eligible for NSSRR registration include:

-   customers who need a Department of Education, Skills and Employment
    record in order to be referred for a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA).
    For example, Disability Support Pension (DSP) new claim customers or
    DSP customers requiring a Medical Review JCA to be booked
-   full-time students applying for a supplementary allowance
    determination
-   principal carers with long term exemptions from their mutual
    obligation requirements (longer than 16 weeks) who do not choose to
    volunteer for employment services
-   customers requiring a Job Plan as a condition of their payment,
    including:
-   principal carers fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements
    who do not choose to volunteer for employment services
-   people with a Partial Capacity to Work who are fully meeting their
    mutual obligation requirements and do not choose to volunteer for
    employment services
-   full-time students transferring to a job seeker payment within 4
    weeks of their student end date
-   customers receiving an income support payment with no mutual
    obligation requirements and who want to apply for Additional Child
    Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
-   New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) participants presenting to
    Services Australia after 39 weeks of participation in the scheme to
    claim income support

If job seekers do not meet the criteria for NSSRR registration at any
time, such as no longer fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, the NSSRR flag must be removed and the customer referred
to a provider, if suitable.

Austudy, ABSTUDY and Youth Allowance customers

These customers are generally not eligible for jobactive services.
However, there are 2 circumstances where Austudy (or ABSTUDY/Youth
Allowance customers and full-time students not on income support) can
access jobactive:

-   students aged 15 to 21 in full-time study, who present in crisis and
    have at least 1 serious non-vocational barrier, are eligible for
    immediate Stream C Services as a Vulnerable Youth (Student) if no
    appropriate youth services are available in their local area.
    Ongoing assistance is subject to confirmation through an ESAt
-   full-time students seeking an apprenticeship or traineeship are
    eligible for servicing as a volunteer

Assessment as a Vulnerable Youth (VY) job seeker

To be assessed as a VY job seeker, a young person must meet all of the
following conditions:

-   be aged 15 to 21 years
-   not working 15 hours or more per week, not studying full-time and
    not currently receiving an income support payment
-   present with at least 1 serious non-vocational barrier
-   have legal rights to work in Australia

Assessment as a VY (student)

In order to be assessed as a VY (student), a young person must meet all
of the following conditions:

-   be aged 15 to 21 years
-   be a full-time student
-   present with at least 1 serious non-vocational barrier
-   be in crisis, which is defined as circumstances that require
    immediate intervention to stabilise their situation
-   have legal rights to work in Australia

VY (youth and VY (students) can be registered either by Centrelink or
directly by a jobactive provider. If they are directly registered, they
will be referred to the agency within 4 weeks to test their eligibility
for an income support payment, and the agency must complete the Job
Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) and refer them to an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt).

Newly arrived refugees

Most newly arrived refugees remain Centrelink managed until 60 or 12
months after their arrival in Australia. There are a number of factors
that determine when a newly arrived refugee needs to be referred to
jobactive and the level of servicing they will receive. See Refugee and
humanitarian entrant service offer for more information.

Voluntary referral to jobactive

Job seekers may be voluntarily referred to jobactive if they meet the
eligibility criteria for registration as a volunteer.

All volunteer job seekers can access jobactive servicing in Stream A for
up to 12 months. Services Australia can register volunteer job seekers
under the registration type of 'Volunteer'. All Stream A volunteer job
seekers are referred to online jobactive services.

A volunteer who has already received services for a total of 6 months
(if registered prior to 8 December 2019) or 12 months (if registered
after 8 December 2019) or who was exited and returns more than 13
consecutive weeks after the date of exit, is not eligible for assistance
and cannot be registered again. The only exception is where a job seeker
subsequently experiences a significant change in their individual
circumstances that result in their core eligibility for Employment
Provider Services changing from a volunteer to a Fully Eligible
Participant.

Note: prior to 8 December 2019, volunteer job seekers were referred to
jobactive providers for a maximum of 6 months and were not referred to
online services. These job seekers will remain with their current
provider until the end of their 6 month period.

Community Development Program (CDP)

When a job seeker lives in a Department of Education, Skills and
Employment designated remote area, they are referred to a CDP provider.
The CDP provider will provide services similar to jobactive, however
under CDP job seekers are not streamed.

The Resources page contains tables of job seeker eligibility for
accessing jobactive services based on the customer's circumstances.

Contents

Participation with jobactive

Eligibility for jobactive as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable
Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY (S))

Eligibility and registration as a No Stream Services Referral Required
(NSSRR)/No Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

Exits and suspensions from jobactive or Community Development Program
(CDP)

Employment services for visa holders

Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer

Related links

Registering customer as a job seeker

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Self service terminals

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Community Development Program (CDP)

Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW)

PaTH Internship Programme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
