
Using an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine payment type 001-02320040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use the information contained in an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) report to determine a customer's
work capacity, mutual obligation requirements or participation
requirements and eligibility for certain income support payments. A
current and valid ESAt is needed to make these decisions. This decision
making can be part of the new claim or Service Update/review process.

Request for an ESAt

A request for an ESAt may be made if job seekers with a medical
condition or other barriers are requesting employment assistance or
claiming or receiving an Activity Tested payment such as JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) or Disability Support Pension (DSP).
See Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is
required.

Temporary conditions

Assessors will record a condition as Temporary if it is verified by
medical evidence and is not likely to last longer than 2 years.

Permanent conditions - not Fully Diagnosed, Treated and Stabilised

In order for a condition to be considered permanent, for the purposes of
determining partial capacity to work status or the appropriate
Employment Service Provider assistance, it must be verified by medical
evidence indicating the condition will persist for at least the next 2
years. There is no requirement for the condition to be Fully Diagnosed,
Treated and Stabilised (FDTS) for this assessment, although FDTS
conditions are also taken into account.

Identifying if an invitation to claim DSP is required

In some circumstances an ESAt can be upgraded to a Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA), where the assessor has enough evidence to assess the
customer's medical condition/s as FDTS. An impairment rating can be
recorded under the Impairment Tables.

Partial Capacity to Work

Customers are considered to have a partial capacity to work if they are
not eligible for Disability Support Pension (DSP) but are assessed as
having:

-   an impairment that prevents them from working, or being trained for
    work for at least 30 hours a week, at or above the relevant minimum
    wage, independently of a program of support, within the next 2 years

If a customer with a partial capacity to work is receiving JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment (PP) or Youth Allowance (YA) they may
have reduced participation requirements, and be eligible for
Pharmaceutical Allowance and a Pensioner Concession Card.

The Resources page contains a link to the DSP online claim form.

Related links

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Assessing a job seeker's mutual obligation requirements based on
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
