
Approved Activity Review Job Plan Contact 001-09100050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure for actioning Approved Activity
Reviews.

Changes from 1 July 2021

From 1 July 2021, Post Approved Activity Reviews (PAA's) were replaced
by online tasks, work items or request to contact letters for those
customers not signed up for self-service. The notification is issued 28
days from the expiry of the approved activity on the Activity and
Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

Some of these online tasks require Service Officer action before they
can be finalised. Secondly, job seekers have now got the option of
advising online if there has been a change in their circumstances if it
relates to their recorded approved activity or exemption.

Online-MOR & Job Plan or AEX Review work item

Service Officer's allocated the Online-MOR and Job Plan or AEX Review
work item (ZCOC_JPL_AEX) may be required to contact the customer and
determine if an update needs to be made to the customers approved
activity recorded on the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

If the work item:

has been created due to the customer actioning their online task and
indicating they are continuing their current activity, Service Officers
should:

-   Update the AEX screen by extending the current activity for 363 days
-   Create a new Job Plan for the customer to agree to online. Note:
    this process does not apply for customers participating in DES (DPA,
    DPB) or QTI customers
-   Customers in DES will have Job Plans negotiated by DES providers and
    QTI customers will have an automatically booked appointment

relates to a change in circumstance, Services Officers should determine
the action required relating to mutual obligations from the notes
provided by the customer

Participation Summary screen

An Action Item 'Action Post Approved Activity Review' will appear on the
job seeker's Participation Summary screen. Once this Action Item is
selected, the Service Officer will be able to complete or cancel the PAA
Review as required via the Post Approved Activity Review screen, which
supports the process through discussion points and links to other
workflows which may be required.

From 1 July 2021, the action item 'Action Post Approved Activity Review'
will be decommissioned from the Participation Summary screen. Updating
of approved activities from contact with job seekers will be done via
the Activity and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen.

Failing to attend an interview

Before 1 July 2021, if the job seeker failed to attend the appointment,
their payment would be suspended with the reason 'Failed to Attend
Interview' (FAI) to prompt contact with Services Australia.

From 1 July 2021 as no appointments will be booked for job seekers,
there will be no suspension of payments if they fail to contact or
complete their online task. If their approved requirement expires then
job seeker management activities will invoke and they will be referred
to a provider.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
