-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains special provisions about mutual obligation
requirements for principal carers of dependent children over the
Christmas and New Year holiday period. There are separate provisions for
principal carers during the Christmas/New Year School holiday period,
and during the Christmas Day public holiday fortnight.

Mutual obligation requirements

In the fortnight (entitlement period) that contains the Christmas Day
public holiday, principal carers subject to compulsory mutual obligation
requirements will not be required to undertake agreed activities as
outlined in their Job Plan. This will apply to all principal carers
regardless of their activity type, including job search, and regardless
of their payment type.

If the customer does undertake some activity but not enough to fulfil
their normal agreed requirements, there will be no additional activities
required or potential failure investigated for that fortnight. The
principal carer will be required to return to fully meeting their normal
mutual obligation requirements the following fortnight.

Principal carers will still be required to report and declare any income
earned, or changes in circumstances for this fortnight.

Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)

Due to the variations in Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED), not all
principal carers will have this provision applied for the same
fortnight.

As customers lodgement frequency varies, some customers may report up to
12 weeks after the Christmas Day public holiday period.

The special provisions for the break from undertaking activities only
apply to the 1 fortnight containing the Christmas Day public holiday,
and customers will need to meet their requirements during all other
periods covered by their Your Reporting Statement.

Allowable break provisions

In addition to provisions over the Christmas Day public holiday
fortnight, principal carers who meet their mutual obligation
requirements through suitable paid work, or a combination of paid work
and study, will not be required to undertake alternative activities,
such as job search, if their regular employment temporarily closes down
at any time during the Christmas/New Year school holiday period.
However, the customer must reasonably expect to resume their usual hours
of employment in the New Year, as soon as their employment is once again
available. These provisions may apply to customers in a variety of
employment situations, including term-time employment such as schools,
and any other temporary employment closure over this holiday period.

The allowable break provisions will apply if:

-   The customer's employment temporarily ceases during the
    Christmas/New Year school holiday period (December - February,
    depending upon the child's school and state/territory rules)
-   The closure may be foreseeable but is out of the customer's control
    (employer initiated)
-   The customer can reasonably expect to resume their normal hours of
    employment in the new year (for example, at the beginning of the
    school term). Note: there is no minimum period of closure for which
    the allowable break provision applies, but a maximum of 8 weeks
    applies
-   Verification can be provided by the customer, or past employment
    history used as evidence, that employment will resume

These provisions only apply for the duration of the Christmas/New Year
school holiday period. Actual term dates will vary due to location and
individual school rules, therefore each determination of allowable break
duration must be undertaken on a case by case basis. Current provisions
remain in place for principal carers taking paid leave breaks from
employment, and other allowable break provisions outside the Christmas
holiday period.

Business closure fortnights

No compliance action will be taken due to failure for not meeting the 30
hours per fortnight of paid work or a combination of paid work and study
requirement during the business closure fortnights.

The principal carer will be required to return to normal mutual
obligation requirements at the end of the business closure period, or at
the end of the maximum 8 week period, whichever occurs first.

Related links

Part-time work as an approved activity

Approved activities for principal carers

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed
activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
