
Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) 001-02090000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE) program. SEE is a Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations managed program.

Objective

SEE provides free language, literacy, numeracy and digital literacy
training to eligible working age customers whose skills are below a
level considered necessary to secure sustainable employment or pursue
further education and training.

The aim of SEE is to produce a measurable improvement in language,
literacy, numeracy and digital literacy skills, and improve a customer's
options for employment and further education and generally improve
participants' daily lives.

Referrals

Services Australia is required to refer eligible job seekers to SEE.
Employment Services Providers may also refer anyone, including job
seekers, to SEE.

After Services Australia has referred a job seeker, they will undertake
a SEE Pre-Training Assessment, carried out by an experienced and
accredited professional. The purpose of the assessment is to:

-   measure the job seeker's competencies
-   assess their circumstances and any impacts on their ability to
    participate, and
-   determine whether they are likely to achieve a measurable increase
    in skills

See Referrals to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) for
information on eligible referrals and system limitations.

Program duration

Once commenced, job seekers may undertake SEE on either:

-   a part-time basis (10 to 19 hours per week), or
-   a full-time basis (20-25 hours per week)

Prior to 01 January 2022, job seekers who were referred to SEE were
eligible for up to 650 training hours over a two year period. From 01
January 2022, this limit no longer applies and job seekers who are
referred to SEE can complete a mainstream VET qualification up to and
including Certificate III level, or a foundation skills qualification up
to and including Certificate IV.

Language Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Some job seekers participating in SEE may be entitled to receive either:

-   the Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) of $20.80 per
    fortnight to help with the costs of participating in the program, or
-   the Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

A job seeker cannot receive both PES and LLNS at the same time.

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Some job seekers participating in SEE may be entitled to receive EdEP in
addition to LLNS, if they meet all the other eligibility criteria for
EdEP. Participation in SEE is not an automatic qualifying activity for
EdEP. Qualification depends on how the study component of SEE is
structured.

Early School Leavers (ESL)

Full time SEE is an approved activity for Early School Leavers and
satisfies mutual obligation requirements for ESL Youth Allowance job
seekers.

ESL Youth Allowance job seekers identified as eligible for a referral to
SEE, are exempt from RapidConnect, but they must still be referred to
Workforce Australia within 14 days.

Support for child care

Job seekers who are participating in SEE may be eligible to claim child
care assistance under Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition
to Work).

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

SEE and AMEP are similar but separate programs that cannot be done at
the same time.

AMEP focusses on delivering English language training to eligible
migrants and humanitarian refugees to assist with their settlement in
Australia.

A job seeker who is eligible for both programs can be referred to SEE
while participating in AMEP, but it is the job seeker's choice whether
they continue in AMEP or move to SEE. If they choose to move into SEE,
the job seeker is exited from AMEP automatically. It is preferable that
a job seeker attains their English language goals in AMEP, before they
move to SEE, to ensure they are not at a language disadvantage in SEE.

Employment Services Providers

Job seekers connected to providers (Workforce Australia, Community
Development Program (CDP) Disability Employment Services (DES),
Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE), ParentsNext (PN) or Workforce
Australia - Transition to Work (TtW)) will continue in these services
for the duration of their participation in SEE.

Providers may also refer any person who attends their office, including
volunteers and those in receipt of any type income support payment.

The Resources page contains a link to the Best Practice Guide and
further information regarding the role of Services Australia and SEE
providers.

Contents

Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Related links

RapidConnect

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
