
Newstart Allowance (NSA) 001-03000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for historical assessments/information only.

This document outlines information about Newstart Allowance (NSA). All
existing NSA customers transitioned to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) on the 20
March 2020.

NSA eligibility and payability

To qualify for NSA a person must have:

been 22 years and over and under Age Pension age

met Australian residence requirements for JSP

been:

-   unemployed or
-   unable to look for work due to a temporary medical condition,
    illness or injury

been prepared to negotiate and enter into a Job Plan if required to do
so, or comply with, or renegotiate an existing Job Plan

satisfied the requirements of a Job Plan

RapidConnect and payability

Job seekers were subject to RapidConnect where they had 14 days from the
date they were advised of their RapidConnect requirements.

The RapidConnect appointment determined the start date of the job
seeker’s income support payment (subject to any waiting periods and
qualification requirements).

A number of factors may have affect the RapidConnect payability start
date. If after 29 days the job seeker has not attended their initial
provider appointment, the claim would automatically reject.

NSA residence requirements

To satisfy residence criteria for NSA, the customer must have met all of
the following requirements:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim was lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and was determined
by the visa subclass and grant date of the customer’s first permanent
residence visa.

The customer had a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer had to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

If a claim was rejected due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Non-protected special category visa (SCV) holders

A non-protected SCV holder who has lived continuously in Australia for a
single period of at least 10 years immediately before claiming may
qualify for NSA for a single continuous period of up to 6 months (182
days). For more information, see New Zealand 10 year residence
exemption.

NSA granted under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

If a customer was granted NSA under the New Zealand 10 year residence
exemption their payment could not be restored on return to Australia if
there was any gap between the date of suspension/cancellation and the
date of restoration. This exemption could only be used once, the
customer could not be re-granted NSA again under this exemption.

The Resources page contains links to contact details, forms, the
Services Australia website and external websites. It also contains a
list of files that were expired as part of the transition from Newstart
Allowance (NSA) to JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
