
Change of circumstance for Parenting Payment (PP) 001-05020000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines a Parenting Payment (PP) customer's obligation to
advise changes in their circumstances, consequences of failure to notify
of changes and the requirement to check contact details every time a
customer contacts Services Australia.

Notification obligations

PP customers are obliged to advise the agency, usually within 14 days,
of any event or change in circumstances that could affect their payment.

Once a customer has signed their claim form (confirming, among other
things, that they have read and understood what changes they must
advise) they are bound by the notification provisions.

Notifiable events

Customers are advised of the types of things they must notify in their
grant notification letter and on the back of each reassessment letter
sent to them.

Following is a list of the types of changes a customer must advise. As
circumstances vary for each customer, this list is not exhaustive.

Changes of circumstance that may require review or update to a
customer's record include:

-   any changes to income or assets, including commencing employment
-   any change of contact details including changes to address and/or
    telephone number
-   any change to accommodation details, including changes to address
    and rent
-   any change to relationship status
-   any changes to child care/custody
-   any change to residency status
-   any changes to study, including temporary cessation due to
    incapacity
-   any changes to activities/exemptions that may impact on mutual
    obligation requirements, including changes to foster care
    arrangements

Statement reporters

PP customers with mutual obligation requirements are required to lodge a
Reporting Statement for a specified period. Any changes to a customer's
circumstance must also be advised when the Reporting Statement is
lodged, or within 14 days, whichever is earlier.

Online notifications

PP customers with mutual obligation requirements who have an Approved
Activity or Principal Carer long term exemption can view their activity
or exemption from their Online Account. If they have a change of
circumstance they are able to click on a link within the activity which
in turn will create a work item for a Service Officer to contact to
discuss their circumstances.

Consequences of failure to notify

PP customers may incur an overpayment if they fail to notify a change of
circumstance which results in a loss of entitlement.

Check and update contact details

Every customer's address (including postal address) and telephone
details (including mobile phone numbers) must be checked at every
contact, and updated if required. Note: if the customer has
authenticated themselves via IVR, address details do not need to be
confirmed.

Contents

Death of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of a partner of a Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer

Death of a Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer

Death of a Parenting Payment (PP) child

Special Employment Advance (SEA)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Restoration of Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation of Parenting Payment (PP)

Suspension of Parenting Payment (PP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment (PP)

Related links

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) customer and/or child going overseas

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customer and/or child going overseas

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Dependent child changes

Reporting overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
