
Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker) 001-03010010

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine unemployment for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker).

Eligibility criteria

For a customer to qualify for JSP they must be unemployed. A customer
cannot qualify for YA as a job seeker if they are:

-   employed in full-time paid work, or
-   employed on a full-time basis as an apprentice or trainee

Note: YA customers starting a full-time Australian Apprenticeship may
still be entitled to YA subject to the income test, but not as a job
seeker.

Customers who are employed or studying and are unable to undertake work
or study due to a medical condition, illness or injury and have a job or
study to return to may still be eligible for JobSeeker Payment.

Determine if customer is unemployed

For JSP/YA (job seeker), an unemployed person can be broadly described
as someone who is without paid work. But not everyone who is without
paid work is unemployed, and some people in paid work can still be
considered unemployed for JSP/YA (job seeker). Determining whether a
person is unemployed at a particular time will depend on several
factors.

All of the customer's circumstances need to be considered in determining
whether they are unemployed.

As per Section 595 of the Social Security Act 1991, discretion should be
exercised when determining unemployment to encourage increased workforce
participation, rather than providing a disincentive for people to
increase their hours of work. The extent of a person's compliance with
any applicable mutual obligation requirements can be useful in
determining whether a person is genuinely committed to engagement in the
labour market.

Self-employed

A person engaged in self-employment may be regarded as unemployed if:

-   the activity is on a small scale and designed to supplement income,
    rather than as an alternative to wages
-   the person invests capital in the business, but not time or effort
-   the business is a contracting or sub-contracting enterprise

If net income received from the business does not preclude payment and
the customer can satisfy mutual obligation requirements based on their
income and hours worked, a self-employed customer may receive payment
and be considered unemployed. Job seekers with an Australian Business
Number (ABN) are not automatically assumed to be self-employed. There is
no requirement for customers with an ABN to have this cancelled to
qualify for JSP or YA (job seeker).

Unemployed due to stand down or industrial action

Stand down

A stand down occurs when an employer is unable to offer an employee work
for a short period of time, without having their employment terminated.
Such a stand down could include a situation where a factory closes down
for a few weeks over the Christmas holiday period or if a company has a
short term lack of work. A customer who has been stood down is
considered to be unemployed, even if the stand down is only temporary.

See Unemployed due to stand down.

Industrial action

Depending on the circumstances that has led to industrial action, a
customer may not be qualified for payment and may be required to serve
an exclusion period.

See Unemployed Due to Industrial Action (UDIA).

Mature age

A person aged 55 or over may still be regarded as unemployed, even
though they may be participating in voluntary work and/or part-time work
to fully meet their mutual obligation requirements.

Casual employees

In some circumstances, such as when a customer is working casually, the
Social Security Act 1991 allows them to continue to be considered
unemployed even though they are not without paid work.

The duration of the employment, the hours worked and other relevant
factors should be considered when determining whether a person can be
deemed to be unemployed.

In general, a person working casually would not be regarded as
unemployed if work in which earnings were sufficient to preclude payment
of JSP/YA (job seeker) continued, or were expected to continue, for 12
weeks or more.

Students

In general, full-time students are not considered to be job seekers and
do not qualify for JSP/YA (job seeker) as they are not unemployed.

In most circumstances when a person is studying full-time, they should
test their eligibility for a student payment.

To qualify for JSP/YA (job seeker), they should give up their studies or
reduce their study-load to part-time, and should be willing to accept
work if it is offered.

However, in certain circumstances a person studying full-time can
qualify for JSP where they:

-   have transferred to the payment from Disability Support Pension
    (DSP) or Parenting Payment (PP) as a single person and were
    receiving Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) at the time, provided
    they are continuing in the same course for which they were receiving
    PES, or
-   are single principal carers receiving JSP and granted PES

JSP or YA (job seeker) are subject to normal mutual obligation
requirements.

In some circumstances, a customer studying full-time can satisfy mutual
obligation requirements when the study is treated as an approved
activity.

On leave from usual employment (including suspension from work and expectant mothers)

A person who is on leave from their usual employment, whether paid or
not, is not usually unemployed as their contract of employment is
ongoing.

If the employer refuses to re-employ the person before the end of the
leave, the leave is unpaid and no benefits are accruing while on leave,
the person may be regarded as unemployed subject to mutual obligation
requirements.

Note: the expectant mother exemption only applies from 6 weeks prior to
the estimated date of birth and ends on the date of birth (whether or
not the child is born alive). Expectant mothers should be encouraged to
investigate their eligibility for Parenting Payment. See Exempting a job
seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when they are an
Expectant Mother.

Paid work and unemployment

JSP or YA job seeker in paid work may be considered unemployed if all of
the following apply:

-   the work is suitable work
-   the work is less than 70 hours per fortnight
-   income earned is less than the JSP income test taper cut off point

These customers are still required to meet mutual obligation
requirements. However, they may have sufficient work to fully meet any
job seeking obligations.

In addition, JSP or YA (job seekers) in paid work who are assessed as
having a Partial Capacity to Work or who are principal carers, may be
considered unemployed and qualified for payment if all of the following
apply:

-   the work is suitable
-   the work is at least 30 hours per fortnight for a principal carer or
    at their assessed capacity for PCW
-   income earned is at least equivalent to the national minimum wage
    but less than the JSP income test cut off point

These customers fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

Current JSP or YA customer starts full-time employment

In this case, the following rules apply:

Customers will remain current on payment if they:

-   would have been qualified for payment apart from the fact they have
    become employed on a full time basis and
-   have a Working Credit balance greater than zero. They are able to
    use this to offset their employment income while remaining qualified
    for payment

Customers will remain qualified for payment until:

-   they lose qualification for a reason not related to employment (for
    example, do not meet Australian residence requirements), or
-   payments cease to be payable either because their working credits
    are reduced to nil, they reach the end of a 6 fortnight employment
    income nil rate period or because of a payability factor such as the
    assets test or a compensation preclusion period

Customers receiving Job Seeker Payment or Youth Allowance (job seeker)
and who are part of the Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) initiative will
be placed on a 26 week suspension period prior to their payment being
cancelled. For more information, see Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy 26 Week
Suspension Period.

Customers in full-time work who may remain qualified for JSP

Customers who remain qualified without further mutual obligation
requirements include:

-   JSP customers with a pensioner partner. The income test for these
    couples results in a higher cut-off point than for couples where
    both receive job seeker payment
-   Long-term single JSP customers aged 60 years or more who receive
    Rent Assistance (RA). These customers also have a higher cut-off
    point which can exceed full-time minimum wages
-   JSP single principal carers in full-time work can continue to be
    regarded as unemployed (despite being employed full-time) and
    continue to be entitled to part rate of payment due to the JSP
    single principal carer income test after all working credits have
    been exhausted

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Income for an independent contractor and commission income

Assessing sole trader income

Assessing partnership income

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
they are an Expectant Mother

Obtaining an estimate of business income

Commencement of a new business or purchase of a business enterprise

Income Test for single allowance customers

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

Working Credit

Employment income nil rate period

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy 26 Week Suspension Period

Unemployed due to stand down

Unemployed Due to Industrial Action (UDIA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
