
Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when they are an expectant mother 001-09120020

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

This document explains the procedures for exempting job seekers from
their mutual obligation requirements when they are pregnant.

Eligible payments for exemption

Job seekers in receipt of, or claiming Jobseeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA), Parenting Payment (with mutual obligation requirements)
or in some cases Special Benefit (SpB), and who are expecting a child,
may be granted an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements,
but not for the entire pregnancy.

Note: for ParentsNext Participants, see ParentsNext exits and exemptions
for the Temporary Period of Confinement (PTC) exemption.

Modified mutual obligation requirements

During the early months of pregnancy, a pregnant job seeker's mutual
obligation requirements will not change. Generally, the job seeker will
still be required to look for work. However, the Provider must take into
account the job seeker's personal circumstances when setting activities
in their Job Plan.

Pregnant job seekers who are 3 months from their expected due date must
not be required to look for work. During this time, Providers cannot
compel these job seekers to accept job offers or referrals to job
interviews, but the job seekers will be required to continue in some
activities subject to their capacity.

Exemption from the mutual obligation requirements

Expectant mothers may obtain an exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements from 6 weeks prior to the expected date of confinement and
for 6 weeks after the birth of the child. These exemptions apply even if
the baby is stillborn or placed for adoption.

Note: once the birth is confirmed, the expected date of confinement will
need to be changed to the date on which the woman gave birth, and the
start date for the 6 week exemption after the birth will commence on the
date on which the woman gave birth.

For example, the expected date of confinement is recorded as 3 Mar and
the baby is born on 27 Feb. The expected date of confinement will need
to be changed to 27 Feb, and the start date for the 6 week exemption
after the birth will automatically commence on 27 Feb.

If the expectant mother is experiencing health problems outside of this
period an exemption can be considered on the grounds of incapacity.
Evidence about their pregnancy status and expected date of confinement
must be provided in order for the exemption to be granted.

Participation with an Employment Services Provider is voluntary whilst a
job seeker is exempt from their mutual obligation requirements. If the
exemption is applied at new claim and the job seeker chooses to
participate, a referral to the provider should be made. If the exemption
is applied after the job seeker has already been referred to a provider,
they will be suspended from service for the duration of the exemption.

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements for bereaved expectant mothers

Expectant mothers may obtain an exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements from the date of death of their partner until the expected
date of confinement and for 6 weeks after the birth of the child if:

-   if they were pregnant when their partner died, and
-   the partner's death was on or after 20 March 2020

These exemptions apply even if the baby is stillborn or placed for
adoption.

The customer may be entitled to other bereavement assistance.

Evidence of pregnancy and expected delivery date

Expectant mothers are required to provide evidence of their pregnancy
status and expected date of delivery to be considered for an exemption
from their mutual obligation requirements. Evidence can include, but is
not limited to:

-   Letter from a doctor
-   Letter from a registered midwife

Evidence does not have to be a Services Australia medical certificate.

Related links

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
