
Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) and Special Benefit (SpB) 001-03030030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about restoring JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) and Special Benefit (SpB). It
does not apply to restoring customers who are on a Youth Bonus Wage
Subsidy (YBWS) 26 week suspension period.

Re-establish ongoing eligibility

Payment cannot be restored unless the customer remains eligible for the
whole period covered by the restoration. To ensure correct payment is
delivered any changes of circumstances must be updated as part of the
activity to restore the customer's record.

Customers with compulsory mutual obligation requirements must show they
have met their requirements for the period.

Restoration limitations

In most cases, payment cannot be restored if it is more than 13 weeks
after the customer was notified of the decision to cancel or suspend.
The customer must test their eligibility and reclaim the payment.

Payment can be restored if the cancellation was in error and the
customer has continued to meet their mutual obligation requirements
since last paid.

If a customer who has mutual obligation requirements has their payment
suspended due to failure to attend an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt), see Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) appointments.

If payment was suspended because the job seeker did not attend a
participation appointment or activity, job seekers participating in
Community Development Program (CDP) may have their payment restored. Job
seekers who are managed by a jobactive, Disability Employment Service
(DES) or ParentsNext provider must contact their provider to discuss.

Before restoring payment for a customer released from prison, the
Service Officer must first confirm, with the appropriate state
authority, the date the customer was released. Contacts for confirming
release are included in the Resources tab of Confirming prison admission
and release dates.

Mail returned from address

If the customer's address details have not changed, but mail has been
returned, proof of address details are required before payment can be
restored.

If the decision is made to not restore a customer's payments when
contact has been made within 13 weeks of suspension/cancellation, a
document is to be recorded outlining the reasons for not restoring,
before referring the customer through the new claim channels.

Cancellations for whereabouts unknown (WUK)

Payment may be restored with full arrears if the customer's payment was
suspended or cancelled whereabouts unknown (WUK), as long as the
customer continues to be qualified and retains payability during the
period of suspension/cancellation.

This may be the case even when the customer contacts more than 13 weeks
after they were advised of the decision to suspend or cancel payment.
The customer would not have received advice of the decision to suspend
or cancel, if they were not at their known address and/or advice of the
decision was returned to Services Australia.

The date of effect of the favourable determination (restoration)
resulting from review of the decision to suspend/cancel is the date of
the original decision, as per Legislation. See the References page for a
link.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Participation
Solutions Team (PST) and the Income Management team.

Related links

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Reviews and change of circumstances for Special Benefit (SpB)

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
