
Financial suitability test for suitable work for principal carers 001-09140010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess if a job seeker's offer of suitable
work or their current job is financially viable and therefore whether
they are required to accept or continue with the work to satisfy
part-time mutual obligation requirements. It applies to principal carers
receiving Parenting Payment (PP), JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) or Special Benefit (SpB).

On this Page:

Financial Suitability Test and mutual obligation requirements

Principal carers subject to compulsory mutual obligation requirements
are required to seek sufficient work of at least 15 hours per week
(unless exempted from this requirement for a period) and to accept a job
offer of suitable paid work up to 25 hours per week.

If these job seekers do not accept offers of suitable work to meet their
sufficient work requirements without a 'reasonable excuse', they are
failing to comply with their mutual obligation requirements and may be
subject to a compliance action resulting in a loss of payment.

However, a principal carer of a dependent child is not required to
accept an offer of suitable work or continue in a job which does not
make them financially better off by $50 or more per fortnight compared
to not doing the job. This is a net figure and is calculated after
allowable deductions for taxation, travel, child care, public housing
rent increases and disability costs (if the principal carer also has a
Partial Capacity to Work) are taken into account.

This Financial Suitability Test (FST) should only be applied after all
other suitability issues have been considered. For example, if it is
clear that the cost of travel makes the job unsuitable, then a test of
financial suitability is not required.

When to apply the FST

Job seekers may ask for this test to be applied at any time as long as
they can provide the appropriate supporting information and
documentation. The FST is a point in time test which takes into account
any working credit that is available to the job seeker. If the job
seeker thinks their financial circumstances will be adversely affected
when their working credit has expired, the FST must be re-run at that
point according to the job seeker's request. This may be several weeks
after the work has commenced.

If the job seeker has a partner and the partner's income changes, or
their income support payment changes, this will not affect the
calculation of the maximum notional entitlement for the job seeker
requesting the FST. For example, the partner increases their employment
and, as a result, their income support payment reduces, at the same time
the job seeker is offered work. The FST is calculated using the job
seeker's maximum notional entitlement regardless of the partner's
maximum notional entitlement.

Who applies the FST

The test should be applied by an APS3 or above who will document the
calculation and outcome on the job seeker's record.

This test may also form part of a compliance investigation for refusing
to accept a suitable job offer. Employment Services Providers or job
seekers with on-line access may apply this test independently.

The Centrelink / Family Assistance / Child Support / Child Care
Estimator is the tool used for this calculation. The FST can be run from
the results page if the 'Compare Centrelink rates only' option is
selected when starting the rate estimator.

Calculations when a job seeker is already working

When a job seeker is already working and is offered the opportunity to
take up more work - either by increasing their hours with the current
employer or commencing an additional job - the rate estimator needs to
compare the situation of zero employment income with the proposed new
income. In this situation, the proposed new income is the total of any
current employment income plus the anticipated additional employment
income. Each job in itself does not need to make the job seeker at least
$50 better off. The test is to see if the job seeker is better off
overall when other costs such as travel and childcare are taken into
account

When a job seeker is already working and wishes to decrease their work:

-   if the job seeker is reducing their current hours, the rate
    estimator needs to compare the situation of zero employment income
    with the proposed new reduced employment income, to see if the job
    seeker is still $50 better off overall
-   if the job seeker is ceasing employment completely, the rate
    estimator compares the current employment income with the proposed
    zero employment income

Centrelink/Family Assistance Rate Estimator

Job seekers who are currently working may wish to compare one job
against another. Job seekers should be encouraged to access the external
version of the Centrelink/Family Assistance Rate Estimator if they have
access to the internet. If the result of the FST indicates that the job
seeker is not $50 better off per fortnight, the exact amount of the net
increase or decrease will not be displayed, only a general message.

The Resources page contains a link to the online, external version of
the Centrelink/Family Assistance Rate Estimator, a manual calculation
worksheet to be used if the tool is not available, and, a table to
assist with coding the rate estimator for different employment
scenarios.

Related links

Paid work as an approved activity

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Suitable / unsuitable work

Refusing or failing to accept a suitable job offer

Online estimator options

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Employment Assistance Fund

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
