
Registering Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers in jobactive 001-02040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on how to register a job seeker as a
Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) for job seekers in jobactive. The job
seeker may be eligible to access the full range of employment services
from an Employment Services Provider according to their assessed needs
and skills.

JSP and YA job seekers

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers must
register as FEP. This registration must be completed as part of the
Participation Interview.

JSP/YA job seekers are subject to RapidConnect and are required to be
referred to a jobactive via Online Employment Services or an Employment
Services Provider.

Most job seekers are automatically referred to Online Employment Service
during their Participation Interview and are not required to be referred
to an Employment Services Provider or attend a RapidConnect appointment.
Instead, they will meet their RapidConnect obligation by agreeing to
their Job Plan online.

Registration process for FEP for jobactive jobseekers

During the Participation Interview or Looking for Work (LFW) workflow,
the agency will register a customer as a FEP job seeker.

This process includes:

-   registering the customer as a job seeker with the Department of
    Education, Skills and Employment
-   providing them with their Job Seeker Identification (JSID) number,
    and
-   conducting the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) to
    determine the appropriate referral type required

Where the JSCI determined that a referral to an Employment Services
Provider is required, the job seeker will usually be automatically
referred to Online Employment Services and a message will be displayed
to explain this to the job seeker. If the job seeker required a provider
appointment to be booked instead, the interview will proceed to booking
an appointment with an Employment Services Provider.

Where the JSCI determined that an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
is required to identify a more appropriate referral option for the job
seeker:

-   an ESAt referral will be made, and
-   the JSCI will remain pending until the Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt) report has been completed

All job seekers claiming or receiving an income support payment with
mutual obligation requirements will have their job seeker registration
and JSCI interview completed by the agency. However, providers are able
to register job seekers without mutual obligation requirements and apply
the JSCI if necessary. Where a JSCI initiated ESAt is flagged, providers
are able to make the referral directly to an Assessor.

If the Participation Interview is being conducted, it will also be
determined if the job seeker is subject to RapidConnect. If the job
seeker is subject to the RapidConnect provision, and a provider
appointment is required, an appointment needs to be made within 2
working days or up to a maximum of 14 days. Non-attendance at this
appointment can affect the job seeker's payment.

In some circumstances, referral to the provider may be deferred.

Principal carer customers

Principal carers with mutual obligation requirements must register as
FEP. This registration must be completed as part of the Participation
Interview. Parenting Payment (PP) job seekers with mutual obligation
requirements are not subject to RapidConnect but are still required to
be connected with an Employment Services Provider, unless exempt from
doing so. An appointment should be made within 2 working days of
Participation Interview being run and the job seeker being advised of
their obligation to attend a RapidConnect appointment.

New job seekers claiming for payments who are principal carers already
meeting part-time mutual obligation requirements by undertaking suitable
paid work/self-employment, of at least 15 hours per week or studying
full-time, will be registered as FEP if they wish to volunteer for
employment services. They will need to be connected to a provider and
have the initial appointment booked. However, if they do not wish to
volunteer for employment services, they will be registered as No Stream
Services Referral Required (NSSRR) job seekers.

PP job seekers not subject to compulsory mutual obligation requirements
may volunteer to be referred to a provider.

Job seekers aged 15-21 who are not receiving income support

Job seekers aged 15-21 who are not receiving income support are not
eligible to be registered as a Fully Eligible Participant. They may
however, be registered as Volunteers as long as they are not:

-   full-time students
-   working in paid employment for 15 hours or more per week and not on
    an Income Support Payment
-   overseas visitors on working holiday visas or overseas students
    studying in Australia, or
-   prohibited by law from working in Australia

Full-time students seeking an apprenticeship or traineeship are eligible
for servicing as a Volunteer.

Young people who are not in receipt of Income Support Payments who are
under school-leaving age, including those under 17 years, can be
Registered only if they have permission to leave school.

Vulnerable Youth (VY)

Young people who wish to access employment services could have the
Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (student) (VY(s)) flag
recorded on their record as part of the FEP registration.

VY and VY(s) can be registered either by Services Australia or directly
by a jobactive organisation. If they are directly registered, jobactive
will commence providing Stream C Services immediately. These young
people will then be referred to Services Australia within 4 weeks to
test their eligibility for income support payment. The agency must
complete the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) and make a
referral to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt), if triggered.

Job seeker visa requirements

Job seekers with a right to work in Australia are eligible for
employment assistance, and may be registered as FEP. Employment
assistance will be based on the conditions of the job seeker's visa.

The following job seekers are excluded from being registered for
employment assistance:

-   overseas visitors on a working holiday visa
-   overseas students studying in Australia
-   people prohibited by law from working in Australia

Voluntary registration for employment assistance services

Other job seekers may choose to voluntarily register for full services.

Job Seekers who have claimed online who choose to voluntarily register
for full services can do so using the Participation Interview.

Volunteer job seekers are those volunteering for jobactive services who
are:

receiving income support payments and do not have compulsory mutual
obligation requirements including job seekers receiving:

-   Parenting Payments with the youngest child under 6
-   Carer Payments
-   Age Pensioners

not receiving income support payments and are:

-   working fewer than 15 hours a week
-   not studying full time, and
-   entitled to work in Australia with the exception of working holiday
    visa holders and overseas students studying in Australia

full-time students seeking an apprenticeship or traineeship

newly arrived refugees eligible for the Better Targeting of Support for
Refugees measure. See Refugee, humanitarian and protection visa holder
service offer for more information

Workers and contractors made redundant from BlueScope Steel

This package is closed to new entrants but jobactive may continue to
provide services to job seekers under this package. On 22 August 2011,
the Australian Government announced a package of support for redundant
BlueScope Steel workers and contractors. As part of this support,
workers and contractors who have been made redundant from BlueScope
Steel in Illawarra and the Mornington Peninsula will be able to access
immediate assistance to help them get back into the workforce.

Workers and contractors made redundant from the Tasmanian Forestry Industry

Workers and contractors who have been made redundant from an eligible
company in the Tasmanian Forestry Industry will receive immediate access
to Stream B employment support through jobactive to help them get back
into the workforce. Affected workers are required to provide evidence of
redundancy when they register with or attend an initial appointment with
a jobactive organisation.

Workers made redundant from the automotive manufacturing industry

An assistance package is available to provide support for redundant
automotive manufacturing workers. As part of this support, any workers
made redundant from an eligible automotive manufacturing company will
receive immediate access to Stream B employment support through
jobactive to assist them get back into the workforce. Workers can also
register directly with jobactive for this support. Workers should check
with their jobactive organisation to determine if they were made
redundant from an eligible company. Affected workers are required to
provide evidence of redundancy when they register or attend an initial
appointment with a jobactive organisation.

Workers made redundant from the textile, clothing and footwear manufacturing industry

This package is closed to new entrants but jobactive may continue to
provide service to job seekers under this package. This assistance
package is available to provide support for redundant textile
manufacturing workers. As part of this support, any workers made
redundant from eligible textile, clothing and footwear manufacturers
will receive immediate access to Stream B employment support from an
Employment Services Provider to assist them get back into the workforce.

The Resources page contains a links to an external website for workers
who have lost their job and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Eligibility for employment assistance as a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP)

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

Registering Volunteer job seekers

Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable
Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S))

Conducting a Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) interview

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Online Diary

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Participation Interview

Refugee, humanitarian and protection visa holder service offer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
