
Exits and suspensions from jobactive or Community Development Programme (CDP) 001-02020060

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reasons why a job seeker may be exited or
suspended from receiving services from jobactive or Community
Development Programme (CDP) providers. Most of these processes are
automatic and are done by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment.

On this Page:

Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) exits from jobactive

Job seekers are exited from jobactive when they are no longer eligible
for services or no longer required to participate. Volunteer job seekers
who do not have Mutual Obligation Requirements may request an exit
either from jobactive or Services Australia.

FEP job seekers will be exited from jobactive automatically when the job
seeker:

-   has stopped receiving an eligible income support payment
-   is fully meeting their Mutual Obligation Requirements and no longer
    needs to remain connected to the provider
-   is commenced in Disability Employment Services or the Community
    Development Programme (CDP), or
-   has become a New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) participant

There are some situations where an automatic exit would not occur but a
FEP may be eligible for a provider exit, which is processed manually by
the jobactive organisation. These situations are where a FEP:

has a partial capacity to work (PCW):

-   of less than 15 hours per weeks, or
-   of 15 hours or more per week and is meeting their Mutual Obligation
    Requirements through 30 hours or more per fortnight of paid work
    and/or study

is a principal carer parent:

-   and has a long-term exemption (end date longer than 16 weeks), or

is meeting their Mutual Obligation Requirements through 30 hours or more
per fortnight of paid work and/or study or both

Volunteer job seeker exits from jobactive

A volunteer job seeker may at any time advise either Services Australia
or jobactive they no longer wish to participate in Employment Provider
Services. Service Officers should inform the volunteer of the 6 month
time limit to their participation in Employment Provider Services.
Depending on the individual circumstances of the volunteer, they may
choose to:

-   continue to participate in jobactive up to their 6 month time limit
-   be suspended by jobactive for up to 13 weeks and then resume
    Employment Provider Services up to their 6 month time limit, or
-   be exited

Note: a jobactive organisation must resume delivery of Employment
Provider Services to a volunteer where they return to services within 13
consecutive weeks after the date of exit and have not received a total
of 6 months service as a volunteer.

Inactivate jobactive job seeker registration

On request from a volunteer job seeker, Service Officers may inactivate
the job seeker registration for volunteer job seekers who no longer wish
to participate in jobactive. This will result in the job seeker being
exited from the provider's caseload.

Volunteer job seekers who request inactivation must be advised they may
not be eligible for another referral to jobactive if they choose to
inactivate their registration. Volunteer job seekers are only eligible
for a total of 6 months of service from jobactive. There may also be
restrictions on re-registration if more than 13 weeks has elapsed since
the last exit or inactivation. The job seeker may wish to talk to their
provider about suspensions of service up to 13 weeks duration instead of
requesting inactivation through Services Australia.

In some instances, jobactive organisations may request Services
Australia to inactivate a volunteer job seeker's registration. Given the
6 months restriction to jobactive services, this should not be completed
unless we have the direct approval of the job seeker. It should be noted
jobactive organisations may manually exit volunteer job seekers.

Exits from Community Development Programme (CDP)

When a job seeker lives in a Department of Education, Skills and
Employment designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Programme (CDP) provider

Job seekers are exited from CDP when they have a change of circumstances
and are no longer eligible, or they are voluntary job seekers and no
longer wish to receive services.

Job seekers will be exited from CDP automatically in the following
circumstances:

-   By a Services Australia activity such as a cancellation of payment
-   When a job seeker transfers to a payment which is not eligible for
    employment services
-   When the job seeker commences training or study and they are
    required to claim a student payment
-   If they are a principal carer or have been assessed with a partial
    capacity to work and commence in a job which fully meets their
    Mutual Obligation Requirements and achieve a full outcome after 13
    weeks in a job, and do not volunteer for further services
-   If they are in receipt of an income support payment with no Mutual
    Obligation Requirements and commence in a job at the level required
    to achieve a full outcome, and achieve a full outcome after 13 weeks
-   If they commence in a NEIS program (however while in NEIS training,
    the job seeker will remain connected to their provider)

Circumstances when CDP providers can exit the job seeker

Providers can also exit the job seeker in the following circumstances:

-   If they are in receipt of an income support payment with no Mutual
    Obligation Requirements and no longer wish to volunteer
-   If they are a principal carer or have been assessed with a partial
    capacity to work (PCW 0-14) and are fully meeting their part-time
    participation requirements and do not wish to volunteer
-   Job seekers with a PCW of 0-14 hours per week who do not wish to
    volunteer
-   Principal carers with long-term exemptions (16 weeks or more) who do
    not wish to volunteer

Suspension from jobactive or CDP

Job seekers who have Mutual Obligation Requirements will be
automatically suspended from jobactive or CDP in the following
circumstances:

-   When they have an exemption from their Mutual Obligation
    Requirements
-   Principal carers or people assessed as having a partial capacity to
    work (PCW 0-14) who are fully meeting their Mutual Obligation
    Requirements, for example, by undertaking suitable paid
    work/self-employment for at least 30 hours per fortnight, studying
    full-time or working their assessed capacity
-   Mature age 55+ are meeting their Mutual Obligation Requirements by
    undertaking approved voluntary or suitable paid work for at least 30
    hours per fortnight
-   When they have a temporary reduced work capacity of less than 15
    hours per week

Providers can also manually suspend services to a voluntary job seeker
if the provider assesses that the job seeker is unable to participate
for a certain period of time.

There is no minimum or maximum time for suspensions. However, job
seekers can volunteer for employment services during the period of
suspension.

Re-engagement with provider

Services Australia should book the re-engagement appointment for the job
seeker with their Employment Services Provider at the end of the
suspension period, if the job seeker does not have an appointment booked
by their provider. There will be a new appointment reason of
'Exemption/Approved Activity completed' available on the Online Diary
for Services Australia to use when booking the re-engagement appointment
for the job seeker when their suspension period expires.

Once the job seeker has been either exited or suspended from jobactive
or CDP, the Department of Education, Skills and Employment will send the
notification to Services Australia. The status of exit or suspend can be
viewed via the Participation Summary screen.

Job seekers in receipt of an income support payment that has Mutual
Obligation Requirements, who have been exited or been suspended from
CDP, will be Services Australia managed. The Managed by field, which is
located on the Participation Summary screen, should be used by a Service
Officer to determine whether the job seeker is Services Australia or
provider managed.

The Resources page contains a list of approved activities, which will
result in automatic suspension from Employment Provider Services by the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment. The page also has an
attachment on the jobactive/CDP exit codes/reasons.

Related links

Inactivating job seekers registration for volunteer Employment Services
job seekers

Registering Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers in jobactive

Online Diary

Participation with jobactive

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
