
Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work capacity 001-09070180

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes required when a job seeker has a
partial capacity to work (PCW) or a temporary reduced work capacity
(TRWC) because of the impacts of a medical condition. This applies to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Parenting Payment (PP) or
Special Benefit (SpB) customers.

PCW and TRWC status

The customer is assessed as having a PCW if both 'baseline work
capacity' and 'with intervention' (previously known as 'future') work
capacity are less than 30 hours per week in the Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report.

A customer is assessed as having a TRWC if they have been assessed by an
Assessor as being temporarily unable to work for at least 30 hours per
week because of a medical condition.

A PCW or TRWC status is coded on the customer's record when the ESAt or
JCA report is accepted by Services Australia. The date of effect of the
work capacity status can be backdated. An ESAt or JCA is the only valid
assessment that can be used to determine a PCW or TRWC status.

Medical certificates

A customer who lodges a medical certificate (seeking exemption from
mutual obligation requirements) may be referred for an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) to assess their PCW or TRWC where there is
not already a current and valid assessment of the customer's work
capacity. The referral for an ESAt should not delay the decision about
the temporary incapacity exemption. In all cases the Service Officer
should make the decision about whether to grant an exemption based on
available evidence, including the medical certificate completed by the
customer's treating doctor.

Mutual obligation requirements

The ESAt or JCA assesses work capacity according to one of the following
bandwidths, and the customer's mutual obligation requirements are
determined based on this:

-   0-7 hours per week
-   8-14 hours per week
-   15-22 hours per week
-   23-29 hours per week

See Process for details of mutual obligation requirements for each
bandwidth.

Approved activities and exemptions

Customers who are assessed as having a PCW or TRWC of between 15 and 29
hours per week must satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
undertaking compulsory activities such as looking for work or
undertaking paid work.

Customers with a PCW or TRWC of either 15-22 or 23-29 hours per week are
not treated differently in terms of employment services or the level of
paid work required to fully meet mutual obligation requirements. Both
groups can fully meet their mutual obligation requirements through paid
work of at least 15 hours per week - a customer with a PCW of 23-29
hours per week does not have to be working for at least 23 hours per
week to fully meet their requirements.

A customer with a PCW or TRWC may be granted an exemption from mutual
obligation requirements. For example, if they have lodged a medical
certificate that shows they are temporarily incapacitated for all work.
This includes customers who meet the criteria for a Temporary Incapacity
exemption - serious illness.

However, for jobseekers who are not participating in a Community
Development Program (CDP), an exemption cannot be granted if the illness
or injury was wholly or mainly caused by the person's drug or alcohol
misuse (including dependency). See Mutual obligations requirement
exemptions for more details.

Job seekers can volunteer to undertake drug dependency treatments or
interventions, which may count towards meeting their mutual obligation
and Annual Activity Requirements if they are provider managed.

Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

The HPAU can provide and/or facilitate medical advice and opinion to
help determine a customer's Temporary Incapacity exemption where medical
evidence has been lodged. Only specific staff can contact the HPAU and
then only for specific reasons, depending on the Service
Officer/Specialist's role.

Customers with a PCW who are required to transfer to JSP, YA, or PP at
the Disability Support Pension (DSP) transition review contact and are
studying and receiving Pensioner Education Supplement (PES), can
continue their studies (full-time or part-time) in the same course and
be qualified for JSP/YA and PES. This can include courses of more than
12 months duration.

Employment Services Provider processes

See Process Table 2 for details of Employment Services Provider
processes for customers with a PCW or TRWC.

Provider access to capacity to work information

The customer's Employment Services Provider has access to the work
capacity assessment information in the ESAt report. See Process Table 2.

Mutual obligation requirements for customers who fit into several categories

Customers with mutual obligation requirements may fit into more than one
category.

The mutual obligation requirement which is the most beneficial to the
customer is applied, depending on their circumstances. The Services
Australia system automatically places the customer into the most
appropriate participation category. See Process Table 1 for details.

The Resources page contains information about types of activities to be
added to Job Plans, and has scenarios of how customers with a PCW can
fully meet their mutual obligation requirements through sufficient work,
including paid leave.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to
Work/Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job
seekers

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

The Health Professional Advisory Unit (HPAU)

Diagnosis of a medical condition provided by an Assessment Services
Psychologist for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
