
Deferring an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral 001-02330020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions to be taken where a customer requires
an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and there is a valid reason to
defer the ESAt referral. This procedure only applies to ESAt referrals
that are initiated through the Job Seeker Snapshot by Services Australia
or an Employment Services Provider.

Valid reason identified

In all instances, Services Australia must consider whether a job seeker
with an exemption would benefit from an immediate referral for an ESAt
before deferring the referral.

Where there is a valid reason to defer an ESAt referral for a job seeker
with mutual obligation requirements, the deferral must be recorded on
the system to reflect the customer's circumstances.

If there is a current and valid assessment of the customer's work
capacity then this should be reapplied to a Job Seeker
Snapshot-initiated ESAt flag to complete a pending Job Seeker Snapshot.

Deferred ESAt

An ESAt referral can only be deferred where the:

-   Job Seeker Snapshot has been run, the Job Seeker Snapshot status is
    pending and the system has flagged that an ESAt is required
-   ESAt flag and pending Job Seeker Snapshot cannot be finalised by
    reapplying the outcomes of a current and valid assessment

Job seeker groups for whom an ESAt referral can be deferred

The ESAt referral to an assessor may be deferred for job seekers:

-   who are receiving a payment with mutual obligation requirements,
    where there is a valid reason for deferment and the job seeker has a
    current exemption from mutual obligation requirements
-   who are newly-arrived refugees. The referral should generally be
    deferred until 12 weeks after the customer's arrival in Australia,
    but a referral may be made sooner if the customer indicates that
    they want to look for work before the end date of their exemption
    from mutual obligation requirements
-   whose claim for payment has been granted, but the payment start date
    is in the future because of a waiting/preclusion period such as an
    Income Maintenance Period or Liquid Assets Waiting Period
-   whose payment is suspended, for example because they are imprisoned
    or overseas and payment is not portable (generally the suspension
    period is for a maximum of 13 weeks, after which payment is
    cancelled)
-   subject to a non-payment period, unemployment preclusion period or
    where the job seeker has entered into a post cancellation
    non-payment period
-   without mutual obligation requirements, where deferment of the
    referral is appropriate

Exemptions for job seekers with mutual obligation requirements

The customer's circumstances will normally be reflected in the type of
exemption granted - for example, Major Personal Crisis or Caring
responsibilities. The fact that an exemption from mutual obligation
requirements is granted does not automatically mean that the ESAt
referral should be deferred.

Period of deferment

In all cases the period of deferment is limited to a maximum of 13 weeks
from the date that the Job Seeker Snapshot identified the need for an
ESAt. A deferment should not exceed the end date of the current
exemption from mutual obligation requirements.

Recording the deferment

Where a request for an ESAt was initiated by Services Australia and
requirements are met to defer the referral, Service Officer(s) must
record the decision to defer the ESAt request on the customer's record,
via Customer First. Once the deferment is recorded, the activity on the
customer's record indicating the requirement for an ESAt will be
automatically finalised, although the Job Seeker Snapshot status will
remain pending.

During the period of the deferment there is no requirement to request an
ESAt.

A customer can volunteer to be referred to an Assessor during the
deferment period.

When the deferment period expires and if an ESAt request has not been
started, the system will automatically create an activity so a Service
Officer can request an ESAt as soon as possible. If the customer is not
receiving an activity-tested payment when the deferment period ends, the
request should only proceed if the customer chooses to do this.

Agency staff access the Deferred Referral link in Process Direct on
Participation Summary.

Related links

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview

Exempting a job seeker from the mutual obligation requirements when they
are an Expectant Mother

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exempting a job seeker from the mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Exempting job seekers from the mutual obligation requirements due to
caring responsibilities

An exemption from mutual obligation requirement exemptions for refugees

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
