
Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation requirements 001-10040070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Examples of circumstances impacting ability to comply at the time of the requirement

George was impacted by an episodic illness and missed the appointment.
George has previously provided medical evidence and discussed his
illness to Services Australia. A circumstance impacting compliance is
current on George's record which indicates this is an ongoing factor.

The PST-skilled Service Officer considers:

-   What is the nature of the illness?
-   How did the illness affect their capacity at the time of the
    requirement?
-   Do the impacts of the illness make it unreasonable for the job
    seeker to comply?
-   Was it unreasonable for the job seeker to contact their provider
    before the appointment or requirement start time?
-   Was the illness the only issue affecting their ability to comply?
-   Do George's actions suggest intent to comply?
-   If the same illness intermittently impacts George's ability to meet
    requirements, have reasonable steps been taken to address this (such
    as discussing with the provider, including receiving reminders or
    regularly checking the Job Seeker app)?
-   Has there been a change in, for example, medication or triggers,
    which correlate with the non-compliance?
-   What time was the appointment? Was it early in the morning, when it
    may be difficult for George to function? Has the provider discussed
    this with George? Has the provider considered this when arranging
    the appointment?
-   Did the illness affect George at the time of the requirement?
-   Would George have known prior to the appointment that he would
    unlikely be able to comply?

Reasonable excuse: Point-in-time or ongoing

The considerations given to what constitutes a 'reasonable excuse' for a
job seeker may be different where the failure relates to:

-   a specific, point-in-time requirement, such as attending an
    appointment with their provider
-   a failure that covers a longer period, such as a failure for not
    meeting their points target (for Workforce Australia participants)
    or job search requirements (for Community Development Program (CDP)
    or Disability Employment Service (DES) participants)

For instance, a job seeker was required to attend an appointment with
their provider. On the way to their appointment, their car has broken
down and so the job seeker has point-in-time transportation difficulties
directly impacting their compliance ability with a compulsory
requirement for this particular incident.

That may not have stopped them from contacting their provider advise
that they were unable to attend, provided it was safe and reasonable for
them to do so. Where did the breakdown occur? It is neither safe, nor
reasonable to except an individual to fulfil prior contact requirements
if their car has broken down in the middle of a multi-lane freeway, but
would it be possible to call their provider if they had broken down on a
quiet side street and had been able to manoeuvre their vehicle safely
off the road, out of the way of on-coming traffic?

Point-in-time transportation difficulties, like this scenario also
wouldn’t mean the job seeker was then incapable of meeting their full
months’ worth of points requirement.

Examples of a reasonable excuse that may be applicable for extended
durations (like a points reporting period) include, but are not limited
to:

-   local natural disaster
-   bereavement
-   family or caring responsibilities
-   COVID-19 isolation or caring for a person with COVID-19 e.g. child
-   homelessness or unstable accommodation
-   became a principal carer
-   other circumstances (usually exceptional and/or unforeseen in
    nature)

Family and Domestic Violence Risk Identification and Referral (RIR) model

Do not share this attachment externally. See Freedom of Information -
Information Publication Scheme.

[\\INTERNAL.DEPT.LOCAL\Shared\NAT\SERDELEXCEL\WORKPRODIMP\Operation
Blueprint Migration\RDT Release
Icons\32w\icon-hidden-attachment.png]Family and Domestic Violence Risk
Identification and Referral (RIR) model

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
