
New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) and Self-Employment Assistance 001-02100000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains information on the Self-Employment Assistance and
New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) including application and
assessment processes and associated payments.

Self-Employment Assistance replacing NEIS

From 1 July 2022, the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
(DEWR) implemented Self-Employment Assistance. This is replacing NEIS
Assistance.

From 1 July 2022:

-   new participants will only be able to participate in Self-Employment
    Assistance (unless on Norfolk Island)
-   any participant in NEIS Assistance with more than 3 months of NEIS
    Assistance remaining will transition to Self-Employment Assistance
-   any participant in NEIS Assistance with less than 3 months NEIS
    Assistance remaining will remain in NEIS Assistance

Due to system limitations, the Services Australia system was not updated
to reflect the changes to Self-Employment Assistance. These changes will
be made at a later date. The Services Australia system will continue to
display all participants as 'NEIS Pre-Training' or 'NEIS Assistance'.

For Services Australia staff, the NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance
Operational Blueprint provides necessary information to cover both
programs. See Resources for further information.

NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance overview

NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance offers flexible services to help people
who are interested in becoming self-employed or people who are existing
micro-business owners. Participants can choose the services they wish to
access, selecting from 6 free services including:

-   Exploring Self-Employment Workshops
-   Small Business Training (previously NEIS Pre-Training) (fully meets
    mutual obligation requirements and meets the short course guidelines
    for the Education Entry Payment (EdEP))
-   Business Plan Development
-   Business Advice Sessions
-   Business Health Checks (for existing micro-business owners), and
-   Small Business Coaching (previously NEIS Assistance) (fully meets
    mutual obligation requirements)

Further detail on each of these is available on the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) website.

If eligible, NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance may be paid for up to 39
weeks.

NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance:

-   is administered by DEWR
-   is delivered by small business specialist providers
-   runs for 52 weeks

Participation in some elements is considered to be an approved activity
for payments with mutual obligation requirements.

NEIS/Self-Employment enquiry by customer

If the customer is already connected to an employment services provider,
the Service Officer should advise them to contact their Workforce
Australia or Disability Employment Services (DES) provider for
information.

All other customers should be advised to search for their local
NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance provider on the Workforce Australia
website.

Eligibility for Self-Employment Assistance

To be eligible customers must satisfy all of the following criteria:

-   be at least 15 years of age (a customer must be 18 years of age to
    access Small Business Coaching)
-   be an Australian citizen, or the holder of a permanent visa, or a
    nominated Visa holder (including a New Zealand Special Category
    Visa, Temporary Protection Visa Holder and a Safe Haven Visa Holder)
-   not be an undischarged bankrupt
-   not already be in education and/or employment for more than 25 hours
    per week

If the customer is already self-employed or already has a business idea,
their local Self-Employment Assistance provider will work with them to
assess whether their business or business idea is eligible.

Note: Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers cannot participate
in NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance.

NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching

Business mentoring and support is an essential component of
NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance. Participants will receive business
mentoring for 52 weeks under the NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching
phase. Participants will also receive advice about organisational,
financial and marketing issues to support the development of their
business.

Participants can receive NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance for the first 39
weeks of the 52 week NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching phase. The
amount of NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance payable will not be affected by
income from the job seeker's business, as the allowance is paid by the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR).

The NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance provider is able to arrange
additional mentoring and support for some individuals and Indigenous
Australian job seekers where they consider it to be appropriate.

NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance

Most NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance participants transfer from their
income support payment to NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance after they
complete NEIS Pre Training/Small Business training and commence in NEIS
Assistance/Small Business Coaching.

Certain customers may be receiving a higher rate of income support than
the amount paid under NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance, for example:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers who
    are single with a dependent child
-   JSP, SpB and Youth Allowance (job seeker) (YA) single principal
    carers with long term exemptions
-   JSP and SpB job seekers aged 60 and over, who have been in receipt
    of an income support payment for more than 9 continuous months, and
-   JSP and SpB job seekers who are assessed as either 'Illness
    Separated', 'Respite Care Couple' or 'Partner in gaol'

These job seekers, if they have no affecting income, should be eligible
to continue to receive a partial rate of their income support payment on
top of their NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance after the dollar for dollar
reduction is applied. The partial rate paid by Services Australia is
paid as a manual rate and is subject to the income and assets test. If
these job seekers also receive employment income, they may be eligible
for Working Credit.

Customers in receipt of:

-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Age Pension
-   Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Partner Service Pension, or
-   War Widow(er) Pension

can elect to remain on their income support payment while participating
in NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching, up to the maximum of 52
weeks, providing all other pension/payment and NEIS Assistance/Small
Business Coaching eligibility criteria are met. Alternatively, they may
elect to receive the NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance and a partial rate
of their income support payment.

NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance rental assistance is available for up to
26 weeks to NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching participants if
eligible.

NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance recipients who do not receive an income
support payment may be eligible for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

NEIS/Small Business Coaching and Disability Employment Services (DES)

Customers may concurrently participate in DES and NEIS Assistance/Small
Business Coaching. Once a job seeker is participating with DES, the job
seeker may be referred by their DES provider to participate in NEIS
Assistance/Self-Employment Assistance, which includes Small Business
Coaching.

Participating in NEIS/Small Business Coaching or DES satisfies the
mutual obligation or participation requirements for income support
payments. Participants will still be required to report regularly to
Services Australia to receive income support payments, including partial
rates. Any business income must be declared and assessed as normal.

Rate of NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance

The amount of NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance paid is equivalent to the
'single, 22 and over, with no children' rate of JobSeeker Payment (JSP).
NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance reduces income support on a dollar for
dollar basis, meaning participants may no longer be entitled to their
income support payment.

Note: customers receiving NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance cannot obtain
early release of superannuation. NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance is
specifically excluded by this legislation. Queries regarding this should
be referred to Department of Employment and Work Relations National
Customer Service Line.

Eligibility for income support after NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance ceases

The maximum period that NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance is payable to a
participant is 39 weeks from the start of the 52 week NEIS Assistance or
Small Business Coaching period.

As a result, these customers may contact the agency to test their
eligibility for an income support payment for the final 13 weeks of NEIS
Assistance/Small Business Coaching. Provided these customers meet all
other eligibility requirements, participation in NEIS Assistance/Small
Business Coaching does not preclude them from income support.

Participation in NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching fully satisfies
a customer's mutual obligation requirements or compulsory participation
requirements. This means the job seeker will not be referred to a
provider where they claim an income support payment during the last 13
weeks of NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching, because they are
already connected to a NEIS/Self-Employment Assistance provider and not
eligible for other employment services.

See the Process page for coding procedures where a NEIS Assistance/Small
Business Coaching participant contacts the agency to claim an income
support payment, or to have their rate of payment restored to full rate,
following the cessation of their NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance after 39
weeks. Note: the NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching participant
will be prompted by their provider to supply their NEIS/Self-Employment
Allowance cessation letter as evidence.

NEIS Assistance/Small Business Coaching participants who were receiving
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) and whose payment was
reduced or cancelled due to receiving the NEIS/Self-Employment
Allowance, will receive an advice from Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations (DEWR) to verify that their NEIS/Self-Employment
Allowance has ceased.

Where a JSP or YA customer re-applies for payment after 39 weeks,
Service Officers will need to manually zero the NEIS/Self-Employment
Allowance on the Other Government Payments (OGP) screen, and end any
manual rate overrides that existed to continue partial rate payments
during the 39 weeks of NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance.

If an AGE, Carer Payment (CP), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) or
Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer re-applies for payment after
39 weeks and their rate was reduced by NEIS/Self-Employment Allowance,
the system will automatically zero on the OGP screen at 39 weeks.
Service Officers will not have to manually zero NEIS/Self-Employment
Allowance for these customers as part of a new claim or to restore
payment back to full rate.

The Resources page has information on the extension of NEIS
Pre-Training/Small Business Training, a link to the NEIS/Self-Employment
Assistance Helpdesk, a link to Workforce Australia and the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations, Self-Employment Assistance, New
Enterprise Incentive Scheme homepages.

Related links

Working Credit

Approved activities for principal carers

Self-employment as an approved activity

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Approved activities for Job Plans

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Extended entitlement to Concession Cards

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Commencement of a new business or purchase of a business enterprise

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
