
Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework 001-18030204

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how providers report non-compliance action to
Services Australia under the Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF).

Responsibility for reporting non-compliance

Providers have responsibility for monitoring compliance with compulsory
requirements.

Each time a job seeker or ParentsNext participant fails to meet a
compulsory requirement, a non-compliance event is recorded in the
Employment Services System (ESSweb) by either the provider or
automatically by the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.
This creates a failure report which is sent to Services Australia.

There are different types of failure reports for:

-   mutual obligation failures
-   work refusal failures
-   unemployment failures

Services Australia may also generate non-compliance events for:

-   work refusal
-   voluntary unemployment, or
-   dismissal due to misconduct

Service Officers are required to gather evidence to establish an
apparent non-compliance event before generating a compliance
investigation. This usually involves talking with the job seeker, but
may also include talking to the employer involved.

Mutual obligation failures in the green or warning zone

When a mutual obligation failure is committed, a job seeker's
participation payment may be suspended. Suspension will occur
immediately if a financial penalty is a potential outcome, or in two
business days for cases where a demerit is the only outcome.

If a job seeker in the TCF green or warning zone fails to meet a mutual
obligation requirement, the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations system (ESSweb 2.0) will send them a notice by SMS or email.
This notice tells the job seeker:

-   it appears they did not meet a requirement, and
-   they must contact their provider or their payment will be put on
    hold

To avoid payment suspension the job seeker must, within two business
days:

-   contact their provider to explain the reason for non-compliance, and
-   meet any re-engagement requirement issued by the provider

If a job seeker contacts Services Australia about this message, they
must be told to contact their provider as soon as possible to avoid
payment suspension.

If the job seeker does not contact their provider, their payment will be
suspended after two business days. Their payment will remain suspended
until they contact their provider and meet any reengagement requirements
the provider sets.

Providers have responsibility for notifying job seekers of reconnection
requirements and for determining when the conditions have been met for
the participation suspension to be lifted.

When the provider records conditions to lift the suspension have been
met, or that re-engagement is no longer required, this sends an
electronic notification to Services Australia's system to finalise the
suspension report, which automatically lifts the participation
suspension.

Mutual obligation failures in the financial penalty zone:

For job seekers in the penalty zone, when the provider records a mutual
obligation failure in ESSweb this sends a non-compliance report (NCR) to
Services Australia's system.

The NCR triggers an immediate suspension of the job seeker's payment.
This suspension prompts an SMS to the job seeker advising of the
suspension and to contact their provider to re-engage. Services
Australia also formally notifies the job seeker of the suspension
including the requirement to contact their provider.

If the job seeker contacts the provider, the provider may:

-   accept the job seeker had a valid reason. The provider will finalise
    the NCR and payment will be restored with no action required by
    Services Australia
-   not accept the job seeker had a valid reason: The provider will
    update the NCR and submit the report to Services Australia. The job
    seeker will not be able to report to Services Australia until they
    talk to a Participation Solutions Team-skilled Service Officer who
    will investigate the mutual obligation failure

Work Refusal Reports

When the provider becomes aware a job seeker has refused, or has failed
to accept or commence suitable work, providers must speak with the job
seeker to determine if a work refusal failure has occurred.

The provider will attempt to contact the job seeker on the day they
become aware of the work refusal. If this attempt is unsuccessful, the
provider submits a Work Refusal Failure Report to Services Australia. On
receipt of this report, the job seeker's payment is immediately
suspended until they contact the provider.

Once contact is made, if the provider considers the work was:

-   suitable and the job seeker did not provide a valid reason for
    refusing the work, the provider will update the Work Refusal Failure
    Report and tell the job seeker to contact the Participation
    Solutions Team. The update to the Work Refusal Failure Report by the
    provider will generate a compliance investigation in Services
    Australia's system
-   not suitable, or accepts the job seekers reason for refusing the
    work, the provider will record this reason in the Work Refusal
    Failure Report and finalise the report, with no further action for
    Services Australia

Reporting unemployment failures

When the provider identifies a job seeker has voluntarily left
employment, the provider must speak to the job seeker to determine if
the work was suitable, and the reasons why they left employment.

If the provider is unable to contact the job seeker to discuss, a
contact appointment is scheduled. This is because, unlike mutual
obligation failures and work refusal failures, there are no provisions
to trigger contact or suspend payment to discuss a potential
unemployment failure. The appointment is compulsory and if the job
seeker fails to attend the appointment, a mutual obligation failure has
occurred.

When the job seeker attends the appointment and the reasons for
unemployment are not valid, the provider reports this to Services
Australia via an electronic transaction, and tells the job seeker to
contact PST who will conduct an unemployment failure investigation.

Validity Checks

Automatic validity checks are conducted by both the Employment Services
System (ESS) and the Services Australia system before generating a
participation suspension or compliance investigation. This ensures
payment suspension and compliance investigations are only generated when
a failure would be legislatively valid.

Department of Employment and Workplace Relations validity check

The ESS validity check confirms:

-   the requirement in the compliance action was appropriate for the job
    seeker or ParentsNext participant
-   notification and reasonable notice occurred
-   there was a non-compliance event and
-   if required, the report includes sufficient evidence

Services Australia validity check

The Services Australia system automatically performs a validity check to
confirm the job seeker or ParentsNext participant had a compulsory
requirement on the non-compliance event date and at the time the report
is received.

When non-compliance related to an approved programme of work, for
example Workforce Australia - Work for the Dole (WFD), the validity
check also confirms the job seeker's payment was not reduced due to
earned income.

Active failures

An active failure is a failure that is available for investigation by a
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer in the
Services Australia system.

Unemployment failures and work refusal failures are active failures as
soon as they are generated.

A mutual obligation failure in the penalty zone becomes active on the
job seekers reporting date. The job seeker can choose to accept a first
or second mutual obligation failure penalty when they report without
speaking to a PST-skilled Service Officer. If the mutual obligation
failure is the third failure, or the job seeker wishes to discuss a
first or second failure with a PST-skilled Service Officer, their
fortnightly report will remain outstanding until the failure
investigation has been completed.

The Resources page contains lists the Targeted Compliance Framework
failure types and reasons.

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
