
Mutual obligation requirements exemptions 001-09120000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This process is impacted by the Coronavirus (COVID-19) response. See
Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response.

This document explains circumstances for which mutual obligation or
participation requirements exemptions can be granted.

Mutual obligation and participation requirements

Job seekers and ParentsNext participants must meet mutual obligation or
participation requirements to get income support payments, unless they
are exempt.

Different exemption rules and coding may apply for job seekers in
receipt of Special Benefit (SpB).

ParentsNext participants have participation requirements. There are some
exemptions that only apply to ParentsNext participants:

-   Temporary period of confinement
-   Special family circumstances (for short term caring exemption)
-   Bereavement

For more information on exemptions specific to ParentsNext participants,
see ParentsNext exits and exemptions.

Exemption reasons

Reasons to exempt job seekers or ParentsNext participants:

temporary incapacity for all work due to illness or injury. This
includes medium or long-term serious illness. Do not exempt if drug or
alcohol misuse or dependence is the whole or main cause

expectant job seekers

expectant ParentsNext participants

getting Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

special circumstances (except drugs or alcohol as the whole or main
cause and not in the Community Development Program (CDP)). Examples:

-   released from prison (except if they have done the Time to Work
    Employment Service (TWES) programme)
-   major disruption to their home
-   major personal crisis
-   declared natural disaster
-   temporary carer
-   they are under an Extended Supervision Order (ESO) or Community
    Service Order

principal carer exemption including but not limited to:

-   special family circumstances (such as, caring for a child with a
    disability, a victim of family and domestic violence, caring for a
    relative child under a Family Court order, job seekers with mutual
    obligation requirements whose livelihood is drought affected)

principal carer of a large family of 4 or more dependent children

principal carer home schooling. Note: if the eligibility criteria are
met, parents or guardians home schooling their children may qualify for
the Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme

principal carer is a foster carer

principal carer providing distance education

refugees (for the first 12 weeks after arrival)

Death of a Partner

Claiming DSP - A job seeker who claims JSP or Youth Allowance (YA) -
Provisional is exempt from mutual obligation requirements pending
determination of their submitted claim for Disability Support Pension
(DSP). The 'claiming DSP exemption' is not automatically recorded by the
system when a job seeker submits their DSP claim. Job seekers who have
submitted a claim for JSP or YA provisional and those already in receipt
of JSP or YA who have submitted a DSP claim should be immediately
granted a 'claiming DSP' exemption. See JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and
Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional) for further information

Mutual obligation requirements for customers after the death of their partner

When a job seeker contacts after the death of their partner, they are
eligible for a Bereavement mutual obligation exemption. Partner death
details are to be recorded on the Miscellaneous Details (NMIS) screen.
The Bereavement Period - Partner exemption (BPP) is recorded from the
date of death of the partner for 14 weeks. If the bereaved is pregnant
at the time of the partner's death, they will have a Bereavement
Period - Pregnant Partner (BPE) exemption for 14 weeks from the date of
the partner's death or to the end of the pregnancy, whichever is later
once verification of pregnancy is provided.

Note: different exemption periods apply on the death of a partner for
ParentsNext participants. See ParentsNext exits and exemptions.

If this is the initial contact after the death of a partner, see Initial
contact after someone has died for more information about available
services and referrals.

Customers may be eligible for Partner Bereavement Payment (PBV) if their
partner dies. PBV can be assessed as either part of a new claim or when
an existing recipient contacts. For more information, see Partner
Bereavement Payment (PBV).

Non-Applied Exemptions

Do not exempt customers if drug or alcohol misuse or dependence is the
whole or main cause of their issues. Record a Non-Applied Exemption
decision. See Resources for a list of Non-Applied Exemption types and
codes.

Drug or alcohol misuse often relates to Temporary Incapacity and Serious
Illness (medical certificate) exemptions. Do not apply a Major Personal
Crisis exemption if drug or alcohol misuse or dependence caused the
crisis.

Job seekers and ParentsNext participants stay linked to their provider
and need to meet their mutual obligation or participation requirements.
Providers negotiate requirements for job seekers and participants to
overcome their barriers to work and record them in the Job Plan or
Participation Plan. Drug or alcohol treatment programs may meet mutual
obligation or participation requirements. Tell job seekers or
participants of the benefits of staying linked to their provider. Do not
suggest lodging a medical certificate with:

-   different medical conditions, or
-   excluding drug or alcohol misuse or dependence

Drug or alcohol misuse or dependence Non-Applied Exemptions do not apply
to Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers.

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) job seekers

Job seekers getting DAP and income support payment with mutual
obligation requirements can ask for a Special Circumstances (SCI)
exemption. The exemption can be for up to 2 weeks while caring for a
child who has entered their care.

Referring job seekers to Workforce Australia

Referring job seekers to providers as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)
and volunteer in employment services is possible for:

expectant customers

job seekers:

-   with a Community Service Order or under an Extended Supervision
    Order (ESO)
-   with caring responsibilities
-   having a major personal crisis or disruption at home

principal carers who:

-   have a large family
-   provide home schooling or distance education
-   are foster parents
-   care for children when the job seeker is a relative (not a parent).
    This would be by a Family Court Parenting Order

Use discretion in deciding if a provider referral is suitable while 1 of
these exemptions is current. If a referral is suitable, explain the
voluntary nature and benefits of the referral.

Voluntary attendance at a provider interview

Job seeker registration stays current during a mutual obligation or
participation requirements exemption. Going to a provider interview is
voluntary when exempt.

Providers may not be able to process items on the job seeker's or
participant's Services Australia record during the exemption. Lifting
the exemption allows providers to action items. If job seekers or
participants do not attend, the exemption coding is a reasonable excuse
for not attending.

For voluntary participation with the provider during the exemption, job
seekers or participants must give their contact details to the provider.
If they do not, the provider cannot help them, as the contact details
will not be on their system.

Community Development Program (CDP)

Refer job seekers to CDP for voluntary assistance if they live in a
designated remote area.

Job seekers who fit into more than one group

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements can fit into more than
one of the following groups:

-   mature age 55+ job seekers
-   job seekers with a partial capacity to work (PCW), or
-   principal carers

If they do, apply the group that suits the job seeker the most,
depending on their circumstances.

For example, job seekers getting JobSeeker Payment (JSP) who are mature
age 55+, would have full-time mutual obligation requirements. However,
if the job seeker has full-time care of a child aged 14, they fit into
the mature age 55+ and principal carer groups, but would most suit as a
principal carer.

Restricted Access job seekers

Job seekers with Restricted Access recorded can be exempt from mutual
obligation requirements. They can get a Special Circumstances (SCI)
exemption. The SCI exemption end date and the next Restricted Access
review date should align if possible. If the dates cannot align, the SCI
exemption end date should be no more than 12 months. Tell the job seeker
that Restricted Access limits their access to employment services and
about the impact of the exemption.

Restricted Access limits Employment Services Provider access to job
seeker records and the chance to offer all services. Job seekers who
choose to stay with their provider must give the provider their contact
details. If they do not, the provider cannot help them, as their contact
details will not be on their system.

Note: Restricted Access customers are not selected for ParentsNext.

The Resources page contains the Non-Applied Exemption type codes table
and the impact on customers receiving JobKeeper Payment during
coronavirus (COVID-19).

Contents

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Expiry and renewal of medical certificates for payments with mutual
obligation requirements

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
they are an expectant mother

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions during disasters

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for refugees

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions for Special Benefit (SpB)

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Related links

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed
activities

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

ParentsNext appointments and processing

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) Incapacitated and
Provisional

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
