
Green Army Programme 001-02130000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The Green Army Programme ceased on 30 June 2018. If a customer asks
about participating in the programme, advise them that the programme
closed on 30 June 2018

This document outlines the information required for restoration of
income support payments and the continuing debt and appeals processes
after the Green Army Programme has ended on 30 June 2018.

On this Page:

Impact on income support payments

When a participant commenced in Green Army their income support payments
were affected in the following way:

-   Participants aged between 17-24 had their income support payment
    suspended
-   Participants aged 25 years and over had their income support payment
    cancelled
-   Income support payment concession card was cancelled

Certain customers could participate in Green Army as a part-time
participant and choose not to receive the Green Army allowance. In these
circumstances, they remained on income support and were eligible for the
Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS).

Green Army full-time participation

Full-time participants were paid the Green Army allowance. A customer
could not receive Green Army allowance and income support concurrently.

Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)

Full-time participants had their income support payment suspended or
cancelled and did not receive the APWS.

ABSTUDY and Green Army participants

ABSTUDY customers who received Green Army allowance were not eligible
for Living Allowance but may have qualified for other allowances under
the ABSTUDY Scheme.

Green Army part-time participation

Part-time participants had the option of remaining on income support, or
receiving the Green Army allowance. A customer could not receive Green
Army allowance and income support concurrently.

Part-time participants who elected to receive the Green Army allowance
had their income support suspended, and the associated concession card
for that payment was also cancelled. They were not entitled to the
Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS).

Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)

Part-time participants who elected to remain on income support may have
been eligible to receive the Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)
of $20.80 per fortnight in addition to income support and associated
entitlements.

Partner of Green Army participant

Green Army allowance was assessed as ongoing 'other income' on the
partner's record. If the customer is partnered, zero-off the affecting
Green Army allowance as at the programme end date, on either OGP or OINS
screen.

Completion/exit from programme

If a suspended participant advises:

within 14 calendar days of completing/exiting the programme:

-   confirm the actual end date of participation, and update via the
    Referral workflow if necessary
-   restore income support payment on the Benefit Action (BA) screen
    from the programme completion/exit date
-   update the Job Plan for Centrelink managed job seekers
-   reconnect the customer with their Employment Services Provider, if
    required
-   depending on payment type, concession entitlements for the customer
    will recommence from the date of payment restoration and a new card
    will automatically be issued

outside 14 calendar days but within 28 calendar days of completion/exit
date of programme:

-   confirm the actual end date of participation, and update via the
    Referral workflow if necessary
-   restore income support payment on the Benefit Action (BA) screen
    from the date the customer has advised of the change
-   update the Job Plan for the Centrelink managed job seekers
-   reconnect the customer with their Employment Services Provider
-   advise customer of decision and notification requirements
-   depending on payment type, concession entitlements for the customer
    may recommence from the date of payment restoration and a new card
    will automatically be issued

outside 28 calendar days of the Green Army completion/exit date, income
support payment will automatically cancel. The customer will be required
to reclaim income support payment

If the customer is partnered, zero-off the affecting Green Army
allowance as at the completion/exit date, on either the OGP or OINS
screen

Cancelled participants reclaiming payment

Former part-time Green Army participants whose income support payment
has been cancelled will need to reapply for income support once they
have completed/exited the Green Army Programme. Current rules for
determining start date of payment should be used. That is, looking at
the date of claim lodgement and not the date of completion/exit of the
Green Army Programme for backdating purposes.

Abridged claims

Where applicable, an abridged new claim process should be applied to
customers re-claiming the same payment. Customers are only eligible for
an abridged claim where they have not experienced significant changes in
their or their partner’s circumstances since last contacting Services
Australia, including a change in relationship status or a change in
partner.

Reconciliation process

Services Australia completes a monthly Green Army reconciliation. The
Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment provides the Green
Army Reconciliation Team with a monthly reconciliation report detailing
a Green Army participant's:

-   Customer Reference Number
-   start date in the programme
-   end date in the programme
-   Green Army service provider
-   full-time or part-time status
-   Green Army allowance received fortnightly

This information is used by the Green Army Reconciliation Team to
reconcile placement within customer records and create debts where
required. The Referrals workflow is used to record or amend Green Army
placements.

The Green Army Reconciliation Team process any debt activities (or
arrears) generated from coding Green Army placements.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
