
Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims 001-04030100

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process YA (job seeker) claims in Process
Direct. This includes online claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Processing claims in Process Direct

Use Process Direct to review the YA (job seeker) claim information and
to process the claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the YA (job seeker) claim has
been submitted online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer or their
    correspondence nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a YA claim activity
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information from
    the customer and make referrals to specialist teams

RapidConnect

Job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect requirements are advised of
their requirements during their Participation Interview.

Job seekers who are automatically selected and referred to an Online
Employment Service are required to agree to a job plan.

Job seekers who are eligible for a referral to a jobactive or other
specialist provider will have an initial appointment booked during the
Participation Interview. Attending this first provider appointment is
known as the job seeker's RapidConnect requirement.

In most cases, meeting RapidConnect requirements will determine the
start date of the job seeker's income support payment. Note: this is
subject to job seekers meeting any waiting periods and qualification
requirements.

For more information, see RapidConnect.

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements apply to all job seekers in receipt of
participation payments including Youth Allowance as a job seeker.

Mutual obligation requirements are designed to ensure that unemployed
people receiving activity tested income support payments are actively
looking for work and are participating in activities that will help them
into employment.

Job seekers will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they:

-   actively seek and are willing to undertake suitable paid work. The
    definition of 'suitable work' for PP job seekers is the same as for
    JSP/YA principal carers, or
-   undertake suitable paid work, or
-   participate in some other approved training, program or course which
    is likely to improve their employment prospects, and
-   enter into a Job Plan, if required, with Services Australia or an
    Employment Services Provider without unreasonable delay, and
-   fully comply with the terms of the Job Plan

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Where a job seeker is unable to meet their mutual obligation
requirements, there are certain circumstances in which they may be
eligible for an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements.

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements exemptions.

Automatic claim processing

The system may process YA (Job Seeker) claims if they meet these
criteria:

-   identity, residence, Tax File Number and employment status
    requirements met
-   known relationship details
-   known children details
-   no bereavement
-   no incapacity
-   homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent
-   income and assets with no significant changes, no manual assessment
    needed

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker when running the script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback to the Business
Enablement and Quality Branch.

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) claims

UTLAH assessments may be:

-   conducted by a Services Australia social worker
-   completed by the Over 18 UTLAH (O18) team, or
-   automatically re-applied by the system

If an UTLAH assessment is in progress, do not reject the claim FSD
(failed to supply documents).

YA (job seeker) claim following a DSP Medical Risk Based Review

Disability Service Officers initiate a YA (job seeker) claim when
completing the Service Offer Interview.

Do not unassign these activities.

Reassessment of YA (job seeker) claims

The customer can request a reassessment of their YA (job seeker) claim
within 13 weeks of rejection.

Ensure all outstanding documents have been supplied before re-indexing
the original claim.

Separate procedures apply if YA was rejected due to:

-   not supplying documents (FSD)
-   not lodging or reporting on time (DNL, FRP)

If the customer contacts more than 13 weeks after the rejection letter
was sent, they will need to claim YA.

Early claims

Customers can lodge an early claim for YA (Job Seeker) up to 13 weeks
before the first day of eligibility. For the day they become qualified,
the customer must provide their:

-   bank account balances
-   employment separation details, and
-   any other income

If an early claim lodgement is accepted, the start date is the first day
the customer becomes qualified for the payment. See Early claims.

Pre-population of claim responses in the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Responses to some questions in the Youth Allowance (job seeker) claim
will be used to pre-populate similar questions in the JSCI. The job
seeker will have the opportunity to review the responses and make
changes where required within the Jobseeker Snapshot (online) or JSCI
(staff assisted).

Intent to claim for Vulnerable Customers

Customers are considered to be vulnerable if they experienced a
vulnerable circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and
this was the reason they were unable to submit their claim on the
contact date. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

The Resources page contains a link to Process Direct resources, a link
to mySupport, common screens for YA claims, examples of when to request
bank account information and Q888 text for inviting principal carers to
check for Family Tax Benefit.

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Principal carer of a dependent child

Process Direct

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker)

Transfer to Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) from another payment

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Waiting periods for income support payments

Withdrawal of claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment new claim processing
interactions

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
