
Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) 001-04030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines initial contact procedures for YA, DSP or SpB
customers who may be assessed as independent if it is unreasonable for
them to live at home with a parent. For students claiming TAP,
eligibility under UTLAH provisions exempts them from providing parental
income.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the risk identification
and management of threats to the safety or welfare of a child for more
information on this model and the agency's commitment to the safety of
children and young people.

Claiming independence on the basis of UTLAH

Separate procedures apply when assessing unreasonable to live at home
(UTLAH) for customers aged 15 years or under, 16-17 years or 18 years
and over.

If a customer advises that they want to test their eligibility under
UTLAH provisions, Service Officers must check they are receiving, or
have lodged a claim for, a primary payment or the Tertiary Access
Payment (TAP). Follow standard procedures to assist the customer if they
have not claimed a payment.

Customers aged 15 years or under

Immediately refer customers aged 15 years or under to a social worker.
The social worker will undertake a risk assessment and organise for the
UTLAH assessment to start locally.

Customers aged 16-17 years

Customers aged 16 or 17 years of age, must attend a phone appointment
with the social work UTLAH team. Service Officers must ensure that this
appointment has been booked.

Customers can book and reschedule their social work UTLAH appointment
online, or this can be done through an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Service Officers must book a Social Work UTLAH appointment if the young
person:

-   is unable to book their appointment online, or
-   lodges a paper claim

Customers aged 18 years or older

Service Officers in the Over 18 UTLAH Assessment Team (O18) will
complete an assessment for customers aged 18 years or older. If the
customer is not already receiving a payment, tell them:

-   to complete an online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), and
-   submit required documents

Service Officers may need to issue Unreasonable to live at home
Statement forms. See Table 2 on the Process page for details.

Note: if a customer is claiming TAP only, the same forms are used for
both income support payment and TAP UTLAH assessments.

Students claiming TAP

A UTLAH assessment is required for eligible TAP claimants of any age, in
circumstances where they cannot live at home due to extreme
circumstances, including:

-   extreme family breakdown or other similar exceptional circumstances
-   where it would be unreasonable to expect the person to do so if
    there would be a serious risk to his or her physical or mental
    well-being due to violence. This includes family violence, child
    abuse, sexual abuse, neglect or other similar unreasonable
    circumstances, or
-   where their parents are unable to provide the young person with a
    home because they lack stable accommodation

DSP customers

An assessment of independence under UTLAH provisions only applies to DSP
customers aged 16 or 17 years. DSP customers aged 18 - 20 years are
considered independent when living away from the parental home for any
reason and do not require a UTLAH assessment.

Continuous support

Receiving continuous support can affect whether a young person is
regarded as independent on the basis of UTLAH. Support from parents or
another person acting as a long term guardian may prevent a young person
being regarded as independent under this category.

Claiming UTLAH within 52 weeks of payment being cancelled

Some customers claiming YA, DSP, SpB or TAP will have their UTLAH
decisions automatically re-applied where they:

-   declare there have been no change to their circumstances, and
-   are re-claiming within 52 weeks of last receiving a payment paid
    under a UTLAH independence category

See Table 2 on the Process page for more detail.

Payment whilst UTLAH assessment is in progress

YA and DSP can continue to be paid at the dependent rate whilst a claim
for UTLAH is being assessed.

As YA is usually paid directly to parents for young people under 18,
Service Officers can consider payments directly to the young person
(instead of the parent) during the assessment of UTLAH. A claim for
UTLAH may indicate the payment is not being used for the customer's
benefit, especially where the young person is considered to be at risk.
Consultation should occur with a social worker before changing payment
destinations. See Payments to parents for under 18 year old Youth
Allowance (YA) dependent customers.

Do not suspend or cancel payments pending a UTLAH decision. The Service
Officer should only suspend/cancel the payment if they are satisfied
that the person does not qualify for the payment.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide further information or evidence
    relevant to the decision
-   tell them their review and appeal rights

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact a customer before finalising an
unfavourable decision.

Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)

Customers will automatically go on the VWPR measure of Income Management
if they are:

-   living in a location offering VWPR, and
-   16 years of age or over, and
-   considered independent due to UTLAH provisions

The Resources page contains a definition of a 'relationship parent', O18
contact details and links to Office Locator, Youth Allowance forms and
Services Australia for customer online accounts.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Assessing and Finalising claims for Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or
Special Benefit (SpB)

Recording accommodation details

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Young Person (SY015)

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Parent(s) (SY016)

Completing the Youth Allowance and ABSTUDY 'Unreasonable to live at
home' Statement by Independent Third Party (SY017)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
