
Eligibility for Workforce Australia as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) 001-02020020

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility guidelines for accessing
employment services as a Workforce Australia Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP) job seeker. Workforce Australia FEP job seekers are eligible to
access the full range of employment services, including services from
Workforce Australia organisations, according to their identified job
readiness or barriers to employment.

Eligible job seekers

Job seekers who are eligible for FEP services are registered by Services
Australia in a process that includes the application of the Job Seeker
Snapshot and an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if applicable.

Eligibility for Workforce Australia as a FEP

To be eligible for services as a FEP, job seekers must be:

claiming an income support payment with mutual obligation requirements

a Disability Support Pension (DSP) recipient with compulsory
requirements. This includes:

-   DSP recipients aged under 35 years with a work capacity of 8 or more
    hours per week (without a youngest child under 6 years)
-   DSP recipients undertaking a Program of Support

a Nominated Visa Holder (including Temporary Protection Visa Holders and
Safe Haven Visa Holders) in receipt of Special Benefit and have mutual
obligation requirements

a Special Benefit recipient who is required to meet the Special Benefit
Policy activity test

a New Zealand non-protected Special Category Visa holder eligible for
JobSeeker Payment or Youth Allowance

a Vulnerable Youth and Vulnerable Youth (Student), or

a pre-release detainee or prisoner aged 15 to 21 who is not in full-time
education or training and who has been registered with Services
Australia as looking for work

newly arrived refugees eligible for the Better Targeting of Support for
Refugees measure. These customers can choose to participate in Workforce
Australia as a fully eligible participant. See Refugee and humanitarian
entrant service offer for more information.

Note: newly arrived refugees who are eligible for the Streamlining
Services for Refugees measures are only eligible to access Workforce
Australia as a Volunteer. See Refugee and humanitarian entrant service
offer for more information.

The procedure, Eligibility to access employment assistance services
through Workforce Australia, has full details about eligibility for all
registration types.

Principal carers with mutual obligation requirements

Principal carers who are fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements by undertaking suitable paid work or self-employment for at
least 30 hours per fortnight or studying full-time can participate on a
voluntary basis with an Employment Services Provider. If they volunteer,
they will be registered as FEP and referred via the online diary.
However, if principal carers who are fully meeting their mutual
obligation requirements do not want to volunteer for employment
services, they should be registered as a Job Seeker Registration Only
(JSRO) job seeker.

If the principal carer's income or activities reduce so they are no
longer fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements, a referral to
an Employment Services Provider as a FEP is mandatory.

Mature aged customers with mutual obligation requirements

It is compulsory for mature age job seekers (aged 55 or over) with
mutual obligation requirements to be registered as FEP and referred to
an Employment Services Provider, even when they are fully meeting their
requirements.

Mature age job seekers who are undertaking approved voluntary work,
suitable paid work or a combination of thereof for at least 30 hours per
fortnight to meet requirements, must be referred to an Employment
Services Provider.

From 20 September 2018, job seekers aged between 55 and 59 who are
within the first 12 months of receipt of their current income support
payment (including suspension periods of up to 3 months) may fully
satisfy mutual obligation requirements through either:

-   30 hours per fortnight of paid work, or
-   30 hours per fortnight of a combination of paid work and approved
    voluntary work, at least 15 hours of which must be paid work

After being on their current payment for a 12 month period, eligible job
seekers aged 55 to 59 may fully satisfy their requirements by
undertaking 30 hours or more per fortnight of any combination of
approved unpaid voluntary work and suitable paid work/self-employment,
including solely through approved unpaid voluntary work.

Whilst a mature age job seeker is fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, their participation with the Employment Services Provider
will be voluntary, however, they must still be available for suitable
full-time work, accept an increase in hours and attend suitable job
interviews with employers.

Community Development Program (CDP)

Job seekers who live in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area, are registered and referred to
Community Development Program (CDP) providers as Remote Fully Eligible
(RFE).

Related links

Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Registering Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers in Workforce
Australia

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider

Participation with Workforce Australia

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Eligibility and registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO)/No
Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
