
Job Seeker Management Activities 001-09150000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Service Officers should action job seeker
management activities generated on customer records, to ensure job
seekers are referred to appropriate services.

Job seeker management activities

Job seeker management activities alert Service Officers that follow-up
action is required for a job seeker.

There may be a keyword (parameter) attached to an activity. It is a
short code or description that provides more details, such as the source
or purpose of an activity, and allows for a search of that activity via
the Worklist in Work Optimiser.

Job seeker activities can be created via job seeker activity management
processing or Job Seeker Registration processing.

Job seeker management activities can be actioned by Service Officers in
Smart Centres or service centres.

Service Officers should action outstanding activities via the Action
Item on the Participation Summary screen or on the Activity List (AL)
screen during job seeker contacts.

System generated activities

Job seeker management activities generated on customer records include
the following:

-   JSR/ADD activities will be created when the job seeker is receiving
    an income support payment that has mutual obligation requirements,
    but does not have a Job seeker Active (JSR/ACT) status. They will
    also create when a student lodges a student to job seeker
    transitional claim within four weeks of their Student End Date
    (SED). In these cases, see Student to job seeker transfers, and
    Eligibility and registration as a No Stream Services Required
    (NSSRR)/No Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker for
    assistance. In addition, an Action Issue will display on the job
    seeker's record to alert that the Job Seeker Registration (JSR)
    process needs completion. Note: these activities should not be
    cancelled unless the corresponding job seeker claim has recently
    been rejected in which case they should be cancelled
-   JSR/UPD activities are non-cancellable and alert that further action
    is needed on a job seeker's record. A To Do Indicator (TDI) may be
    attached to a UPD activity and will identify what action is needed.
    The relevant workflow will need to be completed to action the
    JSR/UPD according to the TDI

If the customer does not require Job Seeker Registration, inactivate
their registration via the Inactivate Job Seeker Registration link in
the Looking for Work workflow. This will auto-complete the JSR/UPD
activity.

JSR/UPD activities

The following activities apply to all job seekers receiving an income
support payment with mutual obligation requirements:

-   JSR/UPD with 'JSC' To Do Indicator (TDI) and 'JSCIREQ' keyword
    activities will be created when the job seeker has a Job Seeker
    Registration 'Active' (JSR/ACT) status, but does not have a Job
    Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) active on the record. In
    these circumstances the JSCI must be completed with the job seeker
-   JSR/UPD with 'JSC' TDI and 'FEP' keyword activities will be created
    when the job seeker is receiving an income support payment that
    requires them to be registered as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)
    job seeker. The JSCI must be completed as part of the FEP
    registration
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'ESAREFRQ' keyword activities are created
    when the job seeker requires a referral to an Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) based on their
    responses to the JSCI. If the ESAt/JCA is deferred with a pending
    medical evidence reason, the activity will not appear during the
    period of deferment, and will be recreated once this period has
    expired
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'ESATATT' keyword activities are created
    when a job seeker has been suspended because they failed to attend
    an ESAt appointment. Job seekers are sent a letter asking them to
    contact Services Australia to arrange a new ESAt appointment. No
    action is required by Service Officers until the job seeker contacts
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESP' TDI activities will be created when the job
    seeker's JSR and JSCI are active, but they have not been connected
    with an Employment Services Provider
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESP' TDI and 'NSUS' keyword activities will be created
    when a job seeker requires a re-engagement appointment to be booked
    with their Employment Services Provider. This occurs when the job
    seeker's Stream Service suspension period has expired. In addition,
    an Action Item will be displayed on the Participation Summary screen
-   JSR/UPD with 'ESA' TDI and 'D26' parameter and 'ESAREFRQ' keyword
    activities will be created when a Domestic Violence - Relationship
    Breakdown (D26) Exemption has expired and the job seeker is a
    principal carer in Stream A or B or they live in a Community
    Development Program (CDP) region. The job seeker should be referred
    to an ESAt to assess if their current level of support with their
    Employment Services Provider is appropriate
-   JSR/UPD with 'RJC' TDI activities will be created when a job seeker
    lives in a CDP region and requires referral to a CDP provider
-   JSR/UPD with 'TW5' TDI activities will be created when a job seeker
    is eligible for a referral to a Transition to Work provider and a
    provider is available in the job seeker's region

JSR/MFU and WAP/MFU activities

JSR/MFU (Manual Follow-up) and WAP/MFU activities are created to alert
that the job seeker may benefit from a referral to a program or
additional services. These activities can be completed manually or
cancelled (if appropriate):

-   JSR/MFU with 'AMEP/SEE' keyword activity will be created when a job
    seeker has been identified as benefiting from a referral to an Adult
    Migrant English Program (AMEP) or Skills for Education and
    Employment (SEE) program when the Job Seeker Classification
    Instrument (JSCI) workflow is run, and the Service Officer confirms
    the referral is required
-   JSR/MFU with 'DES' keyword activity will be created when a job
    seeker should be referred to a Disability Employment Services (DES)
    provider, because of recommendations in the job seeker's Employment
    Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report
-   JSR/MFU with 'ADE' keyword activity is created when a job seeker may
    benefit from a referral to an Australian Disability Enterprises
    (ADE) program based on the recommendations in an ESAt/JCA report
-   WAP/MFU with 'WAPDHSM' keyword activity is created to prompt Service
    Officers to update the customer's Job Plan and code Activity and
    Exemption (AEX) screen where a customer may be eligible for
    Part-time Work (PTW), Self-Employment (SEL), Paid Work and Self
    Employment (Combined) (PWS), Study and Self Employment (Combined)
    (SSE), Study and Paid Work (Combined) (SPW) or Voluntary and Paid
    Work (Combined) (VPE) but does not currently have one of those
    Approved Activities recorded.

The Resources page explains the hierarchy of JSR/UPD activities.

Related links

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

Eligibility for jobactive as a Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)

Altered processes and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due
to coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

JSCI initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) flags

Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity

Actioning automatic activities of a current Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) referral

Online Diary

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exits and suspensions from jobactive or Community Development Program
(CDP)

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

Eligibility and registration as a No Stream Services Required (NSSRR)/No
Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

Student to job seeker transfers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
