
Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers 001-09020130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assist understanding barriers
which may be faced by job seekers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
Youth Allowance (YA), Special Benefit (SpB) or Parenting Payment (PP)
who are recently released from prison. It includes interview techniques
to identify such barriers.

Factors affecting prison release customers

The challenges faced by this group of job seekers will vary depending on
factors such as:

-   how long they were in prison
-   whether they have a recent work history, vocational qualifications,
    and their level of education
-   whether they are homeless or at risk of homelessness
-   friends and/ family support structures upon release
-   their age

Barriers for prison release job seekers

Most job seekers who have been recently released from prison will face
one or more of the following issues or challenges:

-   re-establishment after release, including accommodation issues
-   parole or court order requirements (a restrictive order)
-   stigma as a convicted offender or ex-prisoner
-   health issues including mental illness intellectual disability or
    substance abuse
-   limited literacy or education
-   impact of being institutionalised such as poor social skills/anger
    management, low self-esteem, poor motivation and poor living skills
-   outstanding Commonwealth debts
-   identity confirmation and other issues related to maintaining
    correct documents
-   for job seekers taking part in Community Service Orders, a lack of
    flexibility and difficulty with establishing a routine can also
    impact on employment and training opportunities

The Process page contains more information.

Time to Work Employment Service (TWES) programme

The TWES programme enables eligible adult Indigenous prisoners to
volunteer to receive in-prison servicing by a TWES provider 2 to 4
months prior to their release to help them prepare to reintegrate into
the community and find employment following release from prison.

All TWES participants have a Job Seeker Snapshot conducted by the TWES
provider, who offers them for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
regardless of the Job Seeker Snapshot outcome. Both assessments are
conducted pre-release, enabling early identification of barriers to
participation.

Assessing barriers at initial contact

As part of the new claim process, the First Contact Service Offer (FCSO)
or Participation Interview will determine a customer's job readiness,
any barriers to participation and capability to look for and accept
work.

This will result in an appropriate job readiness pathway being
identified for the job seeker and may include an appointment with a
Service Officer or specialist officer (for example, a social worker).

Where the prison-release customer has had a Job Seeker Snapshot
conducted in prison they do not require one at new claim unless they
have had a change in circumstances that would affect the outcomes of the
Job Seeker Snapshot.

Customers exiting prison are exempt from the RapidConnect process.

Job seekers may be eligible for a temporary exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements upon release from prison. However, an
ex-offender who has participated in the Time to Work Employment Service
(TWES) programme is not eligible for a Major Personal Crisis (MPC)
exemption solely on the basis of prison release. If the TWES participant
is experiencing other forms of crisis, not solely prison release, an MPC
exemption may still be granted at the discretion of the Service Officer.

For information about the service offer and interviews with prison
release customers, see Centrelink service standards and procedures for
pre-release and post-release prison customers.

Assessment interviews with Service Officers or specialists

An appropriate amount of time should be allocated for a new claim
interview where barriers have been identified to ensure thorough
assessment of the customer's situation. Effective interviewing,
preparation before interviews and the ability to rapidly build rapport
with the customer will always be the key to identification of any
challenges and issues faced by the job seeker.

Service Officers must conduct a thorough, detailed and accurate
assessment of a job seeker's situation and their needs, including their
individual and family circumstances, to ensure they are offered the
right help and support as early as possible.

Circumstances impacting compliance

Where a job seeker returns to payment after imprisonment, add a new
circumstances category on the Circumstances Impacting Compliance screen.
Where the job seeker has been imprisoned for:

-   less than 14 days, a Job seeker in transition category is
    appropriate
-   14 days or more, and evidence such as prison release papers have
    been provided, record a Recent Prison Release category

The circumstance will be shared with the job seeker's provider as a
Vulnerability Indicator. This will ensure the provider considers the
circumstance when negotiating compulsory requirements or considering
non-compliance events.

Add or review other job seeker circumstances that may affect capacity to
comply with compulsory requirements.

Capability Assessment

When a participation payment is restored or re-granted, the Employment
Services System will automatically retrigger a Capability Assessment if
it is required.

Where a Capability Assessment is retriggered the job seeker must be
referred to the Participation Solutions Team. A contact trigger will
prevent the job seeker from finalising their reporting until the
Capability Assessment is completed.

The Resources page contains information for identifying issues and
challenges for a job seeker through effective interviewing and
preparation. It also contains a link to Incarcerated Customer Services
(Centrelink).

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Interpreter Services

Job Plans

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

Centrelink service standards and procedures for pre-release and
post-release prison customers

Outstanding compliance action for imprisoned job seekers

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
