
Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) 001-19051501

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how a person can claim JSP online, or with help
from a Service Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

JSP eligibility and when to claim

Customers should claim as soon as possible online via the Services
Australia website.

To qualify for JSP a person must:

be of qualifying age for JSP

meet Australian residence requirements for JSP

be unemployed, and

-   looking for work and willing to take part in activities that
    increase their chances of finding a job, or
-   unable to work, study or look for work due to medical condition,
    illness or injury

be prepared to negotiate and agree to a Job Plan if required to do so,
comply with, or renegotiate an existing Job Plan

satisfy the requirements of a Job Plan

See Initial contact and identification of services for job seekers.

Disability Support Payment (DSP) sus/can RTW customers claiming JSP

A DSP customer whose payments have been suspended/ cancelled return to
work (RTW) can claim an alternate payment when:

-   they are still working 30 or more hours per week, and
-   their income falls below the JSP income test cut-off

For example, a self-employed DSP customer is still working 30 hours per
week, but their income has reduced. See Rates and Thresholds.

In all cases, check if the customer is eligible to have their DSP
reinstated before looking at another payment. See Commencing or
returning to work or self-employment Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Early claims for JSP

Customers can lodge an early claim for JSP up to 13 weeks before the
first day of eligibility. On the day they become qualified they must
provide their bank account balances, proof of income and employment
separation details.

Customers can start an early claim online. They will be able to complete
Your personal details, Your circumstances and Your financial details.

If making an early claim after a break in payment of 39 weeks or less,
the customer will have fewer questions to answer in the online claim.

Customers cannot complete Review and Confirm, Next Steps or submit the
claim online until within 14 days of being eligible for JSP. They will
get a reminder notification 14 days before the eligibility date.

A detained person may lodge a claim up to 3 weeks before release from
gaol. These claims are not considered early claims as the customer is
qualified but not payable when they claim.

Customers transferring from a current income support payment can lodge
an early claim up to 28 days before the date of qualification.

Online claims

[]Customers must be registered with myGov and have a linked Centrelink
online account.

Once registered, to start an online claim for JSP they must:

-   sign in to myGov and access their linked Centrelink online account
-   ensure their personal details are correct. From the menu, select the
    My Details > Personal and contact details > My profile to make
    updates
-   select Payments and Claims >Claims> Make a claim from the menu. For
    more information, see Claiming JSP online table in the Self-managed
    tab

Customers claiming JSP, transferring to JSP or Youth Allowance (job
seeker) will see a reduced question set as part of their online claim if
they are:

-   currently in receipt of an income support payment, or
-   have cancelled from payment in the last 52 weeks

Streamlined claims

In some cases an outstanding task is presented to the customer on their
Centrelink online account homepage up to 28 days prior to losing
qualification for their current payment.

The task will allow the customer to undertake a streamlined claim
process to submit a claim for JSP.

See Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment.

Customers with nominee arrangements

[]Correspondence nominees can submit an online claim for JSP on behalf
of their principal.

If a correspondence nominee contacts to claim JSP on behalf of their
principal, offer an online claim first. If they decline the online claim
offer, a Service Officer must run Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) with the
nominee.

If a nominee is claiming on behalf of a person, encourage the nominee to
help the person claim JSP using the person's Centrelink online account.
If the nominee is unable or unwilling to do so, a Service Officer is to
run ACC with the nominee.

Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

ACC can be used for customers deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an
online claim or nominees. ACC should also be used in instances where a
paper claim for Jobseeker Payment (SU716) is lodged at service centres,
via uploaded documents, post or fax. See Claim lodgement of Centrelink
Claims.

'Channel Hopping' within ACC means:

-   the customer can start a claim online and a Service Officer can take
    it over, or
-   a Service Officer can help a customer start a claim which can then
    be completed by the customer in their Centrelink online account

Claim submission exceptions

In some circumstances, it may not be reasonable for a customer to
complete all Required tasks prior to submitting their claim. These
include exceptions when certain vulnerabilities exist, see Circumstances
Change Monitor (CCM).

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP)

Do not undertake any MALEP assessments. The Department of Social
Services (DSS) have paused all Moving to an Area of Lower Employment
Prospects (MALEP) assessments.

If the customer has moved address within the previous 26 weeks, Services
Australia must determine if they have reduced their employment prospects
by moving to a new location.

If this is the case, the Service Officer must investigate a possible
MALEP employment related exclusion period.

Unemployed due to a voluntary act or misconduct

If the customer has voluntarily left work or been dismissed due to
misconduct in the 12 weeks prior to claiming, an unemployment failure or
an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) may have occurred.

Do not generate compliance action until the Employment Separation
Certificate (SU1) (or equivalent) and/or supporting evidence is received
to identify a non-compliance event has occurred.

See Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct.

RapidConnect

Most job seekers are subject to RapidConnect and are advised of their
requirements or an exemption to RapidConnect during their Participation
Interview at the Jobseeker Online Claim Appointment.

Job seekers who are eligible for a referral to a Workforce Australia or
other specialist provider, will have an initial appointment booked
during the Participation Interview. Attending this first provider
appointment is known as the job seeker's RapidConnect requirement.

In most cases, meeting RapidConnect requirements will determine the
start date of the job seeker's income support payment. Note: this is
subject to job seekers meeting any waiting periods and qualification
requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) will
automatically refer new job seekers to the Workforce Australia online
employment service. This excludes job seekers living in Community
Development Program (CDP) regions.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
external websites for information about employment services, contact
details, and the verbal declaration script.

Contents

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Student to job seeker transfers

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Calculating the start day for an incapacitated customer

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Rejecting a claim for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker)

Related links

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Initial contact and identification of services for job seekers

Early claims

Claiming income support payments from Centrelink

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Assessing and coding medical evidence for temporary incapacity
exemptions

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

RapidConnect

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
