
Early or late lodgement of job seeker reports 001-18120545

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains reasons when early or late lodgement of job
seeker reports can be accepted.

Early reporting

Reporting Statement (SU19) due date

A job seeker must report on their due to report date. The questions in
the Reporting Statement relate to the full fortnight period or the
relevant period for variable reporters.

Early submission of a Reporting Statement is not acceptable:

-   through self service (online account, Express Plus Centrelink mobile
    app or phone)
-   verbally in person, or
-   in writing by providing a Reporting Statement (SU19)

except where holiday reporting arrangements are in place for national
public holiday processing.

Customers can view a summary of due to report dates and reporting
periods in their online account. All reporting periods within 12 weeks
of the date viewed will display. The summary is accessed by selecting
Income and Assets > Employment Income > Next reporting periods from the
menu.

Holiday reporting

Early reporting can occur where arrangements are in place for national
public holiday processing. Job seekers will be notified of the early
reporting date.

Variable reporting

A job seeker on variable reporting can access self-managed service on
their non-stimulus Entitlement Period End Day (EPED). Employment income
paid in the reporting fortnight is a notification reporter requirement.

If the job seeker, or their partner, receives a family assistance
payment, updates to the estimate due to the change in income are needed.

Circumstances where early lodgement is acceptable

A customer can lodge early where a change to their payday code is
approved due to national public holiday processing arrangements. For
further information, see Changing Entitlement Period End Dates (EPED)
and/or Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday
periods.

Self service (online account, Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or
phone) does not support early reporting. Likewise, an early Reporting
Statement (SU19) form cannot be accepted. Tell the customer to report on
their due date.

Late reporting

Determining and recording of a late report

If a job seeker reports late or a self service reporter is referred to a
Service Officer after the report 'drops through', discuss the reason for
late reporting and ask the job seeker to report on the due date to avoid
delays in their payment.

Determine:

-   whether or not the reason for late reporting is acceptable
-   if any special circumstances apply for submitting the form late, and
-   if payment will be approved and processed

The Service Officer must record:

-   whether or not the reason is satisfactory/acceptable, and
-   for job seekers with mutual obligation requirements or pending
    compliance investigations, how the job seeker has satisfied
    requirements during this period

Reason for late reporting not acceptable

If the reason(s) for late reporting is/are not acceptable, the Service
Officer can cancel/suspend payment and advise the job seeker the
decision. If payment is cancelled, the job seeker must be advised to
test their eligibility and re-claim payments. Job seekers must be
advised in writing the reason their payment is cancelled/suspended.

Outstanding compliance action

Where a job seeker has a participation-related payment suspension or
outstanding compliance action, they will need to re-engage with their
Employment Services Provider and/or speak to the Participation Solutions
Team (PST) about an outstanding failure investigation before reporting
can be finalised. Service Officers must check the Participation
Compliance workflow summary and where the:

-   Completed/Provider to Action section shows outstanding compliance
    actions the provider is responsible for managing, advise the job
    seeker to contact their provider, and/or
-   Outstanding section shows a compliance investigation is outstanding,
    assist the job seeker to contact the PST

Note: any changes to the customer's circumstances on the Reporting
Statement (SU19) must be updated before the customer contacts the PST.

Self service for reporting customers

The obligation to report on their due date also applies to job seekers
who use self service options (online, Express Plus mobile app or phone
self service). However, self service reporters can report up to 13 days
after the due date without any penalty or cancellation.

If the job seeker tries to report more than 13 days after their due
Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) using the self service channels, they
will receive a message that will refer them to a Service Officer for
assistance.

Job seekers can:

-   update and correct reported employment income online using the
    Update employment income service to change initial report.
-   correct employment income reported in the last 6 reporting periods

Note: employment income confirmed via the Single Touch Payroll (STP)
channel cannot be corrected via self service. Customers must discuss
changes and provide evidence to staff.

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

Late Reporting Customers (LRC) screen

The LRC screen lists names and home and/or mobile phone contact numbers
for customers who are due to report on a specified date but have not yet
reported.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements must report by lodging a
Reporting Statement:

-   through [] self service (online account, Express Plus Centrelink app
    or phone)
-   in person, or
-   in writing (SU19)

before payment is made. The LRC screen is not to be used for these
customers regardless of their choice of reporting channel.

See Reporting screens for information on the LRC screen.

Customer fails to report

A job seeker's payment will not be generated until the Reporting
Statement is submitted and processed. Late reporting can cause their
partner's payment to be delayed.

If the partner is:

-   a notification reporter, their payment is made automatically
    regardless of whether the customer has reported or not
-   a 2 weekly reporter, their payment is generated if they report on
    their reporting day. Usually when the job seeker reports, their
    partner's payment is generated, unless the partner has mutual
    obligation requirements and are required to report fortnightly

If a job seeker fails to report for 2 consecutive fortnights (28 days),
the payment will cancel automatically from DPT +1. For more information,
see JobSeeker Payment (JSP) cancellations, suspensions and restorations.
Entitlement to the payments issued automatically within the period
covered by the Reporting Statement cannot be proven unless a Reporting
Statement is submitted.

Variable reporting customer fails to report

If a job seeker was previously on a variable reporting cycle when
cancelled did not lodge (CAN/DNL) or cancelled failed to report
(CAN/FRP), the system automatically creates an undetermined debt shell.
The debt shell is automatically placed on hold for 21 days to allow time
for the job seeker to make contact and report. If the job seeker reports
while the debt shell is on hold, it will adjust if the payment is
restored. If no report has occurred in the 21 days the debt shell is on
hold, the debt can then be investigated.

When a debt shell is created, a cancellation letter is automatically
sent to the job seeker. This letter advises the job seeker to report
within 14 days of receiving the notification by contacting Services
Australia via phone or going to a service centre. The letter includes a
warning that failure to report may result in a debt being raised for
payments already received within the reporting period.

The expectation for these job seekers is that they contact to discuss
their options for preventing the CAN/DNL or CAN/FRP debt.

Reporting within 13 weeks of payment cancellation

If the job seeker is seeking restoration and reports within 13 weeks of
payment cancellation and it is has been determined:

-   the job seeker was entitled to payment during that period, and
-   continuing ongoing entitlement has been established,

the payment must be restored from the cancellation date and Reporting
Statements are required for each 2 weekly reporting period from their
cancellation date. These Reporting Statements can be confirmed verbally
if the mutual obligation requirements have been met and all employment
income is reported for each 2 weekly reporting period.

When the job seeker's income support payment is:

-   suspended or cancelled, outstanding compliance action is maintained
    where it is likely the payment may be restored back to the
    suspension/cancellation date. For example, payment is cancelled for
    failing to report
-   restored, outstanding compliance action may need to be actioned
    before reporting can be finalised
-   cancelled for a participation-related reason, the payment may not be
    restorable and the job seeker will have to reclaim payment

Report more than 13 weeks after cancellation

If the job seeker reports more than 13 weeks after notification of
cancellation, a new claim is needed. If the job seeker applies for a
formal review of the cancellation decision, follow normal review and
appeal procedures.

If the system prompts arrears, make sure the incorrect arrears are not
paid, particularly if a debt has already been raised due to the job
seeker failing to report.

If arrears have been manually adjusted to ensure a duplicate payment is
not made, the service centre must send an ACTDOC to the relevant Debt
Raising Team to allow adjustment of the debt. The Debt Raising Team is
responsible for adjusting the debt.

Related links

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Reporting statements for job seekers

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Reporting overview

Earnings and reporting tool

Reporting employment income online

Reporting using phone self service

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Establishing contact with the job seeker to discuss non-compliance or
potential barriers to compliance

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Reporting screens

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
