
Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview 001-02050020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how the Job Seeker Snapshot is used to identify a
job seeker's ability to find suitable employment, to determine their
eligibility to access employment services and the level of employment
assistance they need. This is based on questions about their
circumstances.

Access requirements

Post 1 July 2022, all staff who register customers as a job seeker, view
or update the Job Seeker Snapshot must have registered (if not already
done so) in the ESSWeb 2.0 system before running the workflow in Process
Direct.

To register, follow the process outlined in the Registering access to
ESSWEB 2.0 taskcard on the Resources page.

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

A Job Seeker Snapshot interview may be conducted by either Services
Australia or a Workforce Australia Employment Services Provider. The Job
Seeker Snapshot can be conducted in person or over the phone with a job
seeker.

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (other) job seekers
have the opportunity to complete the Job Seeker Snapshot online at the
end of the new claim process, before the Participation Interview is
conducted.

The Job Seeker Snapshot is conducted by the agency in the following
circumstances:

Within the Participation interview when a job seeker has lodged an
online claim with the agency to apply for an income support payment and
has not completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online

Within the Job Seeker Registration from the Participation Summary screen
when a job seeker without mutual obligations wishes to register for
employment assistance

When a job seeker who has completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online,
indicates during the Participation Interview that their online responses
may not be correct. In these cases, re-run the Job Seeker Snapshot

When job seekers notify a change in circumstances to the agency which
requires the Job Seeker Snapshot to be updated

When a Service Officer believes that the Job Seeker Snapshot needs to be
re-run because the job seeker is a vulnerable youth and may not have
completed the Job Seeker Snapshot correctly

For job seekers in receipt of a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA)
payment, such as a War Widow/er or Partner Service Pension:

-   These job seekers can access Employment Services Provider assistance
-   They need to provide proof of their DVA payment, this can be done by
    displaying the cards issued to them by DVA
-   War Widow/ers are issued with a Gold Card and Partner Service
    Pensioners are issued with a DVA Pensioner Concession Card

As an outcome of a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA) when a job
seeker notifies a change in their circumstances during the CCA
specialist interview

When a job seeker has participated in the Time to Work Employment
Service (TWES) prior to claiming a payment and:

-   has not already completed a Job Seeker Snapshot, or
-   reports to the agency a change of circumstances, other than prison
    release, which may affect the outcome of the Job Seeker Snapshot.
    Note: if a Job Seeker Snapshot has been completed as part of TWES,
    another Job Seeker Snapshot does not need to be conducted at new
    claim unless there has been a change in circumstances that will
    impact the outcome of the TWES Job Seeker Snapshot

Note: the agency should not conduct a Job Seeker Snapshot for a job
seeker who has commenced in Disability Employment Services (DES). These
job seekers should be advised to contact their DES provider to report
their change in circumstances.

Income support customers and Job Seeker Snapshot

Most job seekers claiming or receiving an income support payment who
have mutual obligation requirements must have their job seeker
registration (JSR) and Job Seeker Snapshot interview completed by
Services Australia (unless they have recently completed a Job Seeker
Snapshot online or as part of the Time to Work Employment Service (TWES)
programme). This includes JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA),
Parenting Payment (PP) and some Special Benefit (SpB) customers.

Job seekers can complete the online Job Seeker Snapshot at the end of
the new claim process. They will have an abridged Participation
Interview that will not include JSR and Job Seeker Snapshot.

Workforce Australia providers are able to directly register and apply a
Job Seeker Snapshot for customers who are receiving a Disability Support
Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment (without mutual obligation
requirements).

Accessing the Job Seeker Snapshot workflow

The Job Seeker Snapshot workflow is accessed in Process Direct.

Job Seeker Snapshot questions

The Job Seeker Snapshot questions and responses determine the level of
assistance the job seeker may be eligible to receive. The information
gathered as a result of the Job Seeker Snapshot can be of a personal and
sensitive nature and care needs to be taken when asking these questions.
Ensure the job seeker understands the importance of disclosing
information relevant to their personal circumstances as this will mean
they will receive appropriate services.

When completed with a Service Officer, the Job Seeker Snapshot interview
must be conducted as a meaningful conversation and questions need to be
asked as they appear to ensure a consistent approach is applied to all
job seekers. Job Seeker Snapshot may also be conducted online by the
customer.

Responses to some questions in the online claim will be used to
pre-populate similar questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot. The job
seeker will have the opportunity to review the responses and make
changes where required within the Job Seeker Snapshot online or staff
assisted.

Some questions within the Job Seeker Snapshot are voluntary. The
voluntary Job Seeker Snapshot questions are identified with a response
option of 'Do not wish to answer'. This response option should be
disclosed to the job seeker.

Outcomes of the Job Seeker Snapshot

The final stage of the process involves discussing the outcomes with the
job seeker and organising appropriate referrals. The Job Seeker Snapshot
will identify job seekers who may require a referral to:

-   an Assessor for either a medical or non-medical Employment Services
    Assessment (ESAt)
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
-   Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
-   a Services Australia Specialist Officer for assessment, (for
    example, social worker)

Referral to Workforce Australia

There will be cases where the job seeker will not be immediately
referred to a Workforce Australia provider, such as during a current
exemption from mutual obligation requirements. Even though they will not
be referred, the Job Seeker Snapshot will still need to be completed.
The job seeker will be referred once the exemption has finished. The
system will auto-check the job seeker's eligibility for a referral to
Workforce Australia against any exemptions from their mutual obligation
requirements.

All other job seekers including volunteers do not require a Job Seeker
Snapshot to be applied.

Role of Workforce Australia in relation to the Job Seeker Snapshot

Workforce Australia providers:

-   are generally able to update a job seeker's Job Seeker Snapshot
    details if they identify the job seeker has had a change of
    circumstances that may affect their level of service

Workforce Australia Online for Individuals:

present the job seeker snapshot to claiming job seekers as a task. Its
aim is to get them to complete this online

can identify a job seeker has not completed the Online Job Seeker
Snapshot:

-   A request for the Job Seeker Snapshot to be completed through the
    Department of Employment and Workplace Relations system (ESS) is
    submitted
-   The agency will receive this request to conduct the Job Seeker
    Snapshot with the job seeker

are generally able to update a job seeker's Job Seeker Snapshot details
however the outcomes may be limited

Role of Community Development Program (CDP) providers in relation to the Job Seeker Snapshot

CDP providers are required to complete:

-   the Job Seeker Snapshot as part of their first contact with the job
    seeker, or
-   a referral to an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if required

Role of Services Australia in CDP regions in relation to the Job Seeker Snapshot

In limited circumstances, the Job Seeker Snapshot is completed by
Services Australia for fully eligible job seekers who reside in CDP
regions.

Where the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations system
identifies a fully eligible job seeker who resides in a CDP region, the
Job Seeker Snapshot is not mandatory and is only applied as part of
Participation Interview for:

-   customers flagged as Vulnerable Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth
    (Student) (VY(S)), or
-   customers who are 55 years or older and managed by the agency

If a Service Officer identifies a referral to an Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) may be appropriate, the Job Seeker Snapshot should be
completed.

The Job Seeker Snapshot cannot be completed by the agency for CDP
Community Volunteers (RCV). These job seekers should be advised to
contact the CDP provider.

The Job Seeker Snapshot can also be applied or modified by a Workforce
Australia or CDP provider.

Role of Time to Work Employment Services (TWES) providers in relation to the Job Seeker Snapshot

Time to Work Employment Service (TWES) providers are required to:

-   complete the Job Seeker Snapshot for job seekers participating in
    the TWES programme
-   offer TWES participants an ESAt appointment prior to their release
    from prison regardless of the Job Seeker Snapshot outcome

The Resources page contains activity information that will display when
a Job Seeker Snapshot needs to be completed, and a link to the Job
Seeker Snapshot off-line form.

Related links

Job Seeker Snapshot factors

Actioning a pending Job Seeker Snapshot initiated Employment Services
Assessment (ESAt) activity

Job Seeker Management Activities

Job Seeker Snapshot Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
flags

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Participation Interview

Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW)

Questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot

Change of circumstances while receiving services from an Employment
Services Provider

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
