
Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP) 001-04030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

If you have concerns about a child's safety, conduct the risk and
referral process. If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you
must act, and a delegate must call 000.

This document outlines how to assess UTLAH for customers receiving or
claiming YA, DSP, SpB or TAP.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse. A staff
member must act when they see or hear behaviour that raises concern
about a child or young person's safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. Refer to Risk identification and management of
threats to the safety or welfare of a child.

Assessing UTLAH

A customer:

receiving or claiming YA, DSP or SpB may be considered independent under
UTLAH, or

may be exempt from providing parental income for TAP if their
circumstances meet the UTLAH provisions:

-   if they cannot live at the home of either or both parents
-   if they are not receiving continuous financial or other support,
    directly or indirectly, from their parent(s) or guardian(s), and
-   if they are not receiving any other payment in the nature of income
    support from a commonwealth, state or territory government

Reasons why the young person cannot live in the home of a parent:

-   extreme family breakdown or other similar exceptional circumstances,
-   living at home would cause a serious risk to the customer's physical
    or mental well-being due to family and domestic violence, sexual
    abuse or other similar unreasonable circumstances
-   the parents are not able to provide a suitable home for the customer
    due to a lack of stable accommodation, or
-   because there is no parental concern for two years or more from one
    or both parents

Claiming UTLAH within 52 weeks of payment being cancelled

Some customers claiming YA, DSP, SpB or TAP will have their UTLAH
decisions automatically re-applied where they:

-   declare there have been no change to their circumstances, and
-   are re-claiming within 52 weeks of last being entitled to a payment
    paid under a UTLAH independence category

See UTLAH initial contact for YA, DSP, SpB or TAP.

Claiming more than one payment

If a customer is claiming more than one payment, for example YA and TAP,
only one UTLAH assessment is required.

The same forms are used for all payment types.

Defining the parent for UTLAH purposes

The definition of parent(s) for dependent YA, SpB and TAP customers is
different to the definition for UTLAH. See Applying the Parental Income
Test (PIT) for ABSTUDY and YA and Assessing and finalising claims for
the TAP

For UTLAH, a parent is defined as one of the following:

-   a natural (biological) parent
-   a legally adoptive parent
-   a relationship parent. See the Resources page for an explanation of
    'relationship parent'

YA and SpB customers assessed as independent are not subject to the
Parental Means Test.

Students applying for TAP, who meet UTLAH provisions, are exempt from
providing their parent(s)/guardian(s) income.

Circumstances where UTLAH would not apply

-   A parent refusing to have the young person at home, particularly
    where this has been provoked by an unwillingness of the young person
    to meet reasonable expectations
    Note: if parental refusal to have the young person return home is
    accompanied by other evidence of severe and enduring family conflict
    or risk factors to the young person or other family member's
    wellbeing, then UTLAH should be considered
-   Divorce or separation of the parents is not in itself sufficient
    reason to regard the young person as independent
-   Parents moving to a new location, including overseas. In the absence
    of other forms of support, those at risk of neglect may be eligible
    for independent status
-   A young person choosing to live independently (either for study, job
    search or general preference)
-   The family consider that the young person is independent due to
    deeply held cultural or religious beliefs or they claim they cannot
    afford to support the young person

For Youth Allowance customers, where claims of independence under the
UTLAH status are not established, the living conditions at home may mean
the away from home rate may be appropriate for other reasons.

Delegated officers, social workers or UTLAH trained Smart Centre Service
Officers should make an Away From Home decision, if rejecting UTLAH.

Situations where parents have separated

Where a young person's parents are separated, assess the circumstances
in relation to each of the two parents. For more information, see the
Process page.

Making UTLAH decisions

The decision to grant or reject UTLAH is made only by staff who have
completed relevant training and have delegation to approve independence
under UTLAH criteria.

For customers:

aged under 18 years, delegation is held by social workers. UTLAH claims
for young people aged:

-   15 years or under are managed by the customer's local area social
    worker
-   16-17 years are managed by designated social workers in the U18
    UTLAH Social Work Network

aged 18 years and over, UTLAH assessments for all payments are managed
by delegated Service Officers in the Over 18 UTLAH Team (O18)

22 and over, UTLAH assessments are not required for YA or SpB. The
customer is independent by age

For DSP claims, assessment of independence under UTLAH provisions:

-   applies only to customers aged 16 or 17 years
-   is not required for DSP customers aged between 18 and 20. They are
    considered independent when living away from the parental home for
    any reason

For TAP claims:

-   a student is not automatically exempt from the TAP Parental Income
    Test because they reach a certain age
-   a UTLAH assessment is required for eligible TAP claimants of any
    age, if they cannot live at home due to extreme circumstances

If a customer advises they are homeless or they are at risk of becoming
homeless, make sure the customer gives consent before coding a
Homelessness Indicator on their record.

Implications for payments

Some independent students receiving YA may also qualify for a Relocation
Scholarship (RS). Additional coding is required for independent students
who qualify for Relocation Scholarship to ensure the correct amount is
paid.

YA customers who are assessed as independent because it is unreasonable
for them to live at home may be paid from 15 years of age, provided they
are above the minimum school leaving age for their state/territory.
Customers who are aged under 15 or under the school leaving age may need
to be assessed under the UTLAH provisions for Special Benefit (SpB).

If a parent is receiving a payment relating to caring for a young person
who leaves their home, they may no longer be eligible for Carer Payment
or Carer Allowance. See Change of address for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA).

Unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide further information or evidence
    relevant to the decision
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal review of the decision if required

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

Income Management (IM)

Customers automatically identified for VWPR Income Management (VWPR Auto
Triggered Youth) are those who:

-   live in a location offering the VWPR measure of IM,
-   are aged 16 years or over, and
-   receive an independent rate of YA, DSP, ABSTUDY Living Allowance or
    SpB due to meeting the UTLAH criteria

Customers who are not identified for IM under this measure are those who
are:

-   full time students or apprentices, or
-   currently on Voluntary Income Management (VIM)

For more information, see Eligibility for Income Management under the
VWPR measure.

The Resources page contains a definition of a Relationship parent, links
to forms, lists of YAL Homeless (HOM) grant and rejection reason codes,
AFH grant reason codes and template for the Display on Access (DOA) DOC
used by the O18 team. It also contains examples, scenarios and links to
the Workload Management Team for priority processing, the Job Seeker
Portfolio positional mailbox and Office Locator.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Assessing and Finalising claims for Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Lodgement of unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) statements for Youth
Allowance (YA) and Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Social work service referral

Homelessness Indicators

Updating address details

Youth Allowance (YA) customer leaving the parental home

Eligibility for Income Management under the Vulnerable Welfare Payment
Recipient (VWPR) measure

Review of decision

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
