
Payment Pending Review (PPR) of decision to apply a penalty for non-compliance 001-10130010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the PPR provisions available for a Community
Development Program (CDP) participant if an Unemployment Non-Payment
Period (UNPP) or serious failure is being quality checked by a Subject
Matter Expert (SME), or reviewed by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)
or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

What is PPR

PPR is the process of continuing payment during a UNPP or serious
failure period while the decision is under review with includes being:

-   quality checked by a Subject Matter Expert (SME)
-   under review by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)
-   under review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) (first
    review), or
-   under review by the AAT (second review) if a stay order has been
    issued against the imposition of the penalty prior to the AAT review

Note: a priority review due to no income should not be made if PPR has
been granted.

PPR is not available for some reviews

PPR is not available for review of a decision to apply a connection
failure, non-attendance failure, reconnection failure or No Show, No Pay
failure. If a CDP participant is currently in a reconnection failure
period payment will only recommence from the date the CDP participant
either complies with the further reconnection requirement or a decision
is made that they are no longer required to comply with this
requirement.

PPR is also not available for any failures under the Targeted Compliance
Framework.

When PPR may be used

If a CDP participant disagrees with a decision to apply a serious
failure or UNPP the CDP participant has access to the internal review
framework and may request a review of the decision.

If a serious failure or UNPP decision is being quality checked or is
under review by either an ARO or the AAT, payment is restarted and
arrears are generally paid for any non-payment period that has already
been applied. Payment may also continue during an AAT second review but
only if the AAT has issued a stay order against the imposition of the
penalty.

When a review is requested after the non-payment period has been
reinstated for not attending a waiver re-engagement appointment or
attending but not entering into a new Job Plan, PPR applies from the
start date of the new (that is, reinstated) serious failure period.

If a CDP participant is concurrently serving a UNPP with other
preclusion or waiting periods, payment will not recommence under PPR
provisions until the other waiting or preclusion periods have been
served or have also become subject to PPR (if applicable).

Ongoing participation and PPR

During the period the CDP participant is receiving PPR they are required
to comply with all of their compulsory mutual obligation requirements.
As part of the process associated with reinstating payments the
Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD) or
Service Officer (UNPP) must attempt to re-engage the CDP participant
with their CDP provider.

If the CDP participant fails to comply with their mutual obligation
requirements while a decision is under review, a further failure may be
reported. Subsequent failures may result in an additional serious
failure. If this occurs, a new serious failure penalty period may apply.
CDP participants who become voluntarily unemployed without reasonable
excuse or are dismissed due to misconduct while receiving payment under
PPR provisions may incur an additional UNPP.

Once the quality check or review has been finalised, if the decision to
apply the failure that resulted in the serious failure period is
affirmed, and no party is taking further review and appeal action or if
the next stage of review is the AAT second review and a stay order has
not been issued, the reapplication of the failure ends the PPR provision
and the UNPP or serious failure penalty period recommences.

Penalty period recommencement

A UNPP or serious failure penalty period recommences from the start date
of the next entitlement period if the:

-   CDP participant withdraws a request for review of the decision
-   AAT dismisses the case without a decision (for example, in cases
    when the CDP participant does not appear at the hearing or cannot be
    contacted), or
-   UNPP or serious failure is affirmed

The above does not apply if the AAT first review has specified a
different period for the UNPP or serious failure period and this
decision is not being further appealed.

If a decision to apply a UNPP is affirmed, the CDP participant will be
required to serve the re-applied UNPP in full, noting that the duration
of the re-applied UNPP may be shorter than 8 (or 12) weeks when the CDP
participant had 'self-served' part of the non-payment period prior to
claiming.

Note: it is possible for a CDP participant to incur an additional UNPP
or serious failure penalty period while receiving PPR.

Transfer to new provider type

When a CDP participant transfers to a provider type other than a CDP
provider, any serious failure periods and UNPPs will continue to affect
their payment for the duration of the serious failure period or UNPP
until either a waiver or PPR is recorded.

The CDP participant continues to be eligible for PPR when a serious
failure or UNPP decision is being quality checked or is under review by
either an ARO or the AAT.

Service Officers will continue to record PPR for serious failure and
UNPP decisions made before or after the transfer, and reapply these
decisions if appropriate following review.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Participation
Solutions Team (PST).

Related links

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Implementing Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT second review) partial
stay orders

Implementing the outcome of a failure review or appeal

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP)
partiicipants

Serious failure penalties

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Periods (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Manually adjusting non-payment period start and end dates

Priority explanation or formal review of a decision

Continuing payments pending review (PPR)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
