
Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity 001-02330050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to manage a pending JSCI due to an ESAt
referral being flagged. This is a JSR/UPD activity with a keyword of
ESAREFRQ, and the JSCI status will remain pending, awaiting a decision
about the requirement for an ESAt.

Options for managing the ESAt flag

An ESAt flag activity is generated when a job seeker's responses to
questions in the JSCI indicate that further assessment may be required.
As a general principle, the ESAt flag should only remain when there is a
strong need to assess a customer's capacity to work or connections to
support. If there has not been a significant change in a customer's
circumstances, an ESAt is likely not required. The JSCI status will be
pending until a decision is made regarding an ESAt referral.

The ESAt activity should be finalised within 14 days of the completion
of the JSCI using 1 of the following options:

-   Copy an existing ESAt or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
-   Withdraw the ESAt flag
-   Defer the booking of an ESAt appointment
-   Booking of an ESAt appointment by Assessment Services
-   Cancel the ESAt activity

Copying an existing ESAt/JCA

Copying an existing ESAt or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) will allow a
pending JSCI to be completed.

An existing ESAt or JCA may be copied and reapplied when the person is
in Community Development Program (CDP), Stream C or Disability
Employment Service (DES) and medical conditions disclosed in the latest
JSCI were assessed in the previous ESAt/JCA.

A person may still be referred for an ESAt if there is evidence that a
previously assessed medical condition is deteriorating and requires
significant reconsideration.

Service Officers should consult with a Senior Service Officer (SSO) if
they are not sure about whether to use this function.

Withdrawing an ESAt flag

An ESAt flag should be withdrawn when:

-   the ESAt was flagged for medical reasons and required medical
    evidence cannot or has not been supplied within 14 days of
    completing the JSCI
-   the ESAt was flagged for medical reasons and medical evidence
    supplied indicates that all medical conditions are temporary
-   the jobseeker is exempt from mutual obligation requirements for more
    than 13 weeks, for example exempt due to serious illness
-   the identified barriers will not have a significant impact on their
    ability to work or participate in other activities

The Resources page contains scenarios when a service officer may
determine that an ESAt flag can be withdrawn. Service Officers should
consult with a Senior Service Officer (SSO) if they are not sure about
whether to use this function.

A JSCI initiated ESAt flag should not be withdrawn simply because the
customer does not want to attend an ESAt. If the customer is in receipt
of a payment with mutual obligation requirements and their JSCI
responses indicate that an ESAt referral is required, then the customer
cannot choose to decline a referral.

Following withdrawal of the ESAt flag the JSCI status should become
active, and the job seeker must be immediately referred (if not already
connected) to the recommended service, in accordance with their JSCI
outcomes.

Deferring the ESAt referral

An ESAt referral may be deferred for a maximum of 13 weeks when the job
seeker:

-   is a refugee in their first 12 weeks in Australia
-   is exempt from mutual obligation requirements. A deferment should
    not exceed the end date of the exemption
-   has a payment that is suspended (not yet cancelled) because they are
    imprisoned or overseas
-   has an income support start date in the future because of an Income
    Maintenance Period (IMP) or Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) and
    the job seeker does not wish to volunteer for referral to an ESAt
    during the waiting period
-   is subject to an 8 week non-payment period, due to a serious or
    repeated failure

The ESAREFRQ activity will be finalised if the referral to the Assessor
is deferred. The JSCI status will remain pending during the period of
deferment. Once the deferment period has expired the ESAREFRQ activity
will reappear on the job seeker record to indicate the need for further
action.

Booking an ESAt

ESAt appointments are booked by the Assessment Services and Smart
Centres Co-ordination Branch. An ESAt request should only be made after
considering whether it is more appropriate to:

-   copy and reapply the existing ESAt or JCA,
-   withdraw the flag, or
-   defer the ESAt request

If an ESAt is still needed, an ESAt request should be made when an
assessment is likely to result in a change to the job seeker's:

-   work capacity, for example the person has a long term (2 years or
    more) medical condition not previously assessed by ESAt or JCA
    (medical evidence must be available prior to booking). Please note
    that if a customer already has a 15-22 work capacity with
    intervention, a new medical condition may not change this outcome,
    or
-   recommended referral, for example the job seeker has non-medical
    barriers and may move from Stream A or B to Stream C. If there is a
    significant change in the diagnosed medical conditions, they may
    require a higher level of support, for example moving from DES -
    Disability Management Service (DMS) to DES - Employment Support
    Service (ESS)

The JSR/UPD ESAREFRQ activity will be completed when Assessment Services
book an appointment through the Online Diary. When the report is
submitted by the Assessor the current ESAt flag will be finalised, and
the job seeker's JSCI will change from pending to active.

Cancelling an ESAt activity

The ESAt activity should be cancelled when the person does not have
mutual obligation requirements and is not seeking a referral to
employment assistance. Service Officers should:

-   manually cancel the ESAREFQ activity
-   go to Assessment Results (AR) screen, select and cancel or complete
    the activity
-   deactivate job seeker registration

The Resources page contains a set of scenarios for when a senior staff
member may determine that an ESAt can be withdrawn, and links to the
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Service desk Online
Incident Reporting Form.

Related links

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer volunteering for
employment assistance for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
