
Student to job seeker transfers 001-03020050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to transfer a customer from a student or
Australian Apprentice income support payment to JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
or Youth Allowance (YA) (Job seeker).

Course end date reviews

Students are sent an end of course review letter and have a 'Confirm
course end date' task created in their online account 28 days before the
Student End Date (SED) recorded on their file. If the customer ceases
study on the expected SED and they do not need further income support,
the student does not have to respond to the letter or task and their
student payment will cancel from the day following their last day of
studies.

The 'Confirm course end date' online task allows the customer to extend
their current course details, add a new course or provide more
information to the customer if they still need financial assistance.

[] The 'Manage study details' online service is also available for
customers to extend their current course details or add a new course if
appropriate.

Austudy and YA students 22 years of age and over

Austudy and YA students (22 and over) who are issued with a Course End
Date review, can apply to transfer to JSP via a streamlined claim
process.

To be eligible to use the streamlined process customers must:

-   be approaching their Student End Date (SED) within 28 calendar days,
    and
-   not be continuing to study full-time or as a concessional study load
    student after their SED, and
-   not have a study related Manual Follow-up (MFU) on their file

[] These customers must use the 'Confirm course end date' task on their
Centrelink online account or Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to
complete a JSP streamlined claim.

If the student contacts before ceasing studies but within 28 days of
their SED, the Service Officer must register the student as a No Stream
Services Referral Required (NSSRR)/No RJCP Referral Required (NRRR) job
seeker.

A customer ceasing study who contacts after their SED or wants to claim
an alternate income support payment must lodge an online claim.

Note: if the customer completes a new claim within 14 days of ceasing
study, they may be considered to have continuing qualification for
payment. If they submit the claim after 14 days, see Calculating the
start day general rule.

YA students under 22 years of age

[] A 'Confirm course end date' task will be available to students in
their Centrelink online account or Express Plus mobile app 28 days
before their recorded Student End Date (SED).

The 'Confirm course end date' task allows students to either:

-   update their study details if they are continuing to study, or
-   book a student to job seeker appointment to register with an
    Employment Services Provider and discuss their mutual obligation
    requirements as a job seeker

A YA (Student) does not need to lodge a claim for YA (Job seeker) if
they:

-   have contacted before their SED, if issued a Course End Date review,
    or
-   were not issued a Course End Date review and have contacted within
    their notification period, and
-   are discontinuing study, and
-   are seeking more financial assistance

If the student contacts before ceasing studies but within 28 days of
their SED, the Service Officer must register the student as a No Stream
Services Referral Required (NSSRR)/No RJCP Referral Required (NRRR) job
seeker.

If the customer received a Course End Date review and has not contacted
before their SED, they may not be eligible for retrospective assessment.
Their payment will cancel from their SED + 1.

Customers under 22 who have not completed Year 12 (or equivalent) or a
Certificate III or higher, are identified as early school leavers. They
must undertake approved activities and/or job search to satisfy their
mutual obligation requirements.

Students under 22 who want to transition from YA (Student) to another
income support payment must submit a separate claim for that payment.

Note: if the customer completes a new claim within 14 days of ceasing
study, they may be considered to have continuing qualification for
payment. If they submit the claim after 14 days, see Calculating the
start day general rule.

ABSTUDY

ABSTUDY Living Allowance students who are:

-   Secondary school students and complete their study are paid up to 31
    December each year. Transfer provisions do not apply to ABSTUDY
    students, under Section 23 of the Social Security Act. If the
    customer claims JobSeeker Payment (JSP) the date the customer
    submits the claim will be their start date
-   ABSTUDY students who cease study are paid up to the date they cease
    study. Transfer provisions do not apply to ABSTUDY students, under
    Section 23 of the Social Security Act. If the customer claims
    JobSeeker Payment (JSP) the date the customer submits the claim will
    be their start date

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Customers who were getting PES and a qualifying payment will keep
getting their qualifying payment following ceasing studies.

PES customers getting JSP must change their activity type. Some
customers may also be identified for a Post Approved Activity (PAA)
Review Job Plan Contact.

The Resources page contains a link to the Access Support Centre (ASC)
homepage and extra text a Service Officer recording a manual DOC can use
when Fast Note is unavailable.

Related links

Transfer to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Customer will not commence full-time study for Youth Allowance (YA),
Austudy and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Changing or correcting course of study for Youth Allowance, Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement students

Changing or correcting course of study and/or educational institution
for ABSTUDY students

Processing end of course reviews for ABSTUDY, ABSTUDY Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES) and PES students

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Satisfying the activity test for Austudy

Satisfying the activity test for Youth Allowance (YA) by undertaking
full-time study

Assessing qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Study requirements for ABSTUDY Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Processing end of course and intention to study reviews for Austudy and
Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

Eligibility and registration as a No Stream Services Required (NSSRR)/No
Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
