
Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) 001-04010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Youth Allowance (YA) eligibility criteria for
job seekers, including principal carers of a dependent child aged under
16 and job seekers assessed as having a Partial Capacity to Work (PCW).

YA (job seeker) eligibility criteria

To qualify for a YA (job seeker), a person must:

-   be of qualifying age for YA (job seeker)
-   meet Australian residence requirements for YA
-   be unemployed
-   be prepared to negotiate and enter into a Job Plan if required to do
    so, or comply with, or renegotiate an existing Job Plan
-   not be receiving ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   satisfy the requirements of their Job Plan

Customers under 22 years of age and who have not completed Year 12 (or
equivalent) or a Certificate III or higher, are identified as Early
School Leavers. They are required to undertake approved activities
and/or job search in order to qualify for payment of YA.

Principal carer of a dependent child

A person who is regarded as the principal carer of a dependent child may
qualify for additional entitlements and/or reduced their mutual
obligation requirements in respect of their YA.

Only one member of a couple can be regarded as a principal carer of a
dependent child. If care of a child is shared with another person (other
than the customer's partner) a determination needs to be made as to who
is the principal carer.

A child can be a dependent child of more than one person, but only one
person can be a principal carer in respect of a child. This
determination may affect the person's qualification for YA as well as
their rate of payment.

A non principal carer parent may access the YA (job seeker)
'single/partnered with child' rate if they have shared care of 14% or
more of a dependent child.

Full time students

In general, full-time students are not considered unemployed as they
cannot satisfy mutual obligation requirements. Students undertaking full
time study should be assessed for Youth Allowance (student).

Partial capacity to work

If a person is assessed as having a partial capacity to work they may
qualify for additional entitlements and/or reduced mutual obligation
requirements in respect of their YA. See Job seekers with a partial
capacity to work or a temporary reduced work capacity.

Customers 21 years of age or under who are temporarily incapacitated for
work may qualify for YA with an exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements. See Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth
Allowance (YA) (Incapacitated).

Contents

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Age eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job
seeker)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (job seeker)
when self-employed

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (job
seeker) for sports people

Transfer to Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) from another payment

Unemployed Due to Industrial Action (UDIA)

Unemployed due to stand down

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Principal carer of a dependent child

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under Social Security Law

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Principal carer of a dependent child

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Student to job seeker transfers

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Unsupported under 16 year olds to immediately see a Services Australia
social worker

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
