
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures involved in processing JSP
suspensions, cancellations, restorations and rejections.

Action before making an unfavourable decision

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal review of the decision if requested

Make 2 genuine attempts to contact the customer before finalising the
decision.

Suspending JSP

Generally, JSP should only be suspended when:

-   a decision has been made that the customer is not qualified, or the
    payment is not payable, temporarily or for a specific period as a
    result of changes in their circumstances, or
-   the customer has not complied with a request that was reasonable and
    relevant to determining their eligibility for payment, for example,
    to provide information held by the customer, to attend an interview,
    or to take action (for example, to obtain a foreign payment)

A JSP cannot be suspended pending investigation (INV). Before a payment
is suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be satisfied that
there is sufficient evidence that the customer is either not qualified
for the payment or the payment is not payable. If there is not,
information must be requested from the customer via a notice under the
appropriate section of the Social Security (Administration) Act; section
63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

Notices must include details as to the information/action required, the
timeframe for response (noting that this must be reasonable), the
consequences of non-compliance, and the reference to the relevant Act
that the request has been made under.

If the customer fails to comply with the notice within the reasonable
timeframe by not providing the requested information and/or taking the
required action, the decision maker may, after considering all the
available evidence, decide to suspend or cancel the payment.

Note: when assessing a reasonable timeframe, as a general rule, 8
additional days may be added to the original timeframe to allow for mail
delivery by Australia Post. For example, customer is given 14 days to
provide information, a reasonable timeframe to comply would be 22 days
from the date of the original notice.

If the customer provides the requested information, the customer's
retrospective and/or continuing entitlement should be assessed.

If a decision is made to manually suspend a customer's payment in
conjunction with the above, a manual review must be coded by the Service
Officer to follow up the suspension at a later date.

Cancelling JSP

If the decision to cancel JSP is made, an advice must be sent to the
customer with the cancellation reason and review and appeal rights.

Customer notification

If deciding to suspend or cancel a customer's JSP, advise them straight
away to avoid placing them in financial hardship.

This advice must clearly outline

-   their payment type
-   why their payment was suspended or cancelled
-   the date of effect
-   the relevant section of the legislation
-   their review and appeal rights.

Restoring JSP

Restoration of suspended or cancelled JSP may occur when a customer's
qualification for payment has been re-established or if payment becomes
payable after a cancellation or suspension.

Reviewing suspension - cancelling or restoring payment

Suspended payments are reviewed within 13 weeks of the suspension. If a
customer does not contact or provide requested information, the
suspended payment may be cancelled as a result of the review and
notification of the cancellation will be issued.

A payment may be restored when the customer re-establishes their
qualification for the payment or provides the required information.

See:

-   Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker)
    and Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Cancellation at customer's request of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
    Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Vulnerable or at risk customer

If a vulnerable and at risk customer remains without income support
payment for a minimum of 6 weeks due to an automatic suspension or
cancellation, the customer may be eligible for manual intervention.
Customers who are overseas permanently are not eligible for this
initiative.

For more information, see Manual intervention for Automatic Suspension
and Cancellation of vulnerable and at risk customers.

Contents list

Suspension of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Restoration of JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (job seeker) and
Special Benefit (SpB)

Cancellation of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA)
(jobseeker) at customer's request

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
