
Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity to work (PCW) 001-09070160

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines approved activities which satisfy mutual
obligation requirements for job seekers who have been assessed by an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial capacity to
work.

Capacity to work bandwidths

The Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) assesses capacity to work
according to the following bandwidths:

-   0-7 hours per week
-   8-14 hours per week
-   15-22 hours per week
-   23-29 hours per week

Mutual obligation requirements vary depending on the work capacity
bandwidths assessed by the ESAt provider.

A job seeker's partial capacity to work bandwidth takes into account
both the Baseline Work Capacity and Work Capacity with Intervention from
their ESAt report, based on all permanent medical conditions.

Where a job seeker has a partial capacity to work, this will remain in
place for the purposes of determining mutual obligation requirements
until superseded by a new ESAt/JCA regardless of the age of the
assessment. Where an assessment may no longer be valid due to a change
in circumstances then a new ESAt is required to confirm this.

Requirement for a Job Plan

Services Australia uses the 'With Intervention' work capacity assessment
from the ESAt report to place the job seeker into the appropriate
Partial Capacity to Work (PCW) participation category.

Job seekers who have been assessed as having a partial capacity to work
of 0-14 hours per week will be managed by Services Australia and the job
seeker will negotiate a job plan with the agency.

Mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers assessed with a partial capacity to work of 0-14 hours per
week will fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
negotiating a Job Plan with the agency. The job seeker's requirement
will be to 'attend all appointments made for me. If I am unable to
attend an appointment I will advise Centrelink before my appointment
time as scheduled.

Job seekers assessed with a partial capacity to work of 0-14 hours per
week can also fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
negotiating a Job Plan with the agency that includes either suitable
part-time work or self-employment of up to 14 hours per week.

These job seekers may volunteer to be connected with a provider.
Regardless of whether the job seeker is connected to a provider, they
will be managed by the agency and the agency will be required to
negotiate the initial Job Plan.

Job seekers assessed with a partial capacity to work of 15 hours or more
per week must undertake compulsory activities to satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements, and will be required to be connected with an
Employment Services Provider if they are not fully satisfying their
requirements. A job seeker can participate in suitable part-time work or
self-employment of at least 15 hours per week to fully satisfy their
requirements. If the job seeker is not undertaking an approved activity
which fully meets their requirements, they must have job search included
in their Job Plan.

A compliance investigation will not be required for job seekers who were
working more than 15 hours per week and who voluntarily leave to
commence suitable work that is only 15 hours per week.

Job seekers can volunteer to undertake drug dependency treatments or
interventions which may count towards meeting their mutual obligation if
they are provider managed.

The Resources page contains a link to a table of mutual obligation
requirements that job seekers with a partial capacity to work can
participate in, within different bandwidths.

Related links

Approved mutual obligation requirements for customers assessed as having
a temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC)

Job Plan

Assessment Services

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) overview

Non-compliance events

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
