
Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity 001-09120010

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines the procedure for suitably skilled Service
Officers to determine a job seeker's or ParentsNext participant's
eligibility for an exemption from compulsory mutual obligation or
participation requirements based on a temporary incapacity for work.

Key principles

Job seekers or ParentsNext participants (customers) claiming or
receiving a participation payment may request a temporary incapacity
exemption from mutual obligation or participation requirements by
submitting a valid medical certificate to Services Australia.

Service Officers are required to assess all certificates lodged to
determine if a temporary incapacity exemption can be granted. Each
exemption application must be assessed based on the circumstances. The
following must be considered in making a decision:

-   Where the certificate is valid and the medical practitioner states
    the customer is temporarily unable to work at least 8 hours per week
    due to a temporary condition or temporary exacerbation of a
    permanent condition then, generally, this evidence should be
    accepted and an exemption granted
-   Staff should not unreasonably refuse a temporary incapacity
    exemption request, taking into account the evidence and expert
    opinion of the treating medical practitioner
-   An exemption should not be refused just because a customer's
    condition is permanent, where all available current evidence shows
    that the customer is clearly temporarily incapacitated for all work
-   Where the agency has allowed customers to access periods of
    exemption by accepting previous certificates, staff must carefully
    consider and weigh up any decision not to grant further periods of
    exemption. This may require consultation with senior staff
-   Every new medical certificate lodged must be individually assessed
    to determine if a temporary incapacity exemption can be granted,
    including where the new certificate contains very similar
    information to one previously lodged
-   A separate decision must be made for each new medical certificate
    lodged, including where periods of incapacity overlap, or if a new
    certificate is lodged shortly after an exemption was not granted for
    a previous certificate
-   Each suitably skilled Service Officer is responsible for the
    decision to grant or deny a customer's request for exemption, even
    where a previous decision has already been made for an earlier
    certificate
-   Customers must be contacted by phone to explain the assessment
    outcome, if it is completed without the customer present. See
    Process page
-   Where a customer continues to seek incapacity exemptions for
    extended periods (for example, 18 months continuously), whether for
    the same or different condition, an Employment Services Assessment
    (ESAt) referral must be considered to allow an assessment by the
    agency's health and allied health professional assessors
-   Customers with an ongoing reduced work capacity due to the impacts
    of a permanent condition, may benefit from an ESAt referral, where
    they have some capacity for work, or the incapacity is unlikely to
    be temporary. This will assess if they have a partial capacity to
    work with reduced mutual obligation requirements, and connection to
    suitable employment services. This may avoid the need for the
    customer to lodge repeated medical certificates for the same
    condition(s)

Valid medical certificates

Certificates are only valid when completed and signed by a registered
medical practitioner and include, at least, the following information:

-   diagnosis (name or description of condition)
-   prognosis (how long the symptoms are expected to affect the capacity
    to work). This may be a specified timeframe, or 'Uncertain'
-   the period the customer is incapacitated for work
-   whether the customer is incapacitated for all work of at least 8
    hours per week

Customers and medical practitioners should be encouraged to use the
current version of the Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415) form or
the online SU683 form. The medical practitioner's signature is not
required if an online SU683 certificate has been lodged. A previous
version of the Centrelink Medical Certificate or a non-Centrelink
medical certificate is also valid if it contains the required
information noted above.

The medical practitioner is not required to provide opinion about a
customer's capacity to participate in a suitable activity, but may
choose to include this information when completing a medical
certificate.

Note: invalid certificates should not be used to grant a temporary
incapacity exemption, and the customer must be advised of the decision
reason and outcome.

Medical certificate lodgement

Certificates lodged at a service centre must be processed as a walk-in
on the same day to ensure the customer is aware of the outcome and any
changes made to their mutual obligation or participation requirements.
Otherwise, in exceptional circumstances, the certificate may be
processed no later than by close of business the day after receipt, with
the customer contacted by telephone, and advised of the outcome.

Options for the customer to lodge a medical certificate include:

using the Upload documents service via myGov or the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app

having their treating doctor:

-   complete and print the fillable Centrelink Medical Certificate form
    (SU415) available on Services Australia's website, for the customer
    to lodge, or
-   submit the Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU683) online via Health
    Professional Online Services

attending the service centre with the certificate

having the certificate lodged by a third party

mailing the certificate to Services Australia

faxing the certificate and then provide the original document as soon as
possible

Non-Centrelink certificates lodged must be classified as UNSMCER. This
includes:

-   non-Centrelink certificates with no barcode, or
-   SU415 without a barcode, or
-   if the barcode on the SU415 appears to be of poor quality and not
    readable

Suspected fraud

If the available information suggests the customer has lodged a medical
certificate that was not completed by a medical practitioner or has been
amended after a medical practitioner completed it, contact the medical
practitioner to clarify in all cases. If the service officer is not
satisfied with the integrity of the information on the medical
certificate, a temporary incapacity exemption should not be granted.

Requirement to contact the treating doctor

Attempts must be made to contact medical practitioners via phone if
clarification is required. This includes where:

-   the information required for clarification is not provided, or
-   there are valid concerns about the integrity of the information, or
-   a decision not to grant an exemption for the certificate may have a
    detrimental impact on the customer's wellbeing, or
-   there is other information and medical evidence that raises doubt
    about any decision to be made on granting or denying a request for
    exemption

Any additional information obtained via the contact must be clearly
documented on the customer's record, including the medical
practitioner's contact name and number.

Maximum exemption period

The maximum temporary exemption period for a single certificate is the
lesser of:

-   the period of incapacity for work stated by the medical practitioner
    on the certificate, or
-   13 weeks from the start of the incapacity period on the certificate,
    or
-   12 months for customers who are undergoing or recovering from
    intensive medical treatment for a serious illness

An exemption can be granted for up to a maximum of 13 weeks if the
certificate clearly shows the customer is temporarily incapacitated for
all work of at least 8 hours per week because of a medical condition.
This generally means the incapacity for work is expected to resolve
within the next 2 years. This assessment should take into account all
relevant factors, including the period of incapacity for work, the
prognosis period (for example, if symptoms will clearly affect the
customer's work capacity for less than 24 months), and whether the
condition is temporary or permanent.

-   For example, an exemption can be granted if the certificate shows
    the customer's symptoms and incapacity for work are expected to last
    less than 13 weeks, including where the condition is permanent. For
    more information, see Assessing permanent conditions and prognosis

An exemption may be granted for longer than 13 weeks (based on a single
medical certificate) for customers who are undergoing or recovering from
intensive medical treatment for a serious illness. Customers who meet
the serious illness exemption eligibility criteria may be granted an
initial exemption period of up to 12 months if covered by a medical
certificate. A serious illness exemption can be extended up to a further
6 months based on a further medical certificate. See Exempting a job
seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious illness for
further information.

For each new medical certificate lodged, a further period of exemption
must be assessed and a decision reached on whether to grant or deny any
further exemption period. Customers can apply for a further temporary
incapacity exemption if they are still temporarily incapacitated for all
work and suitable activities at the end of their current exemption.

To assess a further period of exemption for a customer lodging a
subsequent medical certificate, see Expiry and renewal of medical
certificates for payments with mutual obligation requirements.

Exemption may not be granted in some circumstances

Lodgement of a certificate does not always mean an exemption should be
granted. Reasons for not granting an exemption include where:

-   the certificate is invalid because there insufficient information to
    assess if an exemption can be granted
-   the customer is clearly able to work at least 8 hours per week
-   the customer's incapacity for all work is clearly not temporary
    (expected to last for more than 2 years) - for example, the
    condition is permanent, and symptoms are expected to significantly
    affect the customer's capacity for work for more than 24 months
-   the temporary incapacity for work is the result of drug or alcohol
    dependency or misuse, or
-   the customer clearly has capacity to participate in a suitable
    activity, such as job search with an employment services provider

A decision not to grant an exemption must be based on current evidence.
The certificate from the medical practitioner is generally the primary
evidence for the decision.

If an exemption is not granted and the customer subsequently submits a
new certificate:

-   a separate decision must be made to grant/not grant a temporary
    incapacity exemption for the new certificate, with the decision
    outcome clearly documented on the customer record
-   the new certificate may also be considered along with other
    available evidence if the customer asks for a temporary incapacity
    exemption decision to be explained, or requests a formal review of
    the decision

Capacity to participate in suitable activities

Customers who are temporarily unable to work may still be able to
undertake a suitable activity to help them prepare for a job, such as
activities to develop job search skills. In this case, the customer may
not be eligible for a temporary incapacity exemption. A decision not to
grant an exemption for this reason must always be supported by current
medical evidence from the medical practitioner, which clearly shows the
customer can undertake a suitable activity, such as participation in job
search activities.

Medical practitioners may provide information about a customer's
capacity to participate in a suitable activity, in response to the
question 'In order to prepare your patient for return to work or study,
certain assistance may be offered. Identify any factors which may impact
on participation.' This is not a compulsory question and service
officers do not need to contact the medical practitioner to ask for, or
clarify this information. If provided, this information may be relevant
to assessing an exemption, where it clearly shows that the customer can
undertake a suitable activity such as job search with an employment
services provider.

Assessing a request for a temporary incapacity exemption

A valid medical certificate is the primary evidence used to assess if a
temporary incapacity exemption can be granted. To make this assessment,
Service Officers must consider relevant information on the certificate,
including:

-   Diagnosis - the nature of the condition
-   Date of onset - when the condition started
-   Whether the condition is temporary or permanent (including an
    exacerbation of a permanent condition)
-   Prognosis - how long symptoms are expected to affect the customer's
    work capacity
-   Whether the customer can work at least 8 hours per week
-   The period of any incapacity for work

This information should generally be sufficient to assess if a temporary
incapacity exemption can be granted.

Example 1: The certificate states that the customer's primary condition
is severe influenza, which started a week ago; the condition is
temporary; the incapacity is expected to last less than 3 months, and
the customer can't work at least 8 hours per week. This information is
sufficient to grant an exemption.

Example 2: The medical practitioner who completed the certificate states
that the customer can work at least 8 hours per week. This information
is sufficient to determine that an exemption can't be granted. However,
the customer may also need an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
referral to assess if they have a partial capacity to work or a
temporary reduced work capacity.

The Centrelink Medical Certificate also requests information about the
customer's capacity to study. This information is used to assess if a
Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice is incapacitated
for full-time study. It is not used to assess if a job seeker is
temporarily incapacitated for all work.

Assessing permanent conditions and prognosis

It is important to consider the nature of the condition, including
whether it is assessed as permanent or temporary. This factor should be
weighed against other information on the certificate, including how long
the condition is expected to significantly affect the customer's work
capacity. A temporary incapacity exemption may be granted where a
condition is assessed as 'permanent', but all the evidence shows that
the resulting incapacity for all work is still expected to be temporary
(less than 2 years). This assessment should take into account the
medical practitioner's opinion about prognosis of the customer's primary
condition, and how long they are expected to be unfit for work.

Example: The certificate states that a customer is unable to work due to
depression. The date of onset was 12 months ago, and the condition is
listed as permanent (likely to last more than 2 years). This is the
first certificate lodged by the customer since they started receiving
JobSeeker Payment, the symptoms are expected to affect their capacity to
work for less than 12 months, and the period of incapacity on the
medical certificate is 12 weeks. All of the medical evidence shows that
this is a temporary exacerbation of a permanent condition, and the
resulting incapacity for work is expected to be temporary. In this case,
a temporary incapacity exemption can be granted.

Example: The certificate indicates a recent diagnosis of a condition
considered to be permanent in nature but that treatment has recently
commenced and is likely to improve the condition over time. The medical
evidence indicates the customer has no capacity for work for the next 12
weeks. In this case, a temporary incapacity exemption can be granted.

Service Officers should not:

-   reject an exemption request just because a condition is listed as
    'permanent', without considering all other available medical
    evidence including the prognosis, and any recent history of
    exemptions for the same condition(s)
-   ask customers to go back their medical practitioner to change the
    assessment of a condition listed on a medical certificate (for
    example, from 'permanent' to 'exacerbation of a permanent
    condition'), where the certificate otherwise provides sufficient
    information to make an exemption decision

The prognosis of the primary condition is important when determining if
a customer's incapacity for work is temporary. This information must
always be considered alongside the other information on the certificate.

Example: The medical practitioner indicates a mental health condition is
'permanent', but the prognosis is 'uncertain' because it is difficult to
predict how long the symptoms will persist. This should not be taken as
an indication that the incapacity for work (arising from the condition)
is permanent. A temporary incapacity exemption may be granted if the
customer meets all criteria for a temporary incapacity exemption.

Current or valid assessments and other medical evidence

In addition to a medical certificate, service officers may also need to
take into account other available medical evidence. This includes
circumstances where a customer's eligibility for an exemption is less
clear, such as where:

-   the customer's primary medical conditions (with greatest impact on
    work capacity) are permanent
-   the customer has been, or is expected to be incapacitated for work
    for more than two years
-   other evidence shows that the customer may have some capacity for
    work

Other relevant evidence may include:

-   the customer's history of certificate submission, including any
    cumulative, extended period of incapacity exemptions which may
    indicate their incapacity for work is no longer temporary
-   any current and valid assessment of the job seeker's work capacity
    in Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment
    (JCA) reports. Note: ESAts and JCAs are not relevant for ParentsNext
    participants
-   the customer's reported earnings from employment, particularly where
    they are currently working 8 hours per week or more in open
    employment for multiple consecutive entitlement periods
-   evidence the temporary incapacity may have been primarily caused by,
    or be attributable to, the customer's drug or alcohol dependency or
    misuse - this may indicate an exemption can't be granted

Although a current and valid ESAt or JCA may provide additional
information to support an exemption decision including assessments of
temporary reduced work capacity, customers applying for a temporary
incapacity exemption always need to provide a valid medical certificate.
A temporary incapacity exemption cannot be granted based solely on an
ESAt or JCA report, without a valid medical certificate.

How other evidence is considered

While the primary evidence is the medical certificate completed by the
medical practitioner, other available information may also be used to
consider if an exemption should be granted. This includes circumstances
where the customer's incapacity for work may not be temporary, or they
may have some capacity to work.

A decision not to grant a temporary incapacity exemption based on
information other than the certificate must be based on clear evidence,
and must be defensible (likely to be affirmed by an Authorised Review
Officer or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal based on available
evidence on the customer's record). Service Officers must not make their
own judgements about a customer's capacity to work, outside available
medical evidence.

Work capacity recommendations from an existing current and valid
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
report may be used to help determine if a temporary incapacity exemption
can be granted. This information does not replace or 'override' the
certificate as the primary, and usually most recent evidence for a
temporary incapacity exemption decision. Relevant information that may
be considered from an ESAt or JCA report includes:

-   Current recommendations for temporary (reduced) work capacity, which
    may be in bandwidths ranging between 0-7 and 23-29 hours per week.
    This information reflects the assessor's recommendations about
    temporary impacts of a customer's medical condition for a defined
    period, based on medical evidence available at the time of
    assessment. This information may be relevant to a medical
    certificate assessment if the temporary reduced work capacity period
    is still current. If the period has now expired, this does not
    prevent consideration of a new medical certificate based on a
    customer's current circumstances
-   Assessments of partial capacity to work, of less than 30 hours per
    week. This assessment only reflects the work capacity impacts of a
    customer's permanent medical conditions, over the next two years
    from the date of assessment. It does not take into account the
    impacts of any temporary conditions, or temporary exacerbations of a
    permanent condition. Service Officers assessing medical certificates
    must take care using this information, as it may be less relevant to
    determining if an exemption can be granted

An ESAt or JCA may remain current for up to two years, including for the
purposes of referring a customer to recommended employment services.
This doesn't necessarily mean that the assessment is valid, and relevant
to a temporary incapacity exemption decision - this depends on the
customer's individual medical circumstances. These assessments generally
become less relevant with the passage of time.

For example, an ESAt completed at least 6 months ago based on older
medical evidence is generally less likely to reflect a customer's
medical circumstances than a certificate completed by the medical
practitioner in the last few days. If that ESAt included a
recommendation that the customer was expected to have a temporary
reduced work capacity of 0-7 hours per week for 3 months from the date
of assessment, this recommendation is only relevant for that period. The
expiry of the temporary reduced work capacity period should not stop a
new exemption application being assessed after that time, if the
customer provides new current medical evidence about their work
capacity.

When considering information in a current ESAt/JCA, consider any changes
in the job seeker's medical condition(s). The ESAt/JCA may still be
current (less than 2 years) but no longer valid due to a change, such as
a temporary exacerbation of a permanent condition, deterioration of a
medical condition or a change in treatment. Contact with the medical
practitioner may assist Service Officers to reach a more informed and
accurate decision.

Service Officers should take care using ESAt/JCA work capacity
recommendations to reject a temporary incapacity exemption application -
unless this information is still clearly relevant to the customer's
current medical circumstances, and consistent with all other evidence on
the record.

Example: The customer provides a certificate from a new treating medical
practitioner which states they will be unable to do any work for 13 to
24 months because of their mental health conditions, which are listed as
a temporary exacerbation of a permanent condition. They have already
been continuously exempt for over two years based on certificates for
the same conditions, with similar prognosis. An ESAt completed in the
last 3 months assessed the conditions as 'permanent', with an ongoing
partial capacity to work and reduced mutual obligation requirements. The
service officer correctly decides that an exemption can't be granted in
this case because evidence shows the customer's incapacity for work is
clearly not temporary.

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral request

An ESAt is not required in deciding whether to grant or deny a temporary
incapacity exemption. This decision should be based on the certificate,
taking into account any other existing and relevant evidence including
any previous temporary incapacity exemption history, and recommendations
from a current and valid ESAt or JCA.

After the decision is made to grant or deny a customer's request for
temporary incapacity exemption, consider if an ESAt referral is
appropriate to assess the customer's work capacity. Note: ESAts are not
applicable for ParentsNext participants.

An ESAt request may be considered if the medical certificate and/or
other available information indicates the customer:

-   is likely to have an ongoing partial capacity to work due to the
    impact of their permanent medical condition(s) - which may entitle
    them to other services including a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC),
    Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) and Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   has a medical condition(s) that is medium or long term (up to 24
    months) in nature, including episodic or chronic conditions (for
    example, schizophrenia, psychosis, depression and anxiety)
-   cannot be granted a temporary incapacity exemption (for example,
    because the customer can work at least 8 hours per week) but may
    have a temporary reduced work capacity of between 8 and 29 hours per
    week
-   has medical condition(s) that appear to be no longer of a temporary
    nature based on multiple medical certificates being lodged for the
    same condition

Do not make ESAt referral request where the:

-   customer is a compulsory ParentsNext participant
-   medical conditions on the certificate have been assessed in a
    current ESAt that is still valid (no significant change in medical
    conditions), or
-   the customer's conditions are not expected to impact their work
    capacity for longer than 13 weeks

During a temporary incapacity exemption period, job seekers are still
required to attend an ESAt appointment if it was booked before the
exemption was granted. Carefully consider their ability to attend the
appointment, particularly if they have been granted a temporary
incapacity for serious illness.

If an ESAt has been booked and the job seeker would have genuine
difficulty attending a face-to-face appointment due to their medical
condition, consider if the ESAt appointment should be cancelled or
deferred.

See Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt) appointments.

Note: if the decision is to organise an ESAt to assess the job seeker's
work capacity, complete the ESAt referral and book a phone/file
assessment.

Non-Applied Exemptions - job seeker's temporary incapacity is the result of drug or alcohol dependency or misuse

With the exception of Community Development Program (CDP) participants,
job seekers are not eligible for an incapacity exemption if their
temporary incapacity is wholly or mainly attributable to drug or alcohol
dependency/misuse. This only applies if it is listed on the medical
certificate as the primary medical condition. If a decision is made to
not grant an exemption on the grounds of substance dependency or misuse,
a Non-Applied Exemption (NAE) decision must be recorded. See Exempting a
job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to special
circumstances for further information related to coding and follow-up
action.

Note: an exemption can be considered if the customer's primary medical
condition is not related to drug or alcohol dependency or misuse but the
condition is listed as a secondary medical condition as it is not
primarily responsible for the incapacity.

See Drug or Alcohol dependency treatment program or intervention as an
approved activity.

Drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation programmes for Community Development Program (CDP)

CDP participants undertaking a drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation
programme are eligible for a temporary incapacity exemption from mutual
obligation requirements if they have a work capacity of less than 8
hours per week. A valid medical certificate from a medical practitioner
is required as evidence to support the temporary incapacity exemption.
The exemption can be granted for job seekers who are participating in
residential rehabilitation programmes voluntarily or by Court Order.

See Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances for further information related to coding and
follow-up action.

Recommending a claim for DSP

A customer lodging a medical certificate may be advised to claim DSP
only in limited circumstances, including where they are likely to be
manifestly medically eligible.

This includes where:

-   available medical evidence clearly shows the customer is terminally
    ill
-   the medical evidence shows the customer has a List 1 or List 2
    condition
-   the recommendation to claim DSP is made by an agency health or
    allied health professional, including the Health Professional
    Advisory Unit, or as part of an ESAt upgraded to a JCA

A customer must not be advised to claim DSP simply because their
condition is assessed as 'permanent'. A recommendation to claim DSP
should only occur where a customer is likely to meet all medical
eligibility and other criteria for DSP based on available evidence.

Note: diagnosis of a List 2 condition does not mean the customer is
automatically medically eligible for DSP - additional assessment action
may be required to ascertain the prognosis or severity/progression of
the condition.

Manually end dating an exemption

Customers who advise Services Australia they no longer want a temporary
incapacity exemption before their current medical certificate has
expired, must provide evidence from their medical practitioner stating
they now have capacity to work at least 8 hours per week.

If this new medical evidence is received, the exemption is to be ended
and the customer connected or reconnected with a provider.

Employment Services and ParentsNext Providers

Job seekers and ParentsNext participants are responsible for notifying
their provider (if provider managed) or Services Australia (if
Centrelink managed) of their current circumstances. The provider or
Services Australia will review and update their Job Plan/Participation
Plan to adjust or reduce their mutual obligation or participation
requirements. It may be more appropriate to adjust their requirements to
include activities they are able to undertake rather than exempting them
from all requirements. This ensures the customer remains engaged with
their provider and will maximise their employment opportunities.

If Services Australia grants a temporary incapacity exemption, an
auto-transfer of information occurs that enables providers to view the
following in their ICT system:

-   the type of exemption (temporary incapacity/temporary incapacity -
    serious illness)
-   the date the exemption was granted
-   the exemption period (start and end dates)

Providers can also view information recorded in the Job Seeker
Classification Instrument (JSCI) and Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports.

A decision to not grant a temporary incapacity exemption has no direct
impact on how a provider delivers their services. Services Australia
does not advise providers when a decision is made not to grant an
exemption. However, providers may become aware of a non-grant decision
where:

-   the coding of a medical certificate triggers an update in the JSCI,
    or
-   new information is recorded on the Circumstances Impacting
    Compliance screen, or
-   a new ESAt referral is booked

If providers contact Services Australia about a temporary incapacity
exemption, advise them:

-   customers are responsible for lodging a request for a temporary
    incapacity exemption, and providing supporting medical evidence if
    they believe they are unable to reasonably attend any activity or
    appointment due to an illness or injury
-   the customer will be advised of the outcome of their request, and
-   until a decision is made whether to grant a temporary incapacity
    exemption, the provider is to support the customer in the manner
    they deem most appropriate

The Resources page contains information to relevant forms, an attachment
for Customer First established support links, examples of keying medical
certificates and exemptions, Assessment of permanent medical conditions,
Non-Applied Exemptions codes and Non-Exemption reasons.

Related links

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Classifying Centrelink digital images via the National Queue

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Expiry and renewal of medical certificates for payments with mutual
obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Job Plans

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Viewing Centrelink customers' digital images

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Assessment Services

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Resources on illnesses, injuries and disabilities

Drug or Alcohol dependency treatment program or intervention as an
approved activity

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Youth Allowance (YA) student or Australian Apprentice becomes
incapacitated

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Health Professional Online Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
