
Applying mutual obligation requirements 001-09020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines mutual obligation requirements for job seekers
applying for, or receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) and certain Special Benefit
(SpB) customers.

On this page:

Mutual obligation requirements

People receiving income support payments with mutual obligation
requirements must show they are actively looking for work and
participating in a range of tasks and activities that will help them
into employment, unless Services Australia has granted the job seeker a
temporary exemption from these requirements.

Job seekers on the following income support payments have mutual
obligation requirements:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)
-   Parenting Payment (PP) for a single customer (when their youngest
    child turns 6)
-   Special Benefit (SpB) (Nominated Visa Holders)

See Community Development Program (CDP) for information on mutual
obligation requirements for job seekers in CDP.

Types of mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements include a range of requirements a job
seeker can be compelled to fulfil under social security law in return
for ongoing income support. These include:

-   attending Employment Services Provider appointments
-   attending Services Australia appointments
-   undertaking job search
-   meeting a monthly points target (Workforce Australia participants
    only)
-   acting on referrals to jobs, and
-   participating in a requirement that fully meets their mutual
    obligation requirements

A job seeker's mutual obligation requirements are generally determined
by:

-   their age
-   their assessed work capacity, and
-   whether they have primary responsibility for the care of a child

Job seekers have either full-time or part-time mutual obligation
requirements.

Job seekers with full-time mutual obligation requirements should be:

-   looking for work, and
-   actively addressing any circumstances that may affect their capacity
    to undertake paid work

The following job seekers have part-time mutual obligation requirements:

-   Principal carer parents, once the youngest child in their care turns
    six years of age
-   Job seekers with a partial capacity to work (PCW) of 15 to 29 hours
    per week
-   Mature age job seekers, 55 years and over

The extent and combination of tasks activities that the job seeker is to
undertake will vary depending on the job seeker's cohort. In general,
the Job Plan will contain requirements set out but the job seeker's
Employment Services Provider:

With the exception of Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers paid under the
SpB Activity Test, Centrelink managed job seekers fully meet
requirements by participating in approved activities.

The Process page contains information about how Service Officers make
sure Centrelink managed job seekers fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Job search for Provider managed job seekers (Workforce Australia)

See Community Development Program (CDP) for information on job search
and mutual obligation requirements for job seekers in CDP

The job seeker's Job Plan will include:

-   a points requirement, including a minimum job search requirement
-   any compulsory activities, and
-   personal responsibility requirement

Employment Services Providers must:

specify the minimum job search for each job seeker. This will display in
the job seekers homepage, not in their job plan

specify the points target a job seeker is required to meet per month

adjust the points target and the minimum job search requirement
appropriately based on each job seeker’s:

-   personal circumstances
-   local labour market

There are some circumstances where the number of job searches may be
reduced by the provider. Service Officers have no authority to reduce
the number of job searches. Providers will work with job seekers to
decide the tasks and activities they use to meet the points target.

Any job seeker whose income support payment is reduced to nil because of
employment income (their own or partner's) does not have mutual
obligation requirements during the nil rate period.

Points Based Activation System (PBAS)

From 7 December 2020, job seekers granted a participation payment in an
NESM region had a PBAS target in their job plan as part of a trial.
Existing job seekers in the NESM regions were also able to choose to
join the trial. The trial ceased on 30 June 2022 and from 1 July 2022
PBAS has been extended to all job seekers.

Under PBAS job seekers accumulate a points target each month. This is
instead of reporting a set number of job searches each month. A job
seeker's points target is based on their personal circumstances and
local labour market, and displays in their homepage on the Workforce
Australia website.

Job seekers can accumulate points by completing a variety of tasks and
activities, including job search-related activities, and recording them
in their Workforce Australia homepage:

-   applying for a job
-   updating their career profile
-   going for a job interview
-   accepting a job offer, or
-   doing paid work

The points value for each activity is displayed in the job seeker's
homepage. Job seekers can choose which tasks or activities they will
undertake to meet their target. This gives job seekers greater
flexibility in meeting their requirements.

If a job seeker exceeds the number of points they need, they can carry
over that excess into the next reporting period (up to 50 per cent of
their target). This will reduce the number of points they must get next
month.

PBAS replaces the job search requirement in a job plan. All other mutual
obligation requirements remain unchanged, for example attendance at
appointments, activities, etc. Certain other activities may reduce the
number of points required.

It is the provider's responsibility to set the monthly points target and
to manage any disputes with the job seeker about:

-   whether the target is appropriate
-   whether the job seeker has a valid reason for not meeting a monthly
    points target

Advise the job seeker to discuss matter with their provider if they:

-   disagree with their points target, or
-   dispute the number of points accumulated

Services Australia staff cannot view a job seeker's points target or
accumulated points.

Job seekers fully meeting mutual obligation requirements

Services Australia assess and determine whether the following job
seekers are able to meet their mutual obligation requirements by
undertaking part time approved activities for at least 30 hours per
fortnight:

-   Principal carer parents
-   Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or temporary reduced
    work capacity (15 to 29 hours per week), and
-   Job seekers aged 55 years or over

If Services Australia establishes that a job seeker is participating
sufficiently in approved activities, Services Australia updates the Job
Plan.. The job seeker is then suspended from Employment Provider
Services.

Note: job seekers aged 55 years or over must remain connected with a
Workforce Australia provider (although they are suspended from their
caseload). They must attend any notified appointments with their
Workforce Australia provider.

It is possible for some job seekers to maintain qualification for
payment by having sufficient paid work to satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements and to still be regarded as unemployed.

If a job seeker does not continue to meet their mutual obligation
requirements, they may be found to have committed a failure.

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers (early school leavers)

JSP and YA job seekers who have not completed Year 12 (or equivalent) or
a Certificate III or higher are identified as early school leavers. They
are required to undertake approved activities and/or job search to
satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

-   If undertaking study or training or a combination of these, it must
    be for at least 25 hours per week
-   If undertaking any combination of study, training or job search,
    their provider will determine the number of job search required in
    addition to their other activities
-   If undertaking only job search they must look for work of at least
    25 hours per week and the number of job search will be determined by
    their provider

Customers assessed as disadvantaged or vulnerable and unable to meet the
study/training requirements may be exempt from the study requirement.

If a customer in this group is already working or studying, their mutual
obligation requirements may be adjusted dependent on their age and
circumstances.

Note: YA job seekers who are provider managed will have their mutual
obligation requirements determined by their Workforce Australia
provider.

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

JSP and YA principal carers of dependent children, and PPS (child aged
6+) customers must meet part-time mutual obligation requirements to
qualify for income support, unless an exemption is granted. They can
fulfil their requirements by:

-   meeting the sufficient work test (undertaking paid work and/or
    self-employment)
-   looking for work
-   undertaking approved study
-   undertaking a combination of paid work (including self-employment),
    study and (in some circumstances) voluntary work

The activity, or combination of activities apart from job search, must
be for at least 15 hours per week, or 30 hours per fortnight.

Principal carers registered as job seekers

Principal carers must be registered as job seekers, but are not required
to be connected to a provider if they are fully meeting their mutual
obligation requirements through approved activities. Principal carers
who:

-   volunteer to be connected to a provider are registered as Fully
    Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers
-   do not want to volunteer with a provider, are registered as Job
    Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) job seekers

If a principal carer aged 55 years or over is meeting their mutual
obligation requirements by doing approved voluntary work, or a
combination of approved voluntary work and self-employment, for at least
30 hours per fortnight, they:

-   must remain connected with a Provider
-   will not have job search requirements
-   will be suspended from the provider while they are meeting their
    requirements, and
-   must accept any offer of suitable paid work and all referrals to job
    interviews

Partial capacity to work (PCW)

People with a partial capacity to work (PCW) have had an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) completed to determine the number of hours
they are able to participate.

People with a PCW of:

-   0-14 hours per week are not required to look for or undertake work
    or study. They will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
    attending a compulsory quarterly interview appointment with Services
    Australia. They may also choose to meet their mutual obligation
    requirements by undertaking paid work or self-employment within
    their assessed bandwidth of capacity. YA job seekers who would
    otherwise be identified as an early school leaver (ESL) are also
    included in this cohort
-   15-22 hours per week will be required to look for work, or undertake
    work or study of 15-22 hours per week. These job seekers can satisfy
    their mutual obligation requirements with sufficient work or study.
    They may be suspended or exited from Employment Provider Services
-   23-29 hours per week will be required to look for work, or undertake
    work or study of 23-29 hours per week and will be required to accept
    suitable paid work within this range. They can also satisfy their
    mutual obligation requirements if they are working at least 15 hours
    per week and the remuneration meets national minimum wage or
    relevant award requirements. They may be suspended or exited from
    Employment Provider Services

Temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC)

People with a temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) of 0-7 hours or
8-14 hours per week:

-   are not required to look for, or undertake work or study
-   may choose to participate in an activity on a voluntary basis
-   will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by attending a
    compulsory quarterly interview appointment with Services Australia

If the job seeker has been assessed as having a TRWC for less than 12
weeks duration, their compulsory requirement is lodgement of Reporting
Statements and compliance with any agency appointment requests. Youth
Allowance job seekers who would otherwise be identified as an early
school leaver (ESL) are also included in this cohort

Action if job seeker does not meet part-time work requirements

Job seekers with part-time work requirements, (including principal carer
parents and people with a reduced capacity) who fail to meet their
fortnightly work requirement without a reasonable excuse, should be
referred to an Employment Services Provider if they are not already
connected.

If a job seeker provides a reasonable excuse, they should be monitored
to ensure that they return to 30 hours work in the next fortnight. In
general, if they do not satisfy their mutual obligation requirements
within the next two consecutive fortnights, they:

-   will be considered to be no longer fully meeting their requirements
-   must be referred to an Employment Services Provider, and
-   will be required to meet their mutual obligation requirements by
    undertaking activities determined by their provider

Reasonable excuse could include:

-   a sick child
-   a cancelled shift
-   a short term reduction in hours due to public holidays
-   pupil-free days, or
-   failure of special disability related transport

There is an expectation that working hours will return to normal in the
next fortnight.

Breaks in activities

If a break or holiday that is outside of the job seeker's control occurs
during an approved activity and is of less than four weeks duration
there is no need to adjust the job seeker's requirements.

If the break or holiday is longer than four weeks, the job seeker must
undertake other suitable activities such as job search, for the period
of the break. If this occurs, the job seeker is referred to an
Employment Services Provider who is responsible for negotiating a Job
Plan.

If a job seeker who is meeting their mutual obligation requirements
through part-time work takes paid leave, regardless of the duration,
they are regarded as working for the number of hours suggested by their
leave payment rate. Therefore a job seeker on:

-   full-pay leave will be regarded as continuing to work their normal
    hours
-   half-pay leave will be regarded as working half their normal hours,
    and
-   leave without pay will be regarded as not working

Principal carers and breaks in part-time employment

Separate rules apply to principal carer parents where the activity is
casual part-time paid employment.

Breaks or holidays in casual part-time work beyond the control of the
parent of any duration can result in the principal carer parent being
required to undertake other suitable activities (job search) for any
fortnight in which the 30 hours part-time work requirement is not met.

Principal carers who have an approved activity of part-time work or a
combination of study and paid work may be entitled to access the
Allowable Break provisions over Christmas school holiday periods, if
affected by employer initiated temporary closures or reduced
hours/shifts over this duration.

Mature age 55-59 customers

From 20 September 2018, job seekers aged 55 to 59 who are within the
first 12 months of receiving their current income support payment, may
meet their mutual obligation requirements by undertaking:

-   30 hours per fortnight of paid work, or
-   30 hours per fortnight of a combination of paid work and approved
    voluntary work, at least 15 hours of which must be paid work

This includes principal carer parents or people with partial capacity to
work (PCW).

After receiving income support for a 12 month period, eligible job
seekers may fully satisfy their requirements by undertaking 30 hours or
more per fortnight of any combination of approved unpaid voluntary work
and suitable paid work/self-employment, including solely through
approved unpaid voluntary work

Job seekers aged 55 or over must be registered as Fully Eligible
Participants (FEP). If they are already satisfying their mutual
obligation requirements, they:

-   must remain connected with a provider
-   do not have job search requirements
-   are suspended from Employment Provider Services and be Services
    Australia managed job seekers
-   must accept any offer of suitable paid work (either full time or an
    increase in hours) and all referrals to job interviews

Job seekers aged 55 or over who do not satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements for one fortnight, and:

-   do not have a reasonable excuse, should be reconnected immediately
    to their provider
-   have a reasonable excuse, are given two further consecutive
    fortnights to return to regular hours. If they do not return to
    their hours within this time, they are considered to be no longer
    fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements. They will be
    reconnected with their Employment Services Provider, who determines
    their mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers 'on call' who are required to attend a 'base' or like place,
and are participating in a work-like activity for the duration of their
time on call, can have these hours counted towards their voluntary work
hours.

If the job seeker is going about their daily life, without participating
in any work-like activity while on call, does not have these hours
counted towards their voluntary work hours.

Mature age 60+ customers

Job seekers aged 60 to Age Pension age (including those who are
principal carer parents or people with partial capacity to work (PCW))
may meet their mutual obligation requirements by undertaking:

-   30 hours per fortnight of paid work, or
-   30 hours of approved voluntary work, or
-   30 hours per fortnight of a combination of paid work and approved
    voluntary work

Job seekers aged 60 or over must be registered as Fully Eligible
Participants (FEP). If they are already satisfying their mutual
obligation requirements, they

-   must remain connected with a provider
-   do not have job search requirements
-   are suspended from Employment Provider Services and be Services
    Australia managed job seekers
-   must accept any offer of suitable paid work (either full time or an
    increase in hours) and all referrals to job interviews

Job seekers aged 60 or over do not satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements for one fortnight, and:

-   do not have a reasonable excuse, should be reconnected immediately
    to their provider
-   have a reasonable excuse, are given two further consecutive
    fortnights to return to regular hours. If they do not return to
    their hours within this time, they are considered to be no longer
    fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements. They will be
    reconnected with their Employment Services Provider, who determines
    their mutual obligation requirements

People participating in Drug Court programs

Job seekers participating in Drug Court programs may be able to use this
activity to meet their mutual obligation requirements. The activity
should be included in their Job Plan for no more than six months at a
time.

The Job Plan should:

-   be reviewed and updated every six months, and
-   take into consideration the person's individual Drug Court program
    obligations and their ability to look for and take up suitable work
    or study

Participants accepted into the program must follow an individual case
management plan, which sets out the requirements of the 12 month
program. This program is strictly monitored by the court and any
deviance from the agreed program may result in the imposition of
sanctions and in the last resort, expulsion from the program.

The following activities are mandatory for all participants:

-   attendance at court on a weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis
-   regular attendance at counselling sessions organised by the
    Department of Health and the Probation and Parole Service (P and PS)
-   attendance at programs organised by the Department of Health
-   TAFE programs such as numeracy and literacy, English as a second
    language, anger management, self-esteem, preparing for employment
    etcetera
-   urinalysis testing, and home visits by P and PS

As participants will be required to undertake set activities at set
times, there may be limits to their ability to look for and accept
full-time work. On rare occasions, the Drug Court may direct people who
are currently working to stop work for a period of time so that they can
undertake intensive rehabilitation to help them overcome their drug
addiction. Most people in this situation will not qualify for income
support payment, but where they do qualify, a penalty for voluntary
unemployment is not to be applied.

Mutual obligation requirements for job seekers who fit into more than one participation category

The participation category that is the most beneficial to the job seeker
applies when job seekers with mutual obligation requirements meet more
than one of the following categories:

-   JSP mature age 55+
-   job seekers with a partial capacity to work or temporary reduced
    work capacity or
-   principal carers

The system will automatically place the job seeker into the most
appropriate participation category.

Example: a 57 year old of age job seeker with full time care of a child
aged 14 receiving JSP. The job seeker has mutual obligation
requirements. They meet the criteria for two participation categories:
JSP/SPL MA 55+' and 'Principal Carer on JSP/YA/SPL 15hrs wk'. The most
beneficial participation category for this job seeker is 'Principal
Carer on JSP/YA/SPL 15hrs wk'.

If a job seeker is both an Early School Leaver (ESL) and a principal
carer or assessed as having a partial capacity to work, the type of
activities approved are governed by their ESL status.

Mutual obligation requirements for newly arrived refugees

Newly arrived refugees receive an exemption from mutual obligation
requirements for their first 13 weeks in Australia.

Most newly arrived refugees are eligible to remain Centrelink managed
for the first 6 or 12 months after their arrival in Australia. There are
a number of factors that determine this eligibility. See Refugee and
humanitarian entrant service offer for more information.

If they meet the eligibility requirements to remain Centrelink managed,
during the Centrelink managed period, newly arrived refugees can fully
meet their mutual obligation requirements by participating in one or
more of the following activities:

-   Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)
-   Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
-   Voluntary participation in Workforce Australia
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE), if eligible
-   Part Time Work, if they're a principal carer of a child under 16 and
    they're undertaking 15 hours of part time work per week at or above
    the National Minimum wage, or
-   Voluntary Work, if they are mature age, 60+ and doing 15 hours of
    volunteer work per week

Special Benefit (SpB) job seekers

Mutual obligation requirements also apply to job seekers in receipt of
SpB who are required to meet SpB Nominated Visa Holders mutual
obligation requirements. See Mutual obligation requirements for Special
Benefit (SpB).

Job Seekers receiving a training wage

If a job seeker is participating full time in a state government
training program and is receiving a training wage, they are considered
to be employed. They are not eligible for JSP, YA (job seeker) or SpB.

PPS job seekers are not subject to this rule. PPS customers do not need
to meet the definition of 'unemployed' in order to qualify for payment.

If a job seeker is participating on a part time basis in a state
government training program, the training wage these job seekers are
paid while in the program is treated as earned income.

Job seekers who have completed 39 weeks of the New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) and applied for income support

NEIS Allowance is paid to NEIS participants for the first 39 weeks of
the 52 week program. After this time, they can apply for income support.
These job seekers fully satisfy their mutual obligation requirements by
completing the final 13 weeks of NEIS, if they are:

-   registered as JSRO job seekers, and
-   Centrelink managed for the remaining period of participation in the
    NEIS program

Contents

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Mutual obligation requirements during an Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Applying mutual obligation requirements during a Liquid Assets Waiting
Period (LAWP)

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers of dependent
children over the Christmas/New year period

Identifying barriers to participation for Indigenous customers

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Participation Summary screen

Mutual obligation requirements for people with an illness, injury or
disability

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Related links

Approved Activities for mature age customers

Community Development Program (CDP)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Interpreter Services

Moving to an Area of Lower Employment Prospects (MALEP) employment
related exclusion period

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Negotiating Job Plans

Payment pending review (PPR) of a decision to impose a 26 week MALEP
exclusion period

Self-employment as an approved activity

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referrals made by Employment
Services Providers

Youth Bonus Wage Subsidy (YBWS) 26 Week Suspension Period

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
