
Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals 001-10130000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the review process that applies to Targeted
Compliance Framework and Job Seeker Compliance Framework decisions.

Responsibility for the review process

Services Australia and the providers work together to apply job seeker
compliance legislation and policy. Services Australia is the delegate
for some decisions while other decisions are made by the provider. The
Employment Services System (ESS) or Services Australia system also
respond to transactions that were sent by a provider; these responses
may result in the suspension or cancellation of payments.

When a job seeker contacts Services Australia to request a review of a
decision, the decision they do not agree with must be identified in
order to establish who had responsibility for making the decision, and
whether it was made under social security law. This will inform who has
responsibility for explaining the decision and managing the review
process.

Targeted Compliance Framework

Providers are responsible for explaining Targeted Compliance Framework
decisions that are not based on social security law. The provider or the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

When the provider makes a decision as a delegate under social security
law, the provider is responsible for explaining the decision and initial
reconsideration of the decision. If the job seeker is not satisfied with
the outcome, the provider may refer the job seeker to the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment. When the job seeker is still not
satisfied with the outcome, Services Australia manages the remainder of
the review process.

Services Australia is responsible for explaining decisions it is
delegated to make under social security law and fully manages the review
process for these decisions.

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework providers have responsibility
for explaining the decision and for initial reconsideration of the
decision. Services Australia manages the remainder of the review
process.

When a job seeker contacts Services Australia about a Non-Attendance
Report (NAR), they should be advised to contact their provider to ensure
any outstanding issues are resolved so payment can be restored as
quickly as possible.

Services Australia are the delegates for Job Seeker Compliance Framework
decisions made under social security law and fully manage the review
process for these decisions.

Gathering further information and evidence

If a review of a decision is requested, the job seeker should be advised
that it is important to provide any further available information and/or
evidence that may be relevant to the decision. This will ensure relevant
circumstances are considered.

The Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer (WNPPD or
UNPP) responsible for the explanation and review of decision will
consider any additional information and/or evidence.

When the job seeker provides sufficient evidence to change the decision
under review, the PST-skilled Service Officer is responsible for varying
the decision using the Participation Compliance - Review Decision
workflow in Process Direct.

If there is not enough evidence to vary a decision, or the customer is
not satisfied with the new decision, the PST-skilled Service Officer
records the job seeker's review request via the Internal
Review/Explanation script and completes a quality check of the decision.

Progressing the review

All requests for review are quality checked by a Participation Solutions
Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer. The quality check is completed with
no further action if the job seeker is satisfied with the outcome.

If the job seeker is not satisfied with the outcome of the quality
check, the matter will then be referred to an Authorised Review Officer
(ARO) for consideration.

Once a decision is finalised by an ARO or the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT), PST-skilled Service Officers are responsible for
implementing the decision.

Timeframe for implementation of decision review

Once a decision is finalised by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT), this will be returned to the
Participation Solutions Team (PST) who conducted the quality check for
implementation.

An AAT decision must only be implemented when directed by the FOI and
Litigation Branch. The decision must be implemented within 7 days,
unless the job seeker faces immediate implementation of an adverse
decision without the opportunity to consider further appeal options.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Participation
Solutions Team (PST) and the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment, and, a matrix of Targeted Compliance Framework decisions.

Contents

Payment Pending Review (PPR) of decision to apply a penalty for
non-compliance

Implementing Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT second review) partial
stay orders

Implementing the outcome of a failure review or appeal

Related links

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Non-compliance events

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Conducting compliance investigations

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
