-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures to follow when exempting job
seekers from their mutual obligation requirements because of short term
caring responsibilities.

Job seekers with short term caring responsibilities

For ParentsNext participants with caring responsibilities, see
ParentsNext exits and exemptions.

Job seekers may be granted a temporary exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements when they have caring responsibilities that are
not expected to last longer than 13 weeks.

The job seeker will need to provide evidence of these responsibilities
in the form of a medical certificate or a letter from a medical
practitioner confirming the caring requirements. Job seekers may be
exempt from their mutual obligation requirements to undertake carer
responsibilities for up to 13 weeks. The exemption may be extended for
up to 13 weeks at a time.

If the caring responsibility is of a long term nature (6 months or
more), consider whether the job seeker is eligible to apply for Carer
Payment (CP).

Long term exemptions including for foster carers or home schooling may
be granted. See Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation
requirements due to special circumstances.

Note: where caring responsibilities are unforeseen and unavoidable, a
person who has claimed CP may be granted JobSeeker Payment (JSP) with an
exemption from their mutual obligation requirements while their CP claim
is being determined.

Principal carers with short term caring responsibilities

If the job seeker is a principal carer of a child who is temporarily ill
or injured, see Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation
requirements due to special circumstances.

Related links

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
