
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning to full-time study 001-19051528

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines payment options available to JobSeeker Payment
(JSP) customers who return to full-time study.

JSP customer returns to full-time study

When a JSP customer with mutual obligation requirements returns to
full-time study, determine if the customer will satisfy one of the 4
options below:

have the course approved under the short course guidelines

for JSP single principal carers:

-   have the course approved if they are granted Pensioner Education
    Supplement (PES), and
-   studying at least 30 hours per fortnight

qualify for Youth Allowance (YA) (student), Austudy or ABSTUDY, or

have their income support cancelled if they do not fit into any of the
above categories

Customers may continue to receive JSP while undertaking a full time
course under short course guidelines.

The job seeker is considered to be studying part-time if they are
undertaking a course that will last for less than one academic year. See
Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP).

Customers who identify as Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander may be eligible to claim ABSTUDY and can submit an ABSTUDY
claim 13 weeks in advance.

Note: JSP customers who are not subject to mutual obligation
requirements can study but will need to consider their options if mutual
obligation requirements commence. For example, they need to decide to
either claim a student payment or seek to have their course approved.
See the Resources page for scenarios.

Income support options

Service Officers should:

-   consider the personal circumstances of the JSP customer intending to
    commence a course
-   assist the customer to determine which payment may be more
    beneficial

Some points to consider when assessing the most beneficial payment
include:

-   JSP customers aged 22-24 are not eligible for YA as a full-time
    student if they are undertaking a course of less than 12 months
    duration
-   Customers who identify as Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
    Islander may be eligible for ABSTUDY
-   Payment rates for JSP, Austudy or ABSTUDY
-   Income test for JSP, Austudy or ABSTUDY
-   Working Credit and Student Income Bank limit, accrual and depletion
    rules
-   If the customer is a single principal carer studying an approved
    scholarship course, the payment rates for PES will remain the same
    for the period of the course
-   Whether the JSP customer will be disadvantaged by losing access to
    the level of support currently being provided by their employment
    services provider

The above list is not exhaustive and care should be taken to consider
the customer's individual situation when providing advice.

Qualification for Youth Allowance (YA) (student), Austudy or ABSTUDY

JSP customers aged 22-24 years:

-   who want to undertake a full-time course with a duration of less
    than 1 year, are not qualified for YA. They have reached the maximum
    age for YA and should seek short course approval from their
    employment services provider (or in limited circumstances by
    Services Australia)
-   can only transfer to YA (student) if the course duration is 12
    months or longer. They will need to submit an online claim for YA
    (student) to test their eligibility

Customers who identify as Australian Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander may be eligible for ABSTUDY. There is no restriction on age or
the length of the course.

Only customers aged 25 years and over are eligible for Austudy.

Parenting Payment customer transfer to JSP and continuing study

Parenting Payment (PP) customers who transfer to JSP or Youth Allowance
(YA) (job seeker) can continue their approved study for the remainder of
their course. This applies even when a customer has more than 12 months
left to complete their course. This study satisfies the customer's
mutual obligation requirements for the remainder of the course.

PP customers receiving Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) when they
transfer to JSP or YA (job seeker) may retain their PES payment. The PES
payment may continue while in receipt of JSP or YA (job seeker) until
their course is completed.

Full time study and principal carers

Principal carers in receipt of JSP or YA who wish to undertake or return
to full-time study are subject to the same full-time short course
approval rules as other JSP or YA customers.

Principal carers and PES

JSP single principal carers can apply for Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES). Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers who transfer to JSP as a
single principal carer continue to qualify for PES (where all other
qualifications are met). These customers are not required to continue in
the same course of study to retain access to PES. JSP single principal
carers undertaking study must apply for PES and meet PES approval.

Employment Services Provider approved study

Customers negotiate study activities with their employment services
provider.

Services Australia:

can only approve short courses for customers before they enter
employment services, and under limited conditions

is responsible for determining payment eligibility. JSP may be cancelled
by Services Australia if the employment services provider includes study
in the customer's Job Plan that:

-   is clearly not of a vocational nature, or
-   does not meet the short course duration requirements

The Resources page contains an example that outlines the process of a
customer returning to full-time study and an example of circumstances
where a full-time student may still qualify for JSP.

Related links

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to (or continuing in)
part-time study

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Working Credit

Participation with Workforce Australia

Determining minimum and maximum age for Youth Allowance (YA)

Eligibility for Austudy

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
