
Employment assistance for job seekers with drug and/or alcohol conditions 001-02230060

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about job seekers identified as
having drug and/or alcohol conditions and how they should be assisted
into an employment assistance service.

Assessing customer suitability

Job seekers who have a drug and/or alcohol condition may not be suitable
for employment services such as Disability Employment Services (DES),
Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) and Workforce Australia.

In some cases, the employment assistance service provider may decide
that a started referral or current placement is not suitable for the
customer, and ask for a new assessment to be made. Any reassessment
process is generally undertaken by Assessment Services.

How drug and/or alcohol conditions become evident

Information about drug and/or alcohol conditions may be disclosed by the
job seeker, or become evident at any time during the assessment and
referral process. For example:

-   From medical information provided by the job seeker or discussed by
    the job seeker during a Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
    interview as a potential barrier to finding and sustaining suitable
    employment. Where a job seeker identifies as having a drug and/or
    alcohol condition that is a potential barrier to finding and
    sustaining suitable employment, the JSCI will trigger an Employment
    Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   From information available to the Assessor either already on the job
    seeker's record (for example, disclosed during the JSCI), or
    disclosed by the job seeker to the Assessor
-   New information about a job seeker's circumstances may be disclosed,
    or become apparent to a provider after the referral is made. This
    new information may only now be available for the first time, and so
    may not have been taken into account in previous assessments, such
    as the JSCI, or the ESAt report. In some cases the circumstances may
    have been disclosed or apparent, but the provider may have a
    different opinion about the impact of the drug and/or alcohol
    conditions on the job seeker's capacity to benefit from the service
    to which they have been referred

Referral is not appropriate

Where a job seeker with a drug and/or alcohol condition is referred to
an employment service and the referral is accepted by the service as
appropriate, normal processes apply. If the employment assistance
service provider believes the job seeker will not benefit from the
service because they have a drug and/or alcohol condition, further
reassessment and re-referral action may be required.

If the job seeker was referred to the employment assistance service
provider by an Assessor, the service provider has 28 days to contact the
Assessor to dispute the referral.

Referral disputed within 28 days

Where the referral is disputed within 28 days of the date of assessment,
the Assessor will reconsider whether the referral was appropriate, and
may decide to change the assistance recommendation to a different
service. If the Assessor decides that referral to another type of
service is more appropriate, they will update the existing report.

The service provider will record a change in circumstances where
appropriate in the Job Seeker Snapshot and refer the customer for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if one of the following applies:

-   The referral is disputed by the employment assistance service
    provider more than 28 days after the date of assessment by the
    Assessor
-   The referral to the provider was not made by an Assessor and was
    made on the basis of a current and valid assessment of the
    customer's work capacity

Where possible the customer will be referred back to the same Assessor
who completed the original assessment. If the Assessor decides that
another type of service is more appropriate, they will indicate this in
the ESAt report.

Other options

If other funded employment assistance services are not considered
suitable for the customer, the Assessor should examine other disability
employment assistance services referral options and state government or
community options that may be available.

This may include organisations that offer drug rehabilitation or
counselling. A suitable time in the future should be discussed with the
customer to contact them again about employment assistance.

Referral coding for non-acceptance outcome

Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) service providers may advise
Services Australia if a customer has not been accepted due to a drug
and/or alcohol condition/s. If it has been confirmed that the customer
is being referred to a different service, the non-acceptance should be
updated on the customer's record.

For Disability Employment Services (DES), the referral will be
automatically finalised on the customer's record.

Related links

Assessment Services

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Change of circumstances while receiving services from an Employment
Services Provider

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
