-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about job seekers participating in
Skills for Education and Employment (SEE). When a job seeker starts SEE,
participation is documented on their record automatically. Job seekers
may undertake SEE on a part-time basis (10 to 19 hours per week), or a
full-time basis (20-25 hours per week).

Placement in SEE

Job seekers who agree to participate in SEE are referred to an
Employment Services Provider to update their Job Plan.

Centrelink managed job seekers may also participate in SEE. An update to
their Job Plan is not required as the job seeker will already be fully
meeting requirements via another approved activity. SEE participation
alone is not usually enough to meet the criteria to be Centrelink
managed.

Prior to 01 January 2022, job seekers who are referred to SEE are
eligible for up to 650 training hours over a two year period. From 01
January 2022, this limit no longer applies and job seekers can complete
a mainstream VET qualification up to and including Certificate III or a
foundation skills qualification up to and including Certificate IV
level. See:

-   Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE), and
-   Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in SEE

Most job seekers are still required to undertake some job search or
another approved activity, while participating in SEE. Part-time or full
time SEE participation may not fully satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements.

Job search activities are not required for SEE participants who are:

-   a principal carer parent, participating for 15 to 19 hours per week
    in SEE
-   a job seeker with a partial capacity to work, when the number of SEE
    hours meets their mutual obligation requirements, or
-   Early School Leavers claiming Youth Allowance (job seeker), who are
    participating in SEE on a full time basis. This meets their mutual
    obligation requirements, when it is recorded by their provider as an
    approved activity in their Job Plan

Provider notifications

SEE program providers:

monitor the participant's attendance, and

take appropriate action to withdraw a participant, where:

-   they are not participating adequately, and
-   are not expected to satisfactorily complete SEE

The provider's notification that a job seeker has been withdrawn:

-   is sent to Services Australia electronically, and
-   updates the job seeker's record automatically

The Resources page contains a link to the Participation Programmes and
Compliance Section.

Related links

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

Qualifying study for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

RapidConnect

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
