-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Urgent - Please read Network News Update (NNU) - Capability Assessment
Workflow issues (12731)

For Service Officers with WNPPD access only.

This document outlines information for conducting Capability Assessments
under the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Capability Assessment

Capability Assessments are an evidence based review conducted by the
Participation Solutions Team (PST). Job seekers must be referred to PST
so the Capability Assessment can be completed. This will build on the
most recent Capability Interview conducted by the job seeker's provider.

Where possible, the Capability Assessment is completed the day the job
seeker contacts. In limited situations, the participation suspension can
be lifted by PST, but only when there is a valid reason to do so.

In some instances, a Capability Assessment may be held pending evidence
from a job seeker where they have advised of impacting circumstances.
The job seeker will be given an opportunity to provide evidence to
ensure the requirements in their Job Plan are achievable and
appropriate.

During the Capability Assessment:

the job seeker will be:

-   given the opportunity to disclose any new circumstances and how they
    impact their ability to meet their mutual obligation requirements
-   allowed to explain the impact of known circumstances already
    identified on their record, including any change in severity and how
    frequently their ability to meet their mutual obligation
    requirements is impacted

PST staff will:

-   if necessary, consult with a PST-skilled social worker to assess
    impacts that require further investigation, including family and
    domestic violence
-   consider if the compulsory requirements in the job seeker's current
    Job Plan are appropriate for their assessed capacity and
    circumstances

When a Capability Assessment is required

A Capability Assessment is triggered when a Capability Interview has
found the job seeker was capable of meeting their compulsory
requirements, and:

-   a total of 5 demerits are accrued in 6 active months, or
-   the job seeker is fast tracked for non-attendance or inappropriate
    behaviour at a job interview, or
-   they have not acted on a job referral, or
-   the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) triggers
    an assessment is required

The provider notifies the job seeker:

-   of their reconnection requirement to have a Capability Assessment
    completed by Services Australia, and
-   their payment will remain suspended, until the reconnection
    requirement of the Capability Assessment is completed, and
-   if the reconnection requirement to have a Capability Assessment is
    not met within 4 weeks their participation payments will be
    automatically cancelled

Additional non-compliance while a Capability Assessment is outstanding

While a Capability Assessment is outstanding, further demerit accrual
stops until it has been completed. The job seeker is eligible for
payments again once the Capability Assessment is completed and all other
outstanding reconnection requirements have been met.

Capability Assessment outcomes

The job seeker will enter the financial penalty zone when the outcome of
the Capability Assessment is capable. This means the job seeker:

-   is getting the correct level of service for their assessed capacity
-   does not require an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
-   is capable of meeting the requirements included in their current Job
    Plan, and
-   has a Job Plan which does not contain any errors

Once deemed capable and in the financial penalty zone, any further
mutual obligation failures will result in either:

-   a financial penalty, or
-   payment cancellation if reasonable excuse cannot be established

If a Workforce Australia participant registered with Workforce Australia
Online is assessed as being capable during a Capability Assessment, they
will be transitioned to a Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider.

A Capability Assessment outcome of not capable means a determination has
been made that:

-   the job seeker is not capable of meeting one or more of their
    current, compulsory requirements, or
-   there are errors in the Job Plan, or
-   action taken during the Capability Assessment has resulted in either
    a change of service level or referral for an ESAt

An outcome of not capable means the job seeker returns to the green zone
and their provider is responsible for re-negotiating a new Job Plan.

Further Capability Assessments

If the job seeker returns to the green zone, their demerit count is
reset to zero. A further Capability Assessment will be triggered if the
job seeker:

-   accrues another 5 demerits in 6 active months, or
-   is fast tracked

Occasionally, a job seeker who moves into the financial penalty zone
following a Capability Assessment may be returned to either the green or
warning zone. This may occur when the provider removes a demerit
retrospectively.

Capability Assessment review process

Services Australia is not involved in disputes with the job seeker over
the accrual of demerits. Refer job seekers to their provider if they
wish to dispute their demerits. If they are not satisfied following the
discussion with their provider, they can contact the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations.

A Capability Assessment is an administrative process that occurs before
a job seeker can be moved to the financial penalty zone. It is not a
legislated decision under Social Security Law and the outcome is not
appealable.

If a job seeker wants to discuss the terms of their Job Plan, or the
Targeted Compliance Framework zone they are in, they must contact their
Employment Services Provider. If the job seeker is in online employment
services, they must contact the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations' Digital Services Contact Centre (DCSL).

Related Links

Participation Compliance Hub

Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation requirements

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
