
Identifying people with a partial capacity to work 001-03030060

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure on how to identify and assess if a
customer has a partial capacity to work. The procedure applies to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Parenting Payment (PP)
and Special Benefit (SpB) granted under JSP conditions.

PCW eligibility

Customers are considered to have a partial capacity to work (PCW) if
they have an ongoing physical, intellectual or psychiatric impairment
that prevents them from:

-   working at least 30 hours per week at or above the relevant minimum
    wage independently of a program of support within the next 2 years,
    and
-   undertaking any training (mainstream or disability specific) that
    would enable them to do such work within the next 2 years

Temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) is assessed as a work capacity of
0-29 hours per week that is going to last less than 2 years, as it is
not a permanent condition.

ESAt

Partial capacity to work or temporary reduced work capacity is
determined by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). For the purposes
of mutual obligation requirements a partial capacity to work (PCW)
applies indefinitely unless a change in circumstances occurs. This means
that the PCW applies regardless of the age of the ESAt that determined
the PCW. A PCW can only change if a new PCW bandwidth is determined via
an ESAt. Before requesting an ESAt, staff should check to see if there
is already a current and valid assessment of the customer's work
capacity on the customer's record.

If a current and valid assessment of the customer's work capacity is not
available, or their circumstances were not assessed in the previous
ESAt, a request for an ESAt is required to determine their current work
capacity. Note: a request for an ESAt should not delay the decision
about a Temporary Incapacity exemption. The Service Officer should make
the decision based on whatever existing evidence is available to them.

Note: an assessment of the customer's work capacity via an ESAt may also
be triggered as a result of the Job Seeker Snapshot, if one is required.
In these cases a medical certificate is also required prior to
requesting an ESAt.

DSP

Customers will not be eligible for Disability Support Pension (DSP) at
the initial assessment or DSP transition review if they are:

-   able to work 15 hours per week, where wages are at or above the
    relevant minimum wage in the open labour market, independently of
    support, within the next 2 years, or
-   able to be retrained for such work within the next 2 years with a
    program of assistance (including disability specific assistance)

These customers will be assessed for JSP, YA or PP with a PCW if their
ongoing impairment prevents them from working for at least 30 hours per
week at or above the relevant minimum wage within a 2 year period.

Job seekers with a current and future work capacity of less than 15
hours per week generally are medically qualified for DSP. However, they
may not qualify for DSP for other reasons (for example, residency). If
so, they may claim JSP/YA/PP with a partial capacity to work. In some
cases, a customer may choose to claim JSP/YA/PP instead of claiming DSP.

Current work capacity and future capacity to work

Customers who are assessed at review or at initial assessment as having
a current capacity to work of less than 15 hours per week at or above
the relevant minimum wage independently of support, but are expected to
be able to work 15 or more hours per week within the next 2 years with a
program of assistance (including disability specific assistance), will
be assessed for JSP, YA or PP unless another payment is more
appropriate.

Eligibility for JSP/YA when working

Customers with a partial capacity to work of 15 hours or more per week
due to a disability will be deemed 'unemployed' and fully satisfying
their mutual obligation requirements when undertaking sufficient work
of:

-   15 or more hours per week in suitable paid employment or
    self-employment
-   where remuneration, or net business income, is at least equivalent
    to 15 hours a week at the national minimum wage

There is no requirement to seek an increased level of employment.

Note: job seekers with an assessed PCW/TRWC of 0-14 hours per week are
able to fully meet their requirements through paid work or
self-employment and are not subject to the 30 hours per week rule.

Mutual obligation requirements

For people with a partial capacity to work, determine mutual obligation
requirements based on the assessed work capacity. The customer's Job
Plan is modified accordingly by Services Australia if the job seeker is
Centrelink managed and by the provider if the job seeker is provider
managed.

The ESAt assesses capacity to work according to the following
bandwidths:

-   0-7 hours per week
-   8-14 hours per week
-   15-22 hours per week
-   23-29 hours per week

A customer with a PCW may provide a medical certificate when they have a
temporary medical condition or an exacerbation of their permanent
condition. This can lead to a further reduction in work capacity. Mutual
obligation requirements can be modified further or an exemption applied.

Job seekers who have a partial capacity to work of less than 14 hours
per week and do not have an exemption may need to attend Quarterly
Participation Interviews (QTI).

Identification on the system

Customers assessed as having a PCW will have the capacity to work
displayed as a category on the Customer Target Category Summary (CTCS)
screen. Temporary reduced work capacity will also have an end date
recorded due to the condition or incapacity being considered temporary.

The First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow, or the Participation
Interview will identify customers with a current assessment of partial
capacity to work.

Concessions

Customers who have been assessed as having a PCW will be entitled to a
Pensioner Concession Card (PCC) and will retain the PCC for 12 months
after ceasing payments due to employment. They will also be eligible for
Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) and Telephone Allowance (TAL).

PES

Customers who lodged a claim and qualified for DSP between 11 May 2005
and 30 June 2006 who have since transferred to JSP, YA or Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP) with a PCW and who are in receipt of PES will
only remain eligible for Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) while
completing the course of education or study for which they were
receiving PES while in receipt of DSP.

YDS

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS) is paid to full-time students and
Australian Apprentices in receipt of YA and ABSTUDY. The customer must
be 21 years of age and under and have been assessed by an Assessor as
having a partial capacity to work of less than 30 hours per week.

Independence status for YA

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work will be independent for the
purpose of YA (job seeker) for the period of time that they are assessed
as having a partial capacity to work.

Related links

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or temporary reduced work
capacity

Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a temporary reduced
work capacity (TRWC)

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA) (job seeker)

Assessment Services

Youth Disability Supplement (YDS)

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
