
Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview 001-10070070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the job seeker compliance policy and procedures
that apply when assessing a job seeker's non-attendance at a job
interview and situations during a job interview where a job seeker
intentionally behaves in a manner that results in an offer of employment
not being made.

Requirement to attend and satisfactorily participate in job interviews

Job seekers receiving a participation payment are expected to attend all
job interviews their provider has arranged or which they have secured
for themselves. When attending a job interview, job seekers are expect
to present themselves, speak and behave in a manner that gives them the
best opportunity to secure employment.

The Job Seeker Statement included with all Job Plans contains the
compulsory requirement to attend all job interviews and do their best to
get the job. However, the absence of such a clause in a job seeker's Job
Plan, or where a job seeker has no Job Plan, does not remove the
requirement for a job seeker with mutual obligation requirements in
receipt of a participation payment to attend a job interview and behave
in an appropriate manner.

Where the provider arranges the job interview, the provider has
responsibility for ensuring the job seeker receives proper notification
and reasonable notice. The provider also has responsibility for
monitoring the job seeker's attendance and contacting the job seeker
where they have been advised of inappropriate behaviour during the job
interview.

Where a job seeker fails to attend a job interview or behaves
inappropriately this is managed using the relevant job seeker compliance
system to ensure that job seekers who are not genuine in their efforts
to gain employment are appropriately held to account for their actions.

Note: participation requirements for ParentsNext participants do not
include requirements to look for work.

Job seeker unable to attend a job interview

Job seekers who are unable to attend a job interview arranged by their
provider are expected to notify their provider prior to the scheduled
start time and make alternative arrangements where appropriate. This
reflects the same expectations that an employer would have of an
employee.

Behaving in an inappropriate manner while at a job interview

Job seekers are expected to behave in an appropriate manner while
participating in a job interview.

Intentional inappropriate behaviour or conduct at a job interview that
could be expected to result in an offer of employment not being made,
may demonstrate the job seeker is not genuine in their efforts to find
and undertake suitable work.

This type of behaviour may include:

-   dressing in a way that is clearly inappropriate for the interview
-   displaying an obvious lack of interest in the job on offer, for
    example, a lack of responsiveness to the employer's questions or
    explanation about the job on offer
-   using inappropriate language
-   rudeness or verbal abuse, or
-   any other offensive or inappropriate behaviour at the interview

Circumstances that are not within the job seeker’s control cannot be
considered deliberate misbehaviour.

-   The relevant job seeker compliance system is used to manage
    situations where a job seeker behaves inappropriately at a job
    interview, and it was reasonably foreseeable that this behaviour
    would result in an offer of employment not being made.

Job interview related compliance event occurring on the weekend

Where the job seeker fails to attend or satisfactorily participate in a
job interview that was scheduled for a weekend, the compliance action
depends on the job seeker compliance system they are managed under.

-   Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, a mutual obligation failure
    can be committed on a weekend, in which case the failure event date
    will be the date the job interview was scheduled.
-   Under the Job Seeker Compliance Model, No Show, No Pay failures
    relating to attendance or participation in an activity included in
    the Job Plan cannot occur over a weekend other than where a job
    seeker has been referred to a job interview on a weekend and they
    have either not attended, behaved or presented in a manner that
    resulted in an offer of employment not being made

Managing non-compliance with job interview requirements - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, when a job seeker does not
attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview a mutual
obligation failure has been committed.

Following a mutual obligation failure reported by the job seeker's
provider, participation payments are not payable until the job seeker
contacts their provider and meets reconnection requirements notified by
their provider. Participation payments are cancelled if the reconnection
requirement is not met within four weeks.

When providers report that a mutual obligation failure has been
committed, the job seeker’s participation payments are automatically
suspended. The Services Australia system lifts the payment suspension
when the provider electronically notifies the conditions for lifting the
payment suspension have been met.

To reflect the serious nature of this type of mutual obligation failure,
job seekers in the warning zone will fast track to the next assessment
(either a Capability Interview or Capability Assessment) if the provider
is not satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for failing to attend
or satisfactorily participate in a job interview.

Job seekers in the financial penalty zone will incur a financial penalty
unless:

-   on contact with the job seeker to discuss the failure, their
    provider closes the Non-Compliance Report (NCR) because they are
    satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for not attending the
    job interview or the behaviour was not within the job seeker’s
    control, or
-   the job seeker satisfies Services Australia during a compliance
    investigation that they had reasonable excuse for non-attendance or
    the behaviour was not within their control. Participation Solutions
    Team (PST)-skilled Services Officers are responsible for conducting
    these compliance investigations

Managing non-compliance with job interview requirements - Job Seeker Compliance Model

Under the Job Seeker Compliance Model, failure to attend or
satisfactorily participate at a job interview is managed under the No
Show, No Pay policy. This is a key component of the Job Seeker
Compliance Model and is ‘work-like’ in its approach. It is intended to
reinforce the conditionality of participation payments in return for
mutual obligation requirements while also reinforcing behaviours
generally expected in the workforce, for example, turning up on time,
ringing beforehand when unable to attend, and behaving in an appropriate
manner while in attendance.

No Show, No Pay failure

A No Show, No Pay failure occurs where a Community Development Program
(CDP) job seeker does not attend a job interview, or intentionally
behaves in a manner during a job interview that might be expected to
result in an offer of employment not being made.

A No Show, No Pay failure is generated for investigation by Services
Australia when a provider submits a Participation Report. Participation
Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers are responsible for
investigating the incident and determining whether a No Show, No Pay
failure has occurred.

Consequence of a No Show, No Pay failure

If applied, a No Show, No Pay failure will result in a No Show, No Pay
penalty for the day the non-compliance occurred.

Applied No Show, No Pay failures contribute to a pattern of
non-compliance for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA). An
automatic CCA will be generated based on the number of No Show, No Pay
failures applied in a serious failure assessment period. When a decision
is made that a CDP job seeker has been persistently non-compliant, a
serious failure may be applied.

The Resources page contains the text to be used in the Q062 letter sent
to a job seeker who has a No Show, No Pay employment related failure
occurring on a weekend.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a No Show, No Pay Failure

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

No Show, No Pay failure penalties

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
