
Defence Force Reserves as an approved activity 001-09070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about approved requirements for a
member of the Defence Force Reserves. Defence Force reservists can
undertake a variety of activities as part of their normal training, for
example, annual training camps and programmed courses. They can also
work for the Defence Force on a full-time or part-time basis.

Eligible payments

Customers receiving the following payments may be able to reduce or
fully meet their mutual obligation requirements when undertaking Defence
Force Reserve Training or Defence Force Reserve Service:

-   all JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) or
    Special Benefit (SpB) recipients, who are principal carers and
    people assessed as having a partial capacity to work
-   Parenting Payment (PP) recipients who have mutual obligation
    requirements

Note: job seekers who are not Principal Carers or do not have a Partial
Capacity to Work can undertake Defence Force Reserves, but it will not
fully meet their mutual obligation requirements. Job seekers who are
Provider managed should discuss participation in Defence Force Reserves
with their Provider who can advise what impact it will have on their
mutual obligation requirements.

Meeting mutual obligation requirements

Defence Force Reserve Training or Defence Force Reserve Service must be
recorded on the Activities and Exemptions (AEX) page before it fully
meets mutual obligation requirements.

Customers participating in a Defence Force Reserves including training
camp, or allied training, are considered to be fully meeting their
mutual obligation requirements, will be Centrelink managed and must not
have any job search requirement, for the duration of the requirement.
There is no limit on the amount, start date or duration of training,
provided the training is appropriately verified.

Services Australia can approve Defence Force Reserve Service as a
requirement for Principal Carers and Partial Capacity to Work job
seekers who are either Centrelink managed or Provider managed. If the
agency approves a Provider managed job seeker's participation in Defence
Force Reserves as fully meeting their requirements, the job seeker will
be suspended from Employment Provider Services.

If Services Australia approves a Community Development Program (CDP)
managed job seeker's participation in Defence Force Reserves as fully
meeting their requirements, the job seeker will become CDP Centrelink
managed and suspend from the CDP provider.

Provider Managed Job Seekers

Defence Force Reserve Service can contribute to satisfying mutual
obligation requirements, but may not meet all mutual obligation
requirements. Participation in this activity can be approved by the
customers' Employment Services Provider and may reduce their points
target under the Points Based Activation system.

Defence Force Reserve training

A training camp is a programmed camp or a related training requirement,
and can include:

-   induction and employment training courses for new recruits
-   a compulsory annual camp, which can last between 2 and 4 weeks
-   training courses, subsequent continuation or on-the-job training and
    other recognised training activities which can occur outside
    Australia
-   the Defence Indigenous Development Program (DIDP) which is run in
    the Northern Territory. Participants remain qualified for income
    support, and they are considered to be fully meeting their mutual
    obligation requirements during the program. Participation in the
    DIDP should be treated the same as general Defence Force Reserve
    Training, and recorded as such on the AEX screen. DIDP is a 7 month
    residential program

Verification of attendance

Attendance at a programmed training camp or recognised training
requirement is usually verified by the equivalent of a signed training
notice or signal notice. Where a training notice is not issued, a
reservist must produce authorised documentary evidence of the training
requirement. If the requirement cannot be verified as training, it
should be regarded as Defence Force Reserve Service.

-   For reservists attending an annual training camp, Service Officers
    should sight a copy of the reservist's Parade Card or an instruction
    that outlines the dates of the camp
-   For reservists attending a course, Service Officers should sight a
    Department of Defence Signal (notice) listing the details of the
    dates and times of the training and a list of people 'panelled' to
    attend the training. Usually, the signal only contains details of
    training courses included in the overall Training Command Schedule
    for the Defence Forces. Service Officers should be certain that the
    person is attending programmed training before approving the
    requirement as fully meeting their mutual obligation requirements

Training allowance

Reservists receive a daily allowance to cover their costs while in
training. The amount of this allowance varies according to a reservist's
rank and in what capacity they are serving (for example, an allowance
could be higher for a period of time where the reservist is at a
residential training camp). During the common induction training a
recruit would receive an allowance of approximately $66 per day. This
allowance is tax-free, and is not considered income under the Social
Security Act 1991; therefore it is not assessed as income when
calculating the customer's payment.

Defence Force Reserve service

Reserve service is where a reservist receives tax-free salary paid on a
daily rate. This Defence Force Reserve income is tax-free, and not
considered income under the Social Security Act 1991. Therefore, it is
not assessed as income when calculating the customer's payment,
regardless of the number of hours of reserve service the customer is
doing each fortnight, or the length of the customers reserve service.
This applies to all job seeker payment types.

Continuous full-time reserve service

A customer will be considered to be undertaking continuous full-time
service for social security purposes if the reservist's employment
agreement with the Defence Force Reserves specifically states that the
service is 'continuous full-time service'. Where a reservist is engaged
under such an agreement, the reservist's income for their continuous
full-time service is taxable and is not exempt from the income test.
This applies regardless of the length of the customer's continuous
full-time service, and applies to all customer payment types. This
income from continuous full-time service will generally be assessable
under the income test in the fortnight in which is it earned.

Qualification for JSP, YA and SpB customers

Customers on JSP, YA or SpB must remain 'unemployed' to continue to
qualify for payment. Therefore, there are limitations on when, and for
how long, Defence Force Reserve Service can be undertaken.

If a customer on JSP, YA or SpB commences continuous full-time reserve
service, they are considered 'employed' and therefore no longer
qualified for payment.

Additionally, if a customer on JSP, YA or SpB undertakes more than 12
weeks of reserve service in a 12 month period that is not 'continuous
full-time service', but is for more than 35 hours per week, they are
considered 'employed'. In this situation, payment must be cancelled once
the limit of 12 weeks at 35 hours or more per week has been exceeded.

Reserve service of 35 or more hours per week should only be approved to
meet the mutual obligation requirement for customers who have been on
payment for 3 or more months. This is to avoid the possibility of
reservists leaving paid work to attend full-time reserve service and
claim payment in order to take advantage of this policy. This means that
customers who are cancelled due to exceeding the 12 week limit or
commencing continuous full-time reserve service must reclaim payment and
wait for 3 months before reserve service of 35 or more hours per week
will be approved again.

In the event that a customer commences Defence Force Reserve Service of
35 hours or more per week before the 3 month waiting period is served,
their payment must be immediately cancelled.

Defence Force JSP, YA and SpB principal carers

Principal carers who are engaged in regular paid reserve service of:

-   30 or more hours per fortnight, are considered to be fully meeting
    their mutual obligation requirements
-   less than 30 hours per fortnight, will have their mutual obligation
    requirements determined by either the agency or their Employment
    Services Provider according to who is managing the job seeker

Defence Force Reserves for PP customers

Qualification for PP is not dependent on the customer being considered
unemployed, so PP customers who undertake any amount of reserve service,
including full-time service, can remain on PP. There are no limitations
on how long a customer must be in receipt of PP before reserve service
can be approved as meeting their mutual obligation requirements, or for
how long they can undertake reserve service in any 12 month period.

Any income received from reserve service will be exempt from the income
test, unless it is from continuous full-time reserve service.

PP customers who are engaged in reserve service of:

-   30 or more hours per fortnight, are considered to be fully meting
    their mutual obligation requirements and will not have any job
    search requirements
-   less than 30 hours per fortnight, will have their mutual obligation
    requirements determined by either the agency or their Employment
    Services Provider according to who is managing the job seeker

Whether the reserve service is of a continuous full-time nature does not
impact on whether the requirement fully meets mutual obligation
requirements for PP customers. This only affects whether the income is
exempt or not.

Notification requirements

If a customer is undertaking either full-time or part-time reserve
service, they must contact Services Australia or their provider to have
their details updated and income recorded (if full-time continuous
service).

The Resources page contains a summary table that indicates the effect of
Defence Force Reserve Activity on JSP/YA customers and SpB, the evidence
required and the treatment of the income received, and examples of
mutual obligation requirements for principal carers undertaking Defence
Force Reserve Service (this includes the DIDP).

Related links

Mutual obligation requirements

Approved mutual obligation requirements for Centrelink managed Job Plans

Exempt income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
