
Independence for Youth Allowance (YA) customers 001-04060000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines factors to consider when assessing independence
for YA customers.

Independence

A young person's independence affects their eligibility and/or rate of
YA. Young people:

-   aged 22 years or older are considered independent
-   under 22 need to meet 1 of the criteria below to be considered
    independent

Customers not meeting requirements

A young person may consider themselves to be independent because they do
not receive any support from, or have not lived with, a parent or carer
for a period of time.

If a YA customer does not meet the requirements of any of the
independence criteria, they will be assessed as dependent and subject to
the Parental Means Test.

Customers not meeting the Independence criteria may be eligible for the
away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA) customers.

Criteria for independence

A YA customer is regarded as independent if:

-   they are, or have been married or a member of a YA couple
-   they have, or have had a dependent child
-   they have been self-supporting through full-time paid employment
-   they have been self-supporting through paid employment from a
    regional or remote area (full-time students only)
-   they have been self-supporting through approved agricultural work
    (full-time students only)
-   they are
    an orphan
-   they are a refugee. Note: a refugee is only considered independent
    under this criterion where their parents are not in Australia and
    they are not substantially dependent on another person on a long
    term basis
-   they are in State care, provided they are not living with a parent
-   their parents cannot exercise responsibilities
-   they have a partial capacity to work (YA job seeker only)
-   it is unreasonable for the customer to live at home (UTLAH)
-   they are specially disadvantaged with respect to employment
-   they are 22 years of age or older

Specific verification may be required in some cases.

A customer who meets 1 of the above criteria and is 15 years of age can
be paid if they:

-   are also over the minimum school leaving age for the state or
    territory in which they reside, or
-   have a formal exemption from attending school if they are under the
    minimum school leaving age for the state or territory in which they
    reside

Customers under 15 or under the school leaving age may need to be
assessed for Special Benefit (SpB).

Note: customers may have previously established their independence with
a non-reviewable category. This must be taken into account when
assessing YA claims.

COVID-19 concession period for YA customers

A COVID-19 concession period may apply for YA customers:

-   applying for the self-supporting independence criteria, and
-   impacted by COVID-19 between 25 March to 24 September 2020

Check independence through work history tool

The Check independence through work history online tool is available on
the Services Australia website. It helps customers aged under 22 years
check if they meet the independence criteria based on their work
history.

Verifying employment independence eligibility

In addition to calculating income to verify earnings, a customer may
still be required to supply their payslips within 14 days to verify
their independence claim. Before completing the independence assessment
Service Officers need to verify the customer's evidence of employment.
The customer can post the evidence, upload it online or take it to their
local service centre within 14 days.

Customers do not need to provide evidence of employment during the
COVID-19 concession period. Where applicable this will automatically
contribute towards the independence criteria. Periods outside the
COVID-19 concession period retain the same evidence requirements.

When the customer provides evidence, to verify they meet independence by
self-supporting through full-time paid employment, use the Independence
Assessment Tool on the Resources page to calculate verified hours.

The Resources page contains links to the Independence Assessment Tool,
the Services Australia website and relevant forms.

Contents

Assessing independence when a customer is/was married or a member of a
couple

Assessing independence when a customer has, or has had, a dependent
child

Assessing independence when a customer is self-supporting through
full-time paid employment

Assessing independence when a student has undertaken approved
agricultural work

Assessing independence when a customer is an orphan

Assessing independence when a customer is a refugee

Assessing independence when a customer is in State care

Assessing independence when a customer's parents cannot exercise
responsibilities

Assessing independence for customers with a partial capacity to work

Assessing independence for full time or concessional study load students
from regional and remote areas under the self-supporting through
employment criterion

Independent and dependent customers living together

Reviews of independence for Youth Allowance

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Check independence through work history online

Related links

Assessing unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or
receiving Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP),
Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assessing payment rates and independence for Disability Support Pension
customers under 21 years

Income Test for single allowance customers

Income Test for partnered allowance customers

Personal Income Test and Income Bank for ABSTUDY, Austudy and Youth
Allowance (YA) students and Australian Apprentices

Personal Assets Test for allowances, Austudy and independent Youth
Allowance or ABSTUDY customers

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

The away from home rate for Youth Allowance (YA) customers

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
