
Change of circumstances while receiving services from an Employment Services Provider 001-02070000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the procedures to use for job seekers who advise
a change in circumstances while they are receiving services from an
Employment Services Provider.

Change of circumstances

There will be instances where a job seeker receiving an income support
payment with mutual obligation requirements has a change in
circumstances. A job seeker may inform either Services Australia or
their provider of a change in their circumstances.

Updating the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

If a job seeker advises Services Australia of a change in circumstances
that may affect the level of employment servicing, or trigger a referral
to another programme, the agency should update the Job Seeker
Classification Instrument (JSCI). The result of this update may lead to
an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or a referral to another
programme.

An ESAt may be needed if the job seeker has a medical condition that
significantly affects their ability to work. This may include situations
where an existing medical condition has changed. In this case, the ESAt
may indicate the job seeker is eligible for a different type of
Employment Services Provider. The Service Officer should book an initial
appointment with the new provider.

If a current Stream C or Disability Employment Services (DES) job seeker
contacts the agency to advise of a change in circumstances, the JSCI
should not be completed (other than for vulnerable youth). Stream C job
seekers should be advised to contact their Employment Services Provider
who can adjust the services to the job seeker accordingly.

jobactive providers are unable to update the JSCI for job seekers due to
a change in circumstances during their first 6 months of servicing for
Stream A or B. Where jobactive providers identify such changes in
circumstances, an electronic request will be sent to the agency to have
the JSCI updated in an appointment with a Service Officer.

For information about this process, see Conducting a Job Seeker
Classification Instrument (JSCI) interview.

Note: an issue has been identified where JSCI appointments are not being
booked for some job seekers following advice from their Employment
Services Provider of a change in circumstances. See the Process page for
details.

Employment Services Provider transfers

Job seekers generally remain with the same Employment Services Provider
for their period of unemployment. However, there may be some instances
where a job seeker may transfer to another provider offering the same
type of service, for example:

-   when a job seeker has moved address
-   where there has been a breakdown in the relationship between the job
    seeker and their provider or Community Development Program (CDP)
    provider
-   when they have reached the Maximum Time they are allowed with 1
    jobactive provider

Job seekers who approach Services Australia for any transfer reason
should be advised to discuss their situation with their Employment
Services Provider. The agency has no role in transferring job seekers
between providers.

If the job seeker is not satisfied with the response from their provider
in relation to the transfer request, the job seeker should contact the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment's National Customer
Service Line to further discuss their concerns. See Breakdown of the
relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive organisation for
more information.

Maximum Time Transfers ensure job seekers who have been with the same
provider for an extended period without achieving an Employment Outcome
are transferred to a new provider. This will give job seekers different
servicing which may improve their prospects of getting a job.

Job seekers are generally transferred to a different provider, at the
following points:

-   2 years for Stream A job seekers, and
-   3 years for Stream B or C job seekers

Services Australia has no role in the Maximum Time Transfer process, as
the Maximum Time Transfer is calculated by the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment system.

Job seekers with questions about the transfer process should contact the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment's National Customer
Service Line.

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment's National Customer Service Line.

Contents

Job seeker change of address

Release of information to Employment Services Providers

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive
organisation

Jobactive/Community Development Programme (CDP) registration inactivated
and cancellation of income support in error

Related links

Conducting a Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) interview

Assessment Services

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive
organisation

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
