
Registering Volunteer job seekers 001-02040020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to register volunteer job seekers with
Community Development Programme (CDP) Providers and Employment Services.
Volunteer job seekers can access Employment Services for up to 12
months.

On this Page:

Eligibility for Volunteer registration with Employment Services

A Volunteer registration may be offered when a job seeker meets the
eligibility criteria for registration as a volunteer.

Note: all job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are not
eligible for registration as a No Stream Services Referral Required
(NSSRR) job seeker must be registered as Fully Eligible Participants
(FEP).

Job seeker requests to be registered with Employment Services

Eligible job seekers can be registered as a volunteer by any Service
Officer of Services Australia. If the job seeker approaches Services
Australia to register and they are eligible, Service Officers can
provide this service. jobactive providers may also refer job seekers to
be registered as a volunteer to Services Australia.

Registration process for volunteers

Service Officers can use the Looking for Work or First Contact
Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflows to register a job
seeker as a volunteer.

Stream A Volunteer job seekers are referred to online Employment
Services. A Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) is not required
for volunteer registrations.

Job seekers must provide their identity documentation when registering
in person. The Department of Education, Skills and Employment requires
job seekers registering as a volunteer to provide at least 1 acceptable
identity document.

Access to volunteer services starts from the Registration Start Date for
all eligible job seekers.

Duration of volunteer registration

Stream A Volunteer job seekers will receive up to 12 months Employment
Services. Once commenced, they will be referred to as a Stream A
Volunteer.

Stream A Volunteers may, at any time, tell the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment or Services Australia they no longer wish to
participate. If they choose to be exited or suspended before the end of
their 12 months period of service and do not return within 13
consecutive weeks after their exit or suspension date, they will lose
the remainder of their 12 month access to services.

Note: prior to 8 December 2019, volunteer job seekers were referred to
jobactive providers for a maximum of 6 months and were not referred to
online services. These job seekers will remain with their current
provider until the end of their current 6 month period.

Job seeker request to exit

Tell volunteer job seekers who approach Services Australia to request an
exit, to contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment as
they may approve a short suspension from employment assistance which
may, depending on the job seeker's circumstances, be more suitable than
an exit. In all cases where a job seeker seeks an exit or inactivation,
they must be told they may not be eligible to access Employment Services
as a volunteer if they do not re-register within 13 weeks.

At the end of their 12 month period, all volunteers are exited from
Employment Services. They are not eligible for further registration as a
volunteer with Employment Services.

Remote Areas and CDP Registration as a volunteer

If a job seeker lives in a Community Development Programme (CDP)
designated area, they cannot be registered by Services Australia as a
volunteer and must approach a CDP Provider to enquire about eligibility
and registration.

The Resources page contains links to Visa Entitlement Verification
Online (VEVO) which confirms current visa details and entitlements and
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment National Customer
Service Line.

Related links

Identity Confirmation for registration as a Volunteer Job Seeker

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Self service terminals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
