
Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive provider 001-02070030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment process that occurs where there is a breakdown of the
relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive provider.

On this Page:

Relationship failure between jobactive and the job seeker

Transfer between jobactive providers are the responsibility of providers
and the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Where the Department of Education, Skills and Employment determines the
relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive provider has
broken down, they may transfer the job seeker to another job active
organisation where one is available. The request to transfer can be
initiated either by the job seeker or a jobactive provider.

If the job seeker believes they can receive a better service elsewhere,
they should talk to their current or proposed provider. Jobseekers may
be transferred by agreement if the losing and gaining providers agree to
the transfer. A request for a transfer may also be lodged electronically
by a job seeker via their Personal Page on the jobactive website, see
Resources for a link.

The role of Services Australia

Job seekers who approach the agency about a breakdown in their
relationship with their jobactive provider should be advised to discuss
their provider in the first instance. Jobactive providers have processes
in place to deal with these situations. Job seekers should only be
advised to contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment
National Customer Service Line in limited circumstances as detailed
below.

When to refer job seekers to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment Customer Service Line

Job seekers should initially talk to their providers about a transfer to
another provider. However, in limited circumstances, job seekers
requesting a transfer may be advised to directly contact the Department
of Education, Skills and Employment Customer Service Line for job
seekers, to request referral to another provider. This includes:

-   job seekers who refuse to engage with their jobactive provider, or
    approach a new provider
-   job seekers who can clearly demonstrate they will receive better
    servicing if they transfer to another provider, or that they have
    had a relationship breakdown with their provider which prevents them
    from receiving appropriate servicing
-   job seekers who have a restricted servicing agreement in place that
    indicate a restriction on face to face service by jobactive
    providers
-   job seekers who want to have a declined transfer request reviewed
-   job seekers who have level 3 incident reports recorded on the
    Customer Incident Management System (CIMS)

If there are serious Services Australia or Department of Education,
Skills and Employment incidents recorded, staff should use their
discretion in regards to sending the job seeker to their provider. If
there is doubt, the job seeker should be advised to contact the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Customer Service Line,
see Resources for contact details.

Outstanding participation suspension at the time job seeker requests transfer

A participation suspension (TCW or TCF) does not automatically lift when
a job seeker transfers to a new provider. The provider who serviced the
job seeker when the suspension report was generated is responsible for
notifying reconnection requirements and determining when to lift the
payment suspension. Provider contact details are contained in the
suspension report accessed via the Participation Compliance workflow and
sent to the job seeker via SMS and a suspension letter.

Service Officers are required to:

-   deliver key messages about personal responsibility and complying
    with compulsory requirements
-   provide the job seeker with the provider's contact details to
    discuss the suspension, reconnection requirements and request for
    transfer

For further information, see Provider responsibilities for managing
compliance with compulsory requirements.

Provider contacts requesting exit

Jobactive providers that contact the agency about a breakdown in their
relationship with a job seeker should be directed to contact their
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Contract Manager in the
first instance.

Jobactive providers cannot exit fully eligible job seekers in this
circumstance, however they can exit volunteer job seekers, if the
volunteer agrees to the exit. Refer to Exits and suspensions from
jobactive or Community Development Programme (CDP) for information about
exits from jobactive.

The Resources contains a link to the form customers can use to send
their feedback to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment, a
link to the Australian JobSearch website and contact details for the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment Customer Service Line.

Related links

Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
