
Mutual obligation requirements during an Income Maintenance Period (IMP) 001-09020070

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer's mutual obligation requirements
are applied during an Income Maintenance Period (IMP). The IMP
encourages self-provision and eliminates differences in the treatment of
leave and redundancy payments.

Income assessed under an IMP

The IMP takes into account all leave and redundancy payments that have
been accumulated over a period of employment or as a condition of
service which have been paid to the customer. This includes maternity
leave, long service leave, sick leave, rostered days off, public
holidays, annual leave, leave loading and redundancy payments.

The IMP does not apply to any Employer Termination Payments (ETP) rolled
over into deferred annuities, superannuation bonds, superannuation
schemes, allocated pensions or approved deposit funds. If a job seeker
rolls over their redundancy payment after an IMP has been applied, the
IMP will be recalculated from the date the roll over occurs.

Under the IMP, leave and redundancy payments are treated as income for a
period equal to that for which the leave was paid. Leave payments and
redundancy payments (paid for a period of time), that is, 2 weeks' pay
for each year of service are rounded down to the nearest day. Non-time
dependent redundancy payments, for example $20,000 golden handshake, are
divided by the employee's average gross weekly wage and the calculated
amount of weeks is rounded down to the nearest week. The level of income
assessed will be calculated according to the rate paid by the employer.
This will mean that most new claimants will be reduced to a nil rate for
the period of the IMP. In some cases, for example, permanent part-time
workers who were on low incomes, the IMP may result in a reduced rate
for the period of the leave. Current customers are more likely to
receive a reduced rate of payment, as the income from employment did not
preclude payment. The IMP will regard income from leave payments in the
same way as other income (that is, subject to the relevant income test).
Partners will be affected if there is excess income after the IMP has
been applied to the primary beneficiary.

Mutual obligations requirements and IMP timeframes

-   If the IMP is 2 weeks or less and the job seeker is Centrelink
    managed, the job seeker must negotiate a Job Plan. If the job seeker
    is managed by an Employment Services Provider, they will be
    responsible for negotiating the job seeker's Job Plan
-   If the IMP is more than 2 weeks and the job seeker would be on a nil
    rate of pay due to the IMP, the customer is excluded from Service
    Profiling Service Updates and is not required to agree to a Job
    Plan. Note: the system will automatically create an Urgent Issue to
    negotiate a Job Plan at the end of the waiting period. Service
    Officers should only negotiate a Job Plan for the Centrelink managed
    job seekers

The customer is also excluded from Service Profiling Service Updates for
the entire period where the IMP results in nil payment.

The Resources page contains scenarios showing the effect of the IMP on
mutual obligation requirements.

Related links

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Identifying people with a capacity to work

Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
