
Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) 001-19051536

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to determine whether a claimant for
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) satisfies the residence requirements to qualify
for payment. The assessment includes whether the customer is
residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment and whether
they are required to serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period
(NARWP).

On this Page:

JSP residence requirements

To satisfy residence criteria for JSP, the customer must meet all of the
following requirements:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in certain
circumstances.

If a claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Non-protected special category visa (SCV) holders

A non-protected SCV holder who has lived continuously in Australia for a
single period of at least 10 years immediately before claiming may
qualify for JSP for a single continuous period of up to 6 months (182
days). For more information, see New Zealand 10 year residence
exemption.

Serving the NARWP

To be eligible for JSP, customers who have recently arrived to live in
Australia must:

-   have been an Australian resident, and
-   physically be in Australia for the required duration of the NARWP,
    either in 1 period, or in a number of periods

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP. The days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming JSP may
have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia temporarily for 3
weeks the NARWP period does not recommence. The absence extends the
NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

Broken periods of residence in Australia can count towards NARWP if the
person continued to be an Australian resident. For example, a customer
who has returned to live in Australia after several years living
overseas may have previously lived in Australia as an Australian
resident. The period of former Australian residence would count towards
any current NARWP requirements.

Generally it is not a requirement that the period of residence required
for the NARWP occurred immediately before claiming. However if a person
is claiming an exemption from the NARWP for the reason that they became
a Lone Principal Carer, they need to have become a lone parent after the
start of the current period of Australian residence. The Lone Parent
exemption only applies to Parenting Payment Single (PPS), JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) and Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information must
manually recorded. If Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. When the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to movement
information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains links to staff contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

Residence assessment for customers claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Coding and viewing the RSCD, TOAD and TOAS portability screens

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
