
Participation Interview 001-03020100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines processes for the Participation Interview. This
workflow is used for all customers claiming a payment with mutual
obligation requirements including JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) (job seeker) and some Parenting Payment (PP) customers.
The Participation Interview must also be completed when a customer
claims JSP, YA (job seeker) and PP (in certain circumstances), as part
of a transfer from another payment. The workflow is used for online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Participation Interview

The Participation Interview uses information provided by customers in
their claim and responses within the Participation Interview to assess
their eligibility for income support, their job readiness and to make
referrals if appropriate.

The Participation Interview:

-   Interacts with Department of Education, Skills and Employment
    through web services
-   Loads information from the customer's online claim or ACC into
    certain Participation Interview questions where the Department of
    Education, Skills and Employment requires these questions to be
    asked. This information can be edited if required by Services
    Australia staff
-   Identifies long term mutual obligation requirements exemptions prior
    to running the Job Seeker Snapshot including principal carers with
    possible long term exemptions and women eligible for the Sunset
    Widow Allowance (SWA) exemption
-   Displays the result of the Job Seeker Snapshot where it has been
    completed online during the new claim process as part of the online
    Job Seeker Snapshot trial
-   Enables booking appointments with Workforce Australia Employment
    Services Providers, including booking and rebooking of RapidConnect
    appointments
-   Identifies customers from information provided in the online claim
    or ACC, who are ineligible for RapidConnect due to residence or high
    employment income

Accessing the Participation Interview

The Participation Interview can only be accessed when a job seeker or PP
customer with mutual obligation requirements has lodged a claim online
or where ACC has been completed.

Interview processes

The Participation Interview includes the following individual processes:

-   Job seeker registration
-   Job Seeker Snapshot
-   RapidConnect questions, referral and appointment rebooking
-   Deferred referrals
-   Online Diary
-   Reapply Job Seeker Snapshot functionality
-   Activity Management (that is JSR/UPD activities etc.)
-   Discuss the security benefits of recording a voiceprint and voice
    biometrics technology

Note: preferred service centre defaults to the one closest to the
customer's location.

Job Seeker Registration (JSR)

Job seekers eligible for services from Employment Services Providers
must register to access these services. The Participation Interview
registers JSP, YA (other) and PP customers who have submitted an online
claim or have had ACC completed. The JSR will auto-finalise for JSP, YAL
(other) Special Benefit (SpB) with JSP conditions and Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) customers whose youngest child is older than 6, job seekers
who completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online during the new claim
process as part of the online Job Seeker Snapshot trial.

Their claim information and responses to the JSR questions are used to
determine if the Job Seeker Snapshot needs to be completed.

Job Seeker Registration only (JSRO)/No Remote Referral Required (NRRR)

The Participation Interview helps Service Officers identify potential
JSRO and NRRR job seekers.

If a customer is identified as a JSRO/NRRR job seeker, Service Officers
can complete the Job Seeker Snapshot if the job seeker wants to access a
Workforce Australia or CDP provider or other assistance. For example,
Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) and Adult Migrant English
Program (AMEP).

If this is the case, register the job seeker as a Fully Eligible
Participant (FEP), complete the Job Seeker Snapshot and refer them to a
provider.

YA (job seekers)

Job seekers aged 15 to 22 will be presented with questions to identify
if they are Vulnerable Youth (VY).

See Registering a customer as a job seeker.

Job Seeker Snapshot

The Job Seeker Snapshot questions and responses determine the level of
employment assistance the job seeker may be eligible to receive. Be
mindful that this information is personal and sensitive. Ensure the job
seeker understands the importance of disclosing information relevant to
their personal circumstances to facilitate the most appropriate service
offer.

The Participation Interview will load certain questions into the Job
Seeker Snapshot from the online claim:

-   Are you Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander?
-   Indigenous status?
-   What is the date of birth of your youngest child?

YA (job seeker) specific questions:

-   What is the highest level of schooling you have completed?
-   Have you completed any other qualification(s)?
-   If yes, what qualification(s) have you completed?

Where JSP, YAL (other), Special Benefit (SpB) under JSP conditions and
PPS customers whose youngest child is older than 6, job seekers have
completed the Job Seeker Snapshot online , during the Participation
Interview the workflow will bypass the Job Seeker Snapshot questions and
go straight to the Job Seeker Snapshot Results screen.

If the job seeker says the information is incorrect, correct it as part
of the interview.

See Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview.

RapidConnect

RapidConnect questions and referral

RapidConnect is a referral process that gives unemployed people early
access to assistance through Online Employment Services and Employment
Services Providers. Job seekers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or
Youth Allowance (YA) may be referred directly to these services for
registration before their income support claim is finalised. Meeting
RapidConnect requirements may also affect the date a job seekers
payments can start.

To determine if a job seeker is subject to RapidConnect requirements or
has a RapidConnect exemption, determinations relating to accommodation,
date last worked and independence are automatically performed and a
RapidConnect exemption will be automatically applied where appropriate.
Additional questions relating to RapidConnect eligibility may also be
asked during the Participation Interview to determine if the job seekers
has a RapidConnect exemption.

-   Most job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect are automatically
    referred to the Workforce Australia Online for individuals during
    the Participation Interview. These job seekers are not required to
    attend a RapidConnect appointment with a provider. Instead, they
    will meet their RapidConnect obligation by agreeing to their Job
    Plan online. From 4 December 2021, job seekers who are referred to
    online employment services under RapidConnect provisions will need
    to complete their Career Profile before they can agree to their Job
    Plan online
-   If a job seeker who is subject to RapidConnect is not automatically
    referred to the Online Employment Services during the Participation
    Interview, then they will require an appointment to be booked for
    them with a provider. They will need to attend this appointment to
    meet their RapidConnect obligation

RapidConnect appointment rebooking

Customers who are required to attend a RapidConnect appointment can have
their RapidConnect appointment rebooked if they have missed their
appointment and are still within 14 days of RapidConnect determination.

However, the job seeker's payment start date may be affected if the
reason the appointment was missed was not for an acceptable reason.

To initiate the appointment rebooking, select the Participation
Interview workflow under Staff Workflows. Select Rebook appointment to
start the RapidConnect Online Diary appointment workflow.

To reschedule and rebook an appointment, see RapidConnect.

Deferred referrals

A job seeker's referral to Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider or Disability Employment Services provider may need to be
deferred in some circumstances.

Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers are either recorded
automatically by the system or manually by Service Officers where
appropriate.

Online Diary

Use the Online Diary to initiate referrals, check current appointments
and view the job seeker's full appointment history and appointment
outcomes.

During the interview, the Online Diary may be required to book
appointments for job seekers with Employment Services Providers. This
includes Workforce Australia Employment Services Providers, Disability
Employment Services (DES) and Community Development Program (CDP).

The Online Diary will not feature in registration and referral workflows
for job seekers selected for Workforce Australia Online for Individuals.
They will be automatically connected to the Online Employment Service
and given instructions by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment on how to participate and meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Reapply Job Seeker Snapshot functionality

If it continues to reflect the customer's current circumstances, use the
Participation Interview to reapply a current and valid Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) result.

See Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is
required.

Re-indexed job seeker claim

When an online claim or ACC is re-indexed, the Participation Interview
may present as already being completed or required.

The workflow must still be run before finalising the claim, see Process
Table 3.

Customer declines Participation Interview or link with provider

To be eligible for income support, job seekers eligible for services
from Employment Service Providers must answer the questions in the
Participation Interview and be linked with the Workforce Australia
Online or an appropriate provider.

Reject claims using reason code JRC (job seeker registration cancelled),
if the job seeker declines to complete the Participation Interview or to
be linked with Workforce Australia Employment Services
Provider/Disability Employment Services.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
the privacy notice shown to customers when they complete an online
claim.

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Digital Assistant Roxy in Process Direct

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

RapidConnect

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Registering a customer as a job seeker

Online Diary

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Voiceprints for phone self service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
