
Explains provider responsibilities under the Job Seeker Compliance Model and the Targeted Compliance Framework. 001-10010010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Employment Services and ParentsNext
Provider's roles and responsibilities in managing compliance with
compulsory requirements and re-engagement following non-compliance.

Negotiating compulsory requirements

Employment Services providers deliver employment services to job
seekers. This means working with job seekers to help address barriers to
employment (both vocational and non-vocational) to help them off welfare
and into work. Job seekers will have the best chance of improving their
employment prospects by engaging fully with their provider and
employment services designed to help them achieve the earliest possible
entry or re-entry to the workforce.

ParentsNext providers will work with parents of young children to ensure
they receive the assistance they need to prepare for employment by the
time their children reach school age. They encourage and help parents to
think about the types of employment that they would like to obtain and
to prepare for this through education and other activities tailored to
their individual circumstances.

Providers have responsibility for negotiating Job/Participation Plans
that set out the job seeker’s compulsory requirements in return for
receiving a participation payment and to assist their return to work.
When setting requirements, the provider must ensure that:

-   the job seeker's personal circumstances and assessed capacity have
    been considered to ensure that the job seeker is capable of meeting
    their requirements, and
-   compulsory requirements are consistent with relevant legislation and
    policies and do not exceed prescribed maximum limits set out in
    social security law

Notifying compulsory requirements and explaining the consequences of non-compliance

Providers are responsible for ensuring job seekers are aware of what
they need to do in return for receiving a participation payment, and
understand the effect on their payment if they do not meet requirements.

When notifying requirements, providers must ensure job seekers receive
proper notification and reasonable notice.

For a notification to be valid under Social Security Law, it must
include:

-   the date and time of the appointment or activity being notified
-   the location at which the person being notified must attend, and
-   a compliance warning explaining the consequences of not meeting the
    requirement

If at the time an appointment is made, it is known that the job seeker
will be required to enter into a Job/Participation Plan, this
requirement should also be notified.

Providers are required to keep a copy of any formal notification
provided to a job seeker.

Monitoring compliance with requirements

Providers are responsible for monitoring the job seeker’s compliance
with their compulsory requirements.

Where a job seeker does not comply with a compulsory requirement, the
provider determines the appropriate action, based on the compliance
system that applies to the job seeker.

For job seekers managed under the Targeted Compliance Framework,
providers use a shared online calendar to book compulsory appointments
and job seekers (or sometimes providers on their behalf) are required to
record job seeker attendance by the end of the day.

Providers also use the calendar to schedule activities, job interviews
and third party appointments and will monitor attendance at these
requirements, though job seekers will generally be expected to record or
report their own attendance. The provider provides support for job
seekers who require assistance with recording their own compliance with
compulsory requirements.

Targeted Compliance Framework

This compliance system is a tool available to providers where an
additional incentive is required to help keep a job seeker engaged with
employment services and their compulsory requirements. Providers assist
job seekers to access and use available online tools to record
attendance at requirements and keep track of how they are going with
meeting their compulsory requirements.

Most job seekers are genuine in their efforts, but where non-compliance
occurs or the job seeker has not recorded their attendance, payment
suspension is used to secure early reengagement with the job seeker and
to help motivate future compliance.

Where providers become aware of non-compliance, they are required to
attempt a minimum of 1 outbound contact on the day of a missed
requirement to discuss the missed requirement. The Employment Services
System electronically notifies Services Australia where a mutual
obligation failure has occurred which triggers payment suspension.

When contact with the job seeker is established following payment
suspension, the provider is responsible for notifying appropriate
reconnection requirements. They monitor the job seeker’s compliance with
these requirements and electronically notify Services Australia when the
conditions for lifting the payment suspension have been met, such as,
when they have met the reconnection requirement or the provider decides
they no longer need to meet the requirement.

On contact with the job seeker, the provider talks with the job seeker
about their reasons for not meeting requirements and decides if the job
seeker had a valid reason. The outcome of this decision, and the zone
the job seeker is in, will determine what further action the provider
will take.

For job seekers in the warning zone, providers are responsible for
managing demerits, including the accrual and removal of demerits:

-   where the provider decides the job seeker has a valid reason for a
    mutual obligation failure, the pending demerit is removed
-   where a valid reason has not been provided the provider confirms the
    demerit and ensures the job seeker understands the consequences of
    this
-   if the job seeker disputes a decision to apply a demerit, the
    provider is responsible for the discussion and removal of demerits
    if appropriate

A demerit will only become visible to the job seeker when it has been
confirmed by the provider.

Providers undertake a Capability Interview when the job seeker's accrued
demerit points trigger this in the Employment Services System. Where a
job seeker accrues further demerits in an active 6 months, the
Employment Services System may trigger a Capability Assessment. Where a
Capability Assessment is triggered, the provider notifies the job seeker
of the requirement to contact Services Australia for a Capability
Assessment.

For job seekers in the financial penalty zone, where a valid reason for
non-compliance has been provided before the job seeker's reporting date,
providers will record this to close the outstanding Non-Compliance
Reports. This will also end the need for Services Australia to undertake
a compliance investigation. In other words, before a Non-Compliance
Report is generated for investigation by Services Australia, the
provider must confirm that the job seeker does not have a valid excuse.

Providers are responsible for electronically notifying Services
Australia that a mutual obligation failure (where a job seeker is in the
financial penalty zone), work refusal failure or unemployment failure
requires an assessment of reasonable excuse for the purpose of
determining whether a penalty should be applied. They do this after
discussing the event with the job seeker and establishing the job seeker
did not have a valid reason and work was suitable (where suitability of
work is applicable).

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Where non-compliance occurs, Community Development Program (CDP)
providers will consider whether or not to submit compliance action.

CDP providers initiate and action Non-Attendance Reports (NAR),
including booking reconnection appointments, notifying CDP job seeker's
of the reconnection requirement and sending an electronic transmission
to lift payment suspensions resulting from a NAR. The provider advises
the CDP job seeker where their participation payment will be stopped due
to a missed appointment, and of the need to arrange reengagement so that
the suspension can be lifted.

CDP providers speak to CDP job seeker's to discuss non-attendance prior
to submitting a Provider Appointment Report (PAR). A PAR can only be
submitted on the day the provider makes contact with the CDP job seeker
to discuss the non-attendance at the appointment.

CDP providers will provide Services Australia with all necessary
information in relation to a non-compliance event where a decision is
made to pursue compliance action via a PAR or Participation Report (PR).

CDP providers are required to ensure that they have availability to
deliver any reconnection appointments.

CDP providers facilitate CDP job seeker access to compliance activities
for the purpose of waiving all or part of a serious failure penalty.

A CDP provider may also manually request a Comprehensive Compliance
Assessment (CCA) where they suspect a CDP job seeker may have barriers
to compliance but has not yet disclosed these to their provider.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment.

Related links

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Services Australia’s responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Non-compliance events

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures

Job Seeker Compliance Model

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers with their requirements

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers

Finalising Community Development Program (CDP) re-engagement
requirements

Investigating a No Show, No Pay failure

Investigating a connection failure

Investigating a non-attendance failure

Investigating a reconnection failure

Generating and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Waiving a serious failure by participating in a Compliance Activity

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
