-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess and record a customer as a
principal carer of a dependent child so that their mutual obligation
requirements and entitlements are determined correctly. This applies to
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker), Special
Benefit (SpB) and Parenting Payment (PP).

Principal carer

A principal carer is a person with the primary care of a dependent child
under the age of 16 years. A step parent may qualify as a principal
carer if they live as a member of a couple with the parent of the child.

Principal carers may qualify for a higher rate of payment, additional
concessions and reduced mutual obligation requirements.

-   JSP single principal carers also have a separate income test to all
    other JSP customers
-   Customers with principal care of a child under 6 if partnered, or
    under 8 if single, may qualify for Parenting Payment
-   Customers with shared care of a child who do not qualify as a
    principal carer may still qualify for the 'with child' rate of
    payment or an additional income free area for Parenting Payment
    Single (PPS)

Only one person at a time can be the principal carer of a child

In shared care situations, it is necessary for a shared care assessment
to be undertaken to determine which carer is the principal carer of the
child and advise each person in writing of the decision, even if one
carer has not claimed income support.

Where each member of a couple is claiming or receiving a social security
payment that is based on or affected by them being a principal carer of
a child, they must be advised in writing of the determination of who is
the principal carer. Standard text is to be used in letters to advise
customers of the decision.

Principal carer status and legal responsibility

In most cases, the person with the greater degree of care and control of
the child is the principal carer of that child. A person may remain as
the principal carer of a child during a temporary absence from caring
for the child.

If only one person has legal responsibility for the day-to-day care,
welfare and development of the child and the child is in the adult's
care, that person is the principal carer.

In some cases, grandparents or relatives who have taken on
responsibility of caring for the child can be determined to be the
principal carer where the person with legal responsibility is unable or
unwilling to care for the child.

Appropriate service offer

PP may be paid to single principal carers whose youngest qualifying
child is under 8 years and to partnered principal carers whose youngest
qualifying child is under 6 years.

JSP/YA may be paid to principal carers who do not qualify for PP or who
choose instead to claim JSP/YA. JSP/YA is paid at the 'with child' rate
for single principal carers.

JSP/YA job seekers who have a special family circumstances automatic
exemption from mutual obligation requirements are paid the 'higher rate'
of JSP.

Mutual obligation requirements

Principal carers are subject to part-time mutual obligation requirements
(rather than full-time). PPS customers do not have mutual obligation
requirements until their youngest child turns 6. Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP) customers do not have mutual obligation requirements, as
their PPP will cancel when their youngest qualifying child turns 6 years
of age. However, PPP customers, and PPS customers without mutual
obligations may voluntarily participate.

All JSP, YA (job seeker) and SpB principal carers have mutual obligation
requirements, regardless of the age of their youngest child. However,
principal carers in receipt of SpB who have a youngest dependent child
under the age of 6 years can be granted an exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements.

These requirements include registration with an Employment Services
Provider unless the principal carer is fully meeting their mutual
obligation requirements through an approved activity. Principal carers
with a job search requirement must look for and accept offers of
suitable work.

A temporary exemption from these requirements may be granted due to
special family circumstances.

ParentsNext

PP customers with a child under 6 may be required to participate in
ParentsNext. Parents participating in this program may be subject to
certain participation requirements to retain eligibility for Parenting
Payment (PP).

Change in principal carer status

Only one member of a couple can be a principal carer at one time. If
parents of a child in their care wish to change the principal carer
status from one member of the couple to the other due to a change in
their circumstances (for example, employment), principal carer status
can be transferred from one to the other. In these cases, it is not
necessary to verify that a change in care has occurred.

If a customer gains principal carer status, they may become eligible for
more exemptions and flexibility in meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, depending on their circumstances. It may also be
appropriate to reassess whether the customer is on the most appropriate
payment, taking into consideration their change in principal carer
status.

Partnered customers with a dependent child

Only one member of a couple can be a principal carer at one time. The
parents will need to decide who is the principal carer of the dependent
child or children. This applies whether both parents are on payments or
not.

There are important differences between the definitions of:

-   a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person
-   a dependent child under social security law

These differences mean that a child could be considered a dependent of a
person for FTB but not for their Social Security payment, and vice
versa.

Single principal carers with dependent child

As qualification for PPS is reliant on being a single principal carer of
a qualifying child under 8 years any change in principal carer status
may affect ongoing PPS qualification. A customer may lose principal
carer status of a PP child but still have dependent children in their
care for whom they are not the principal carer. In such cases where the
child was their only PP child, an alternative income support payment,
such as JSP, paid at the 'with child' rate may be appropriate.

Single JSP and YA customers with a dependent child are eligible for the
'with child' rate of payment.

Single YA customers who have been assessed as principal carers, are also
eligible for the 'with child' rate of payment. YA customers are subject
to the YA Allowance Income Test.

Single JSP customers, who have been assessed as principal carers, are
also eligible for the 'with child' rate of payment but have a more
generous single principal carer income test applied.

Single JSP and YA principal carers with a special family circumstance
automatic exemption from mutual obligation requirements may be paid the
'higher rate' of payment where they are:

-   an active foster carer
-   involved in home schooling
-   provide distance education for their children
-   have a large family, or
-   caring for a child when the customer is a relative (other than a
    parent) as directed by a Parenting Order made through the Family
    Court

The 'higher rate' is equivalent to the PPS rate of payment.

Note: a partnered customer with dependent children cannot avoid the
application of a non-payment or rate reduction period for JSP, YA or
Austudy by claiming PPP as an alternative payment.

Entitlements and concessions for principal carers

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) if
    they need extra help with the cost of child care
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL) (eligibility requirements differ depending
    on the income support payment and whether the principal carer is
    partnered or single)

Single principal carers are also entitled to:

-   PPS where the customer is the principal carer of a child under 8 and
    otherwise qualified for the payment
-   'With child' or 'higher rate' of basic payment for JSP and YA
    customers with dependent children
-   JSP (single principal carers) can attract a payment of Pensioner
    Education Supplement (PES)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)

Principal carers in receipt of PPP who claimed payment on or after 1
July 2006 and have an assessed partial capacity to work due to a
disability are eligible for the following supplementary concessions:

-   PCC
-   PhA
-   PES (where a customer is continuing the same course)
-   TAL

Principal carer customers who meet all the following conditions:

-   have transferred to PPP from the DSP transition group
-   have been assessed as having a partial capacity to work
-   who were in receipt of DSS PES or ABSTUDY PES

will only remain eligible for PES if they remain in the same category
(that is, partial capacity to work) and are still completing the same
course of education or study for which they were receiving PES while
receiving DSP.

The Resources page contains:

-   information regarding a shared care system problem (P24845) that
    occurs when a parent has transferred their Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    to their current partner (step parent)
-   standard text to be used in the Q888 - inviting the customer to
    claim FTB
-   examples of determining the principal carer of a child
-   assessment of principal carer status, and
-   standard text to be used in letters to advise customers of the
    principal carer determination

Related links

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Child enters customer's care/custody

Child Override/Claim (CHOC) screen

Linking a child to a customer's record

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Approved activities for principal carers

The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed
activities

Suitable/unsuitable work

Death of a dependant child of a JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth
Allowance (YA) customer

Rates and Thresholds

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Community Development Program (CDP)

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
