
Selection or allocation of a jobactive organisation 001-02060010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for the selection or allocation of a
jobactive organisation for a job seeker.

Jobactive provider referrals

When a job seeker registration is completed, eligible job seekers will
be referred to Online jobactive Employment Services (unless already
connected to a jobactive provider) to access the assistance available
through jobactive. The Department of Education Skills and Employment may
determine that a jobactive provider is more suitable for the job seeker
and refer them onto the provider at commencement. The job seeker will
remain with OES or provider:

-   for the duration of their unemployment
-   until the jobactive organisation no longer has a contract, or
-   they reach the maximum time they are allowed with OES or one
    jobactive organisation

Job seekers referred to the online jobactive employment service will
remain with the online service until the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment deem it appropriate to refer them to a jobactive
provider.

Job seekers, who have been with the same jobactive provider for an
extended period without achieving an employment outcome, are transferred
to a different provider. The maximum time transfer begins at:

-   2 years for Stream A job seekers, and
-   3 years for Stream B or C job seekers

The timeframe depends on their 'Time in Program with Provider' (TIPP)
clock.

The TIPP clock:

-   starts when a job seeker commences on a Provider Contract
-   is paused during periods of suspension
-   is re-set if a job seeker transfers to a new provider or achieves an
    employment outcome

This procedure covers the selection or allocation part of the referral
process.

The jobactive referral process is not complete until the initial
appointment is booked with the provider or they have been selected for
Online jobactive Employment Services.

In cases where a job seeker has not been referred to online servicing,
referral to a jobactive provider must be done on the day the
Participation Interview is conducted and the provider appointment booked
within 2 working days, unless the customer is exempt from the process.
Where there are no appointments within 2 workings days, an appointment
must be made as soon as possible within 14 days.

Job seekers participating in the online jobactive employment service are
not required to attend a RapidConnect appointment with a jobactive
provider. Instead, they will meet their RapidConnect obligation by
agreeing to their Job Plan online.

RapidConnect

Eligible job seekers will be identified as RapidConnect job seekers
during the Participation Interview. All customers claiming JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) (job seekers) will be subject to
RapidConnect conditions, unless they meet one of the exemption reasons.

It is mandatory for all Service Officers to run the Participation
Interview for any job seeker who is claiming JSP or YA (job seeker).

Currently, Parenting Payment (PP) customers with mutual obligation
requirements are not subject to RapidConnect payability conditions.
However, they are required to be referred to jobactive and have the
initial appointment booked.

PP customers without mutual obligation requirements are not required to
be referred to jobactive, but they can volunteer to do so.

New Employment Services Model Pilot

From 1 July 2019, all eligible Stream A job seekers in 2 designated
pilot areas are selected by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment to participate in the New Employment Services Model Pilot.
The 2 employment regions selected for the pilot are:

-   Adelaide South, South Australia, and
-   Mid North Coast, New South Wales

The pilot builds on the existing Online Employment Services (OES) that
commenced in July 2018.

Jobactive provider referrals and other programs

If a customer is potentially suitable for other programs, this will be
identified during the Participation Interview or subsequent interview
for job seekers who are eligible to be registered as Fully Eligible
Participants (FEPs) or No Stream Services Referral Required (NSSRR) when
the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) is conducted.

If the job seeker is eligible for, and assessed as suitable for,
Disability Employment Services (DES) or Australian Disability
Enterprises (ADE), referral to jobactive is not required at this time.
All job seekers registering for employment services are referred to a
provider. Incapacitated job seekers, whose incapacity end date is more
than 6 weeks in the future, cannot be referred to jobactive.

Details of deferred referral can be viewed via the Participation Summary
screen.

Note: Job seekers identified as eligible for Intensive Support -
Transition to Work (TtW) must not be referred to jobactive. Where
available, TtW referrals have priority over jobactive. If TtW is
available and offered in the Online Diary, job seekers must be referred
and should not be referred to jobactive. However, job seekers can insist
on a referral to jobactive.

Voluntary referral to jobactive

A Volunteer registration may be offered when a job seeker meets the
eligibility criteria for registration as a Volunteer.

For details, refer to Eligibility for Employment Services as a
volunteer.

Provider referral at the end of deferred referral or exemption period

If the customer has a deferred referral or is exempt, a letter is sent
asking the job seeker to contact the agency at the end of the deferred
referral or mutual obligation requirements exemption period, to arrange
referral to jobactive. If the job seeker does not respond to the letter,
the system will attempt to book an appointment with Services Australia
to discuss a referral to jobactive. A manual follow up activity will be
created on the customer's record if the system cannot auto book an
appointment. Service Officers should contact job seekers with these
manual follow-up activities to make the provider referral.

Allowable break and re-registration with jobactive, including Online jobactive Services

The duration of the allowable break for job seekers is 13 weeks.

If a job seeker is re-registering, the time between the date of
inactivation and the date they contact to re-register can affect the
referral process:

-   If a job seeker re-registers within the allowable break, up to 13
    weeks, the initial registration date will be retained. They will be
    reconnected to the same jobactive organisation that they were
    attending prior to the inactivation of the registration. Services
    Australia does not have to book an appointment with the provider and
    the job seeker will have access to jobactive as a continuing job
    seeker
-   For job seekers re-registering more than 13 weeks after the date of
    inactivation, a new registration date is recorded and the job seeker
    must go through the entire registration and referral process

Change of address and jobactive

If a job seeker has moved to a new location and their jobactive
organisation services in the new area, they will be allocated to the
same jobactive organisation in their new area.

If the original jobactive organisation does not service the new area,
the job seeker will be randomly allocated a new organisation.

When a job seeker moves to a Department of Education, Skills and
Employment designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider.

If the job seeker has moved to a new area, but remains linked to their
previous jobactive organisation, further investigation is required.

For further details, see Job seeker change of address.

Job seekers already connected to jobactive claiming for JSP/YA (job seeker)

A job seeker will not require a jobactive appointment upon claiming for
income support payment and will be automatically exempt from
RapidConnect. This applies when a job seeker is claiming for JSP or YA
and they are:

-   registered as an active job seeker
-   connected to jobactive, and
-   current in or suspended from Employment Provider Services

An existing volunteer job seeker who is now claiming JSP or YA will have
their registration change to Fully Eligible Participant (FEP). These job
seekers are assessed under the RapidConnect provision and will need to
have a RapidConnect appointment booked with their jobactive provider.

Errors with jobactive selection and appointments

If a selection and appointment is created in error, it cannot be changed
by Services Australia.

If the wrong jobactive organisation was selected by the Service Officer,
they must advise the job seeker to contact their jobactive provider or
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment National Customer
Service Line (NCSL) for job seekers. See the Resources page for a link
to the website and useful contact information containing contact phone
numbers.

Community Development Program (CDP)

There is only one CDP provider per remote area, job seekers in these
areas will not have a choice of providers.

The Resources page contains links to the contact details and website for
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment and a list of reasons
for choosing a jobactive organisation with no immediate appointments.

Related links

Breakdown of the relationship between a job seeker and their jobactive
provider

Employment Services Providers

Online Diary

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

RapidConnect

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Reconnect

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Voluntary Work as an approved activity

Job seeker change of address

Community Development Program (CDP)

Participation with jobactive

Intensive Support - Transition to Work (TtW)

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
