
Referral to Adult Migrant English Program 001-02170020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the referral process to the Adult Migrant English
Program (AMEP). AMEP is a free English language tuition program
administered by the Department of Home Affairs. AMEP is available to
eligible migrants from the Humanitarian, Family and Skilled visa
streams.

Identifying eligibility for AMEP

Service Officers can identify eligible job seekers for AMEP during the
Participation Interview process. Job seekers are identified as having
low or nil English language proficiency through their responses to the
Job Seeker Snapshot questions.

Following the Job Seeker Snapshot, Service Officers should ensure that
the job seeker has tested their eligibility for AMEP before being
considered for referral to other literacy or numeracy programs including
Skills for Education and Employment (SEE). Service Officers should
record this advice to job seekers in a DOC.

Youth Allowance job seekers, under 22 years of age identified as
potentially eligible for a referral to AMEP as part of the Participation
Interview, will be exempt from RapidConnect.

Referral to AMEP

Customers that are not job seekers may participate in AMEP. These
customers, including Parenting Payment (PP) customers, do not require a
job seeker registration or Job Seeker Snapshot to be referred to AMEP.

A list of AMEP providers is available via a link on the Resources page.
Service Officers should select one AMEP provider from the list of AMEP
providers in the area, provide contact details to the customer and
request them to contact the provider directly, as there is no need to
record a manual referral. The Resources page also contains a link to
AMEP information in other languages which provides information for job
seekers in 38 other languages.

AMEP referrals, placements and outcomes, are automatically displayed on
the customer's record. Service Officers must check the Referrals Summary
screen for the participation status of AMEP.

AMEP information on the customer's record

Department of Home Affairs AMEP records are automatically linked with
Centrelink customer records using the AMEP Identified (ARM Id). In some
cases manual action will be required to delete the AMEP referral from a
customer's record due to incorrect linking of the ARM Id.

AMEP referral, participation and the level of achievement in a
Certificate in Spoken and Written English (CSWE) (if available) are also
displayed.

The Resources page contains link to the Department of Home Affairs
website and a list of AMEP providers that are available.

Related links

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

English programs for migrants

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
