
Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation requirements 001-10040070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines determining if a job seeker has a reasonable
excuse for failing to comply with a compulsory mutual obligation
requirement.

Policy context for assessing reasonable excuse

Under the job seeker compliance system, a penalty may apply if a job
seeker fails to comply with a mutual obligation requirement. Reasonable
excuse provisions protect job seekers when events outside of their
control directly affect their ability to comply.

Mutual obligation requirements are designed to prepare job seekers for
work. A reasonable excuse is one that an ordinary member of the
community, or an employer, would accept as reasonable for an employee to
miss work. Job seekers need to give prior notice if they are unable to
comply with a mutual obligation requirement, as an employee is expected
to do.

Prior contact assessment

If a job seeker is unable to attend an appointment or compulsory
requirement, they are required to make prior contact to discuss the
issue where it is reasonable to do so.

Prior contact usually occurs by phone, however, a job seeker and their
provider may agree to other arrangements such as an email or a phone
message to the appropriate person or organisation.

Reasonable excuse for non-attendance at an appointment or requirement
can only be considered when:

-   the job seeker has made prior contact with the provider, or
-   it was unreasonable to expect then to do so

Reasonable excuse assessment

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers conduct a
reasonable excuse assessment as part of a compliance investigation.

The PST-skilled Service Officer considers the job seeker's reasons for
non-compliance, including if the reasons and/or circumstances:

-   were foreseeable or within the job seekers control
-   directly affected their ability to comply, and
-   are acceptable under the reasonable excuse provisions

The PST-skilled Service Officer also considers whether prior contact
provisions have been met (if required).

In some cases, evidence may be required before reasonable excuse can be
determined.

The legislation specifies factors that must be considered when assessing
reasonable excuse. It also specifies factors that must not be
considered. See the Process page for details.

Note: there are special rules about when drug and/or alcohol related
issues may be considered when making a decision about reasonable excuse.
See the Process page for details.

Assessing misconduct

Reasonable excuse does not apply if the non-compliance event is about
misconduct. This includes:

-   inappropriate behaviour at an requirement/appointment or job
    interview
-   unemployment due to misconduct

Misconduct investigations focus on if the incident:

-   was within the job seeker's control
-   occurred as reported

In the case of dismissal, consider if the misconduct was the primary
reason for the job seeker's employment ending.

Job seeker responsibilities

As a general principle, the job seeker needs to establish they had a
reasonable excuse for not:

-   complying with a requirement, and
-   notifying beforehand (if required)

The job seeker may be asked to provide evidence to support their
explanation. For further information, see Gathering information and
weighing evidence to establish facts for a compliance investigation.

PST-skilled Service Officer responsibilities

The PST-skilled Service Officer must record the job seeker's
explanation, and their investigation into the non-compliance event. This
information is completed within the Compliance Investigation workflow.

The Resources page contains an example of how to decide if a job
seeker's circumstances directly affected their ability to comply at the
time of the requirement, and a link to the Family and Domestic Violence
Risk Identification and Referral (RIR) model.

Note: a PST-skilled Service Officer must consult with a PST-skilled
Social Worker where the job seeker presents with family and domestic
violence or has a current Family relationships/Domestic violence
circumstance recorded. See Accessing a PST-Skilled social worker.

Assessing reasonable excuse - drug or alcohol related reasons

Jobseekers participating in jobactive, DES and ParentsNext cannot use
drug and/or alcohol dependence as a reasonable excuse more than once,
unless they agree to participate in appropriate treatment (where
available).

When recording drug and/or alcohol dependency as a reasonable excuse for
non-compliance, the system will trigger a message to the provider. The
message prompts the provider to discuss drug and/or alcohol issues with
the job seeker. The discussion may include possible treatment options if
available.

Where appropriate treatment options are available:

-   job seekers who decline treatment without medical advice must
    continue to meet all of their mutual obligation requirements
-   the provider will update the job seeker's record so if further
    non-compliance occurs, drug and/or alcohol dependency cannot be used
    as a reasonable excuse

Some job seekers can meet mutual obligation requirements by
participating in treatment programs/interventions for drug and/or
alcohol dependency, see Drug or Alcohol dependency treatment program or
intervention as an approved activity.

The Resources page contains an example of how to decide if a job
seeker's circumstances directly affected their ability to comply at the
time of the requirement, and a link to the Family and Domestic Violence
Risk Identification and Referral (RIR) model.

Related links

Accessing a PST - skilled social worker

Altered mutual obligation requirements for job seekers due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) response

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Drug or alcohol dependency treatment programs or intervention as an
approved activity

Gathering information and weighing evidence to establish facts for a
compliance investigation

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

Compliance investigations and hardship provisions for job seekers
affected by a natural disaster or declared emergency

Identifying barriers to participation for Indigenous customers

Rejecting a compliance action

Participation Compliance workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
