
Deferred referral to Employment Services Providers 001-02330030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when referral to an Employment
Services Provider is not appropriate for the job seeker at the time of
the assessment and the referral is to be deferred.

Deferred referrals

A job seeker's referral to Workforce Australia or Disability Employment
Services (DES) may need to be deferred in some circumstances. Deferred
referrals may be recorded

-   automatically by the system, or
-   manually by Service Officers

Deferred referrals may be identified at any time, for example when
running the Participation Interview.

Services Australia is required to complete deferred referrals for job
seekers who:

-   have a current exemption and do not want to volunteer for employment
    services
-   are receiving Parenting Payment and have participation requirements
    but have a current Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (TRWC) of 0-14
    hours per week at Participation Interview stage
-   are in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA) and have been identified as
    potentially eligible for a referral to a combination of approved
    Youth Activities at the Participation Interview stage

Deferred provider referrals for YA job seekers 22 years of age and under

If a YA job seeker under 22 years of age is identified in the
Participation Interview as benefiting from a combination of approved
Youth Activities, the system will automatically create a deferred
referral to Workforce Australia.

Deferred referrals to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Job Seekers with mutual obligation requirements who have attended an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) may be identified as requiring a
referral to DES. In some circumstances the referral may need to be
temporarily deferred.

Job seekers with work capacity of 8-14 hours per week can volunteer to
receive DES assistance. See Referring a job seeker to Disability
Employment Services (DES).

The Assessor may also recommend participation in a voluntary requirement
such as psychological counselling provided by a community mental health
service before the job seeker is referred to DES.

End of deferral period

Job seekers who need a deferred referral must be referred to the
recommended employment service as soon as the deferral period ends.

The system creates different activities for referrals to:

-   Workforce Australia
-   DES, or
-   Youth Activities

Related links

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Participation with Workforce Australia

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Deferring an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
