-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers only.

This document outlines how job seekers who are subject to the Targeted
Compliance Framework (TCF) are re-engaged with their provider following
non-compliance with a compulsory requirement. It includes information
about how and when a participation suspension is used to re-engage the
job seeker.

Non-compliance events, re-engagement and participation suspensions

When a non-compliance event occurs, providers have responsibility for
re-engaging the job seeker.

Suspensions may be used to get the job seeker to contact their provider
to discuss the failure.

Deferred suspensions

Payment will not be suspended immediately if:

-   The job seeker is in the Targeted Compliance Framework green or
    warning zone, and
-   The failure is a mutual obligation failure

When a mutual obligation failure occurs for a job seeker in the Targeted
Compliance Framework green or warning zone, the provider will record a
non-compliance event in ESS. This will send a notice from the provider
to the job seeker telling them:

-   it appears they did not meet a requirement, and
-   they must contact their provider or their payment will be put on
    hold

To avoid payment suspension the job seeker must, within 2 business days:

-   contact their provider to explain the reason for non-compliance, and
-   meet any re-engagement requirement issued by the provider

If the job seeker does not contact their provider, their payment will be
suspended after 2 business days. Their payment will remain suspended
until they contact their provider and meet any re-engagement set by the
provider.

Immediate suspensions

An immediate payment suspension will be triggered when the provider
records the non-compliance event in ESS for a job seeker in the penalty
zone.

This suspension prompts an SMS to the job seeker telling them they must
contact their provider to re-engage. Services Australia also formally
notifies the job seeker of the suspension, including the requirement to
contact their provider.

Unemployment or work refusal failures

When an unemployment or work refusal failure is identified, the provider
or Digital Services Contact Centre (DSCC) for job seekers in Workforce
Australia Online must talk to the job seeker before a failure report can
be submitted.

If the provider is not satisfied with the job seeker's explanation, they
may submit a work refusal or unemployment failure for Services Australia
to investigate.

If the provider is unable to contact the job seeker

When a work refusal failure is identified and the provider cannot
contact the job seeker, the provider can record a non-compliance event
to get the job seeker to re-engage with them to discuss the work
refusal. The non-compliance event will immediately suspend the job
seeker's payment.

If the job seeker does not re-engage within 29 days of the submitted
non-compliance event, the job seeker's payment is cancelled. The job
seeker will need to re-claim their payment.

When an unemployment failure is identified and the provider cannot
contact the job seeker:

-   the provider will schedule an appointment, and notify the job seeker
    of the requirement to attend the appointment
-   job seekers who fail to attend the appointment will be notified they
    may have missed a requirement and need to contact their provider
-   job seekers who fail to contact their provider within 2 business
    days of the missed appointment, may have their payment suspended

If the job seeker does not re-engage with their provider within 29 days
of being notified to do so, the job seeker's payment is cancelled. The
job seeker will need to re-claim their payment.

Outstanding participation suspension at the time job seeker transfers to new provider

A TCW - Provider work refusal failure or TCF - Did not meet provider
requirement participation suspension may automatically lift when a job
seeker transfers to a new provider. The provider who triggered the
suspension is responsible for determining when to restore payment.

Job seeker contacts seeking a review of their suspension

A job seeker's payment can be suspended as a result of a mutual
obligation failure, or work refusal failure.

Providers are responsible for managing re-engagement so payment can be
restored. Services Australia's system automatically responds to the
electronic notification to:

-   restore payment, or
-   cancel payment if the job seeker fails to re-engage within 29 days

Job seekers requesting a review of the decision to suspend their payment
need to first talk to their provider or the Digital Services Contact
Centre for job seekers connected to a Workforce Australia Online
provider. If the job seeker is not satisfied with the outcome, they can
contact the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations' National
Customer Service Line. If the job seeker is still not satisfied with the
outcome, Services Australia manage the remainder of the review process.
See Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals.

Job seeker contacts following a CDR cancellation

A job seeker's payment can be cancelled if they fail to re-engage with
their provider within 29 days of being notified of the requirement to do
so. Where payment is cancelled CDR, the job seeker is deemed to have
lost qualification for their participation payment. Payment restoration
is not appropriate where the cancellation is correct. To receive the
payment again, the job seeker will need to re-claim.

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled staff may restore payment
following a CDR cancellation if there is evidence that within 29 days of
being notified to re-engage:

-   the job seeker met the requirement, or
-   the job seeker is no longer required to meet the requirement

Evidence may include:

information on the job seekers record confirming the job seeker has
contacted and met their re-engagement requirement

the job seeker attended a re-engagement appointment, but attendance was
not identified/recorded before the CDR cancellation due to:

-   incorrect or incomplete coding by the provider/DSCC
-   incorrect appointment type booked, or
-   a system issue or error. For example, incorrect cancellation of a
    manual follow up activity (MFU)

a valid medical certificate was not assessed prior to cancellation, and
the outcome of the medical certificate assessment suggests an exemption
would be granted

PST-skilled staff must advise the job seeker of:

their review and appeal rights, and

the need to re-claim payment if:

-   evidence does not exist, and the cancellation is deemed to be
    correct, or
-   the job seeker is contacting more than 13 weeks after their payment
    was cancelled

See Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals for
additional information on the formal appeals process.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations and the Participation Solutions Team
(PST) and a table of common CDR cancellation scenarios.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Provider responsibilities under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework and
the Targeted Compliance Framework

Capability Assessments

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Work refusal failures

Unemployment failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF)
non-compliance cancellation

Reporting employment income online

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Selection or allocation of a Workforce Australia Employment Service
Provider

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
