
Job Seeker Snapshot and short term illness/incapacity 001-02050040

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how the Job Seeker Snapshot is affected by short
term illness or incapacity.

When the Job Seeker Snapshot is applied

The Job Seeker Snapshot is usually applied as part of the Participation
Interview and the standalone workflow from the Participation Summary
screen when the Job Seeker Snapshot needs modification.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are eligible to be
granted a temporary incapacity exemption because they have lodged a
medical certificate are exempt from their mutual obligation
requirements, and also exempt from the RapidConnect process.

An accurate Job Seeker Snapshot can be conducted while a person is
temporarily incapacitated. This should be done if the job seeker is able
to attend an interview. If the job seeker is too ill to participate in
the interview, the application of the Job Seeker Snapshot may be delayed
until they can participate. However, it should be applied as soon as
possible after that time.

Job Seeker Snapshot and medical conditions

Where the Job Seeker Snapshot is applied when a job seeker has a short
term illness/incapacity for work, care should be taken when recording
whether the customer has an ongoing disability.

The expected duration of the incapacity and the impact it may have on
long term employment should also be considered when applying the Job
Seeker Snapshot. Some types of incapacity are of a short duration and
generally lead to a full recovery (for example, bone fractures). Other
types have ongoing effects on the job seeker’s ability to work even
after their exemption from their mutual obligation requirements ceases.

Conditions affecting work capacity

The Job Seeker Snapshot asks if the job seeker has any disabilities,
medical conditions or addictions that affect their ability to work. If
job seekers present with temporary incapacities or other short term
conditions, this does not mean that it is appropriate to be recorded as
a disability, even though the job seeker may be exempt from their mutual
obligation requirements because of their incapacity.

If the incapacity is of a very short term nature (for example, cold or
flu), the illness or injury should not be recorded as an ongoing
disability in the Job Seeker Snapshot responses. In this case, the
response should be 'No' to the job seeker having a disability or medical
condition.

The questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot make sure that only those
conditions that are ongoing and will affect a job seeker's ability to
work or look for work will be recorded as a disability for the purposes
of the Job Seeker Snapshot. An ongoing condition is one that is expected
to last for more than 13 weeks. This includes episodic or intermittent
conditions but does not include pregnancy.

Further assessment for capacity to work

When considering the appropriate process to follow for job seeker's with
disabilities, illnesses or injuries, the Service Officer will need to
assess the job seeker's capacity to work, based on medical information
available and discussions with the job seeker.

An incapacity is only included in the Job Seeker Snapshot if it
represents an ongoing barrier to employment. If a temporary incapacity
is included in the Job Seeker Snapshot, it may produce a Job Seeker
Snapshot score which does not accurately reflect the job seeker's true
barriers to employment and may also set up an inappropriate Job Seeker
Snapshot Disability 'flag' for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt).

Related links

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirement for a temporary incapacity

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

RapidConnect

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
