-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines considerations when reviewing and validating a
Participation Report (PR) and a Provider Appointment Report (PAR)
received from Community Development Program (CDP) providers.

Participation Report (PR) and Provider Appointment Report (PAR)

PRs and PARs are used by Community Development Program (CDP) providers
when a participant has failed to meet their mutual obligation
requirements. PRs and PARs trigger a compliance investigation to be
conducted by Services Australia.

A CDP provider may submit a PR or PAR to trigger a compliance
investigation due to:

-   non-attendance at a provider appointment
-   non-attendance at a job interview arranged by their provider
-   inappropriate behaviour at a job interview
-   refusal or failure to start suitable work
-   leaving a job voluntarily or dismissal due to misconduct
-   non-attendance at a compulsory third party appointment arranged by
    their provider, or
-   refusal to enter a Job Plan

PR and PAR details

PRs and PARs submitted to Services Australia for investigation should
include the following information:

details of the compliance action that requires investigation

details of the formal notification provided to the CDP participant about
their requirement to:

-   attend an appointment with the provider
-   attend an appointment with a third party arranged by the provider
-   attend a job interview

any other relevant information which may assist Services Australia
investigate the compliance action

Invalid failures

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers must be
reasonably satisfied a failure is legislatively 'valid' (that is, has
actually occurred) before it can be applied.

The most common reason Services Australia might consider a failure
invalid include:

-   the CDP participant was not given reasonable notice of the
    appointment or requirement. See Assessing reasonable notice
-   the CDP participant actually did attend/was not required to attend
    on the incident date
-   the CDP participant did meet their job search requirements
-   the job the CDP participant was referred to work that was unsuitable
    (according to legislated definitions)
-   misconduct did not occur

While the PST-skilled Service Officer needs to be satisfied the reported
failure is valid, this does not mean the Service Officer needs to
confirm this in every case. For example, if the CDP participant is not
disputing they understood where and when they were required to attend,
or that they were given adequate advance notice, generally it can be
accepted they have been notified correctly.

Validation processes before a failure is generated

Measures are in place within Services Australia and the Employment
Services System (ESS) to help ensure a failure is not generated if it is
not valid.

Department of Employment and Workplace Relations validation

To help ensure the failure is valid and that PRs and PARs have the
information required by Services Australia, ESS includes prompts and
requires certain information to be recorded by the provider before the
PR or PAR can be submitted.

Systems checks automatically applied before a failure can be generated
include:

-   whether the CDP participant was active on their caseload on the
    incident date
-   if the incident date(s) match activity start and end dates in a CDP
    participant's Job Plan
-   does the CDP participant have a job search code in their Job Plan

Mandatory fields a provider must also complete before a failure is
generated include:

incident date

details of the failure, including:

-   time and location of the failure as appropriate
-   notification method
    Note: all details of notification are not required in the Job Plan.
    Providers often include the overall requirement in the Job Plan with
    start and end dates but issue the further details of the requirement
    verbally, via e-mail, letter or through the Activity Diary

correct notification is attached as evidence to the PR

did the CDP participant give prior notice of their inability to attend,
if appropriate

has the provider discussed the matter with the CDP participant

If a compliance action has already been lodged for that date, ensure the
CDP participant had more than one requirement on the day before lodging
another report.

If the report is created, ESS will also check and provide further
prompts to a provider including

if the CDP participant:

-   is on a nil rate
-   declared earnings up to 28 days from the incident date
-   had a current employment placement in the fortnight prior to the
    requirement
-   has any vulnerability
-   has a participation requirement and is receiving a participation
    payment on the incident date
-   has an early school leaver or principal carer requirement on the
    incident date

ensuring a No Show, No Pay PR was not due to distance issues if a PR has
been rejected for this reason in the past 9 months

Services Australia validation

All reports a provider submits to Services Australia also go through an
automatic system validation process before a failure investigation is
generated.

The validation that occurs ensures the CDP participant:

-   was in receipt of a participation payment on the event date (other
    than for Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) failures)
-   has not/is not expected to commence full-time study or an
    apprenticeship within the next 3 days (applies to Youth Allowance
    (YA) CDP participants only)
-   does not have an outstanding Comprehensive Compliance Assessment
    (CCA)
-   was not serving a serious failure period or UNPP on the incident
    date

This validation is important as it confirms (as far as possible) that
before a failure is generated for investigation, the failure is valid.
Unless the CDP participant or the investigation indicates otherwise, the
investigation would generally commence with an assumption that the
failure is valid.

Investigating a failure

Once a failure has been generated in the Services Australia system, it
requires investigation. This can include a number of different elements
dependent on the type of failure generated and the discussion with the
CDP participant.

Identification and investigation of the facts generally commence with a
review of the PR or PAR and, the participant's record, and by asking the
participant to explain why they have not met the requirement (as
reported). See Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements.

Amending failure incident date

When the Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officer
identifies that the failure incident date recorded by the provider does
not reflect the incident described in the report, it should be returned
to the provider with the relevant free text allowing them to update if
appropriate.

System restrictions do not allow for a No Show, No Pay investigation to
be generated or a failure applied if the incident date is a weekend. To
manage this, providers will send Services Australia a PR with an
incident date equal to the Monday following the date the incident
actually occurred. See Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate
in a job interview. The Resources page contains examples of when it
would be appropriate for Services Australia to amend a failure reason or
incident date.

PRs for non-attendance at a provider appointment, when a Non-Attendance
Report (NAR) or PAR is the appropriate compliance action, are invalid
and should be rejected.

Assessing suitability of employment

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers
investigating an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) failure are
required to consider:

-   the suitability of the work for the CDP participant and
-   the reasons for leaving employment

For more information, see Suitable/unsuitable work.

PST-skilled Service Officers investigating a failure for refusing,
failing to accept or failing to commence suitable work are required to
consider:

-   the suitability of the work for the CDP participant and
-   the reasons for not accepting or commencing work

See Refusing or failing to accept a suitable job offer.

Assessing the terms of a Job Plan

Depending on the failure type, Participation Solutions Team
(PST)-skilled Service Officers may be required to consider the terms
outlined in the CDP participant's Job Plan.

A failure related to a Job Plan term can be applied only where:

-   the requirement is compulsory
-   the requirement was reasonable and suitable (in line with relevant
    policies), and
-   the CDP participant received proper notification of the requirement

Proper notification includes:

-   clear information about the times and dates of the requirement
-   details of the location of the requirement
-   clear instructions about what the CDP participant must do if they
    are unable to attend, for example, who to notify and when
-   reasonable notice prior to the start of the requirement

If a requirement is included in a CDP participant's Job Plan as
compulsory, the provider may specify some of these details separately.
For example, date, days and time of attendance can be provided
separately. The provider will generally use the Activity Diary to advise
the participant of these additional details.

PST-skilled Service Officers are required to ensure there are no
conflicting compulsory requirements contained in the Job Plan. For
example, a scheduled provider appointment has not been booked for the
same time as an appointment arranged by the provider with a third party.

It is expected that when investigating any Job Plan related failure or
if a CDP participant is disputing being adequately notified of their
requirements, staff will review the terms to ensure they are appropriate
and not conflicting or otherwise unreasonable.

When a CDP participant is refusing to sign a Job Plan or has indicated
they are struggling to fully meet the requirements in their Job Plan, a
more thorough review of the content of the Job Plan is required. This
ensures requirements are reasonable, do not exceed the CDP participant's
assessed capacity, do not conflict with each other, and take into
consideration other aspects of their circumstances, e.g. principal carer
status.

Note: a CDP participant's circumstances can change. A requirement that
was reasonable at the time a CDP participant entered into the Job Plan
may no longer be reasonable at the time they failed to comply.

Returning a report to the provider for further information

There may be circumstances when the PR or PAR does not contain all
information the Service Officer needs to make the decision, or when the
information provided by the participant conflicts with the provider's
statement in the report. In this case, the Service Officer should
attempt to contact the provider by phone for clarification.

When contact is unsuccessful, the report can be returned to the provider
for further information. The provider has 5 working days from the date
the report was returned to provide either the correct incident date or
the additional detail and resubmit it to Services Australia for
investigation.

When returning a report to the provider for further information,
appropriate free text comments clearly explaining the reason and the
additional information needed must be included.

The Resources page contains scenarios of when it would, or would not, be
appropriate for a Service Officer with Participation Failure Decision
(PFDEC) or 8 Week Non-Payment Period Decision (WNPPD) security resource
to amend a failure reason or incident date.

Related Links

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Assessing reasonable notice

Not meeting points target or job search requirements

Gathering and assessing evidence for a job seeker compliance
investigation

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) participants with their requirements

Conducting compliance investigations

Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider

Refusing to enter into a Job Plan or Participation Plan

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a job interview

Non-attendance at compulsory provider managed appointments

Refusing or failing to accept a suitable job offer

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Investigating a connection failure

Investigating a non-attendance failure

Investigating a No Show, No Pay failure

Assessing a serious failure for refusing to accept or failing to
commence a suitable job

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Establishing contact with the job seeker to discuss non-compliance or
potential barriers to compliance

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised

Mutual obligation requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
