
Inactivating job seekers registration for volunteer Employment Services job seekers 001-02060040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a volunteer job seeker's registration can be
inactivated.

Volunteer job seekers

A volunteer job seeker is a job seeker who is not subject to mutual
obligation requirements. When volunteer job seekers request or indicate
they no longer wish to be registered as looking for work, they can have
their job seeker registration inactivated manually. This may be due to a
number of circumstances such as commencing work or study, or no longer
actively pursuing employment.

Volunteer job seekers can access Workforce Australia Online services
indefinitely.

All volunteer job seekers are referred to Workforce Australia Online
employment services.

Volunteers may, at any time, tell the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations or Services Australia they no longer wish to
participate.

Inactivate the registration of job seekers

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements, cannot have their
registration manually inactivated by Services Australia.

Tell volunteer job seekers requesting inactivation to contact the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations as they may approve a
short suspension from employment services which may, depending on the
job seeker's circumstances, be more suitable than an inactivation.

A volunteer registration will inactivate automatically if they do not
use their online account for 12 months. If they want to regain access to
Workforce Australia Online as a volunteer they will need to re-register
via their online account.

Parenting Payment (PP) customers

Job seekers receiving Parenting Payment and who are not subject to
mutual obligation requirements should be advised that as a volunteer,
they can access Workforce Australia Online as a volunteer indefinitely.
The Service Officer can however inactivate the job seeker.

Mature age, principal carers and partial capacity to work

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements who are 55 years of age
and over, are required to remain connected with a Workforce Australia,
and cannot have their job seeker registration inactivated by Services
Australia. However, if they are fully meeting their mutual obligation
requirements, their employment services may be suspended by the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations or by their provider
and they will not be required to attend ongoing interviews with the
provider. Job seekers who are 55 years of age and over are obliged to
accept any offer of suitable paid work (either full-time or an increase
in hours) and all referrals to job interviews.

Community Development Programme (CDP)

CDP Centrelink managed job seekers can voluntarily participate in the
Community Development Programme (CDP). As each remote area has only one
provider, the job seeker should be advised to contact their CDP provider
to discuss cancelling their registration.

Re-registration

If a customer's job seeker registration has been inactivated and the job
seeker wishes to be re-registered, Service Officers should advise the
job seeker to access their Workforce Australia Online account via myGov
or the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations. Service
Officers should register the job seeker via the Job Seeker Registration
Workflow where assistance is required.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport

Related links

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
