
Calculating the effect of Job Seeker Compliance Framework failure penalties on fortnightly instalments 001-10120050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the recovery of penalty amounts incurred under
the Job Seeker Compliance Framework, including No Show, No Pay,
reconnection and non-attendance failures and how these affect a
Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker's fortnightly
instalments.

Penalty recovery date

The earliest recovery date for a No Show, No Pay failure penalty amount
is the end of the instalment period following the instalment period in
which the CDP job seeker was notified of the decision to apply the
failure.

For Non-attendance failures and reconnection failure penalties the
earliest penalty recovery date is the date the failure is imposed if
this is also on or after the end of an outstanding entitlement period
during which a penalty has accrued. Once the earliest recovery date has
been calculated it cannot be changed.

The penalty amount will remain provisional until reporting for the
relevant instalment period has been completed, at which time the final
penalty amount can be calculated. This means when a penalty period
accrues over two or more instalment periods, penalty recovery in any
instalment period is limited to the non-attendance failure period that
falls within that instalment period.

When multiple failures have occurred, the recovery of penalty amounts
occurs in order from the oldest to most recent, with the oldest being
determined based on the earliest recovery date then the event date for
each failure.

Payment components affected by penalty recovery

Whilst the penalties are calculated based on the basic rate,
participation related supplementary payments and Energy Supplement (when
this is received fortnightly), the penalty amount is recovered from the
CDP job seeker's basic rate of participation payment. A penalty amount
is not recovered from add-ons, supplementary or family assistance
payments.

Amount of penalty recovery

The penalty amount to be recovered from a CDP job seeker's payment will
be confirmed at the time they report. Any outstanding penalty amount, or
penalty accrued during the reporting period may be recovered from the
payment issued for that period. However, the maximum amount that can be
recovered in an instalment period is limited to the maximum basic rate
of participation payment payable during that instalment period. Any
remaining balance of the penalty amount is then recovered from
subsequent instalment periods.

The recovery of a non-attendance failure, reconnection failure or No
Show, No Pay failure penalty amount takes precedence over the recovery
of a debt and occurs prior to Income Management processing.

Transferring to another participation payment

When a CDP job seeker transfers to another participation payment while a
penalty amount is still owing, the outstanding balance will transfer to
the new payment. An outstanding penalty amount balance is only waived 26
weeks after a CDP job seeker's participation payment is:

-   no longer subject to participation requirements, or
-   cancelled and the CDP job seeker has not transferred to a new
    participation payment

When an outstanding penalty amount is waived, the penalty balance for
the associated failure will be updated to nil.

Tax liability

The CDP job seeker's tax liability is assessed on the participation
payment actually received by the CDP job seeker after deduction of the
penalty amount. Any penalties incurred by the CDP job seeker are
reflected as 'non reportable' amounts on the CDP job seeker's income
support taxation notice of assessment.

Related links

Investigating a reconnection failure

Investigating a No Show, No Pay Failure

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Reconnection failure penalties

No Show, No Pay failure penalties

Serious failure penalties

Manually adjusting non-payment period start and end dates

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
