-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document assists Participation Solutions Team (PST) skilled Service
Officers investigating compliance actions where notification of the
requirement is in doubt.

Note: the term 'job seeker' in this procedure also refers to ParentsNext
(PNX) and Community Development Program (CDP) participants.

Requirement for proper and reasonable notice

Under Social Security Law, all job seekers must receive appropriate and
reasonable notice of a compulsory requirement, for example, attending an
appointment or activity. Notice of a requirement can be given verbally
or in writing by:

-   Employment Services Providers
-   ParentsNext Providers
-   Disability Employment Services Providers (DES)
-   Community Development Program Providers (CDP), and
-   Services Australia

Proper notice must include the date, time, location of the compulsory
requirement and the consequences for failing to attend or failing to
advise of an inability to attend.

When a non-compliance event is reported, information about the notice
that was issued by the provider to the job seeker is linked to the
provider report.

A compliance action cannot be applied if the job seeker did not receive
appropriate and reasonable notification. PST-skilled Service Officers
only need to consider if appropriate and reasonable notice was given if
the job seeker disputes receiving notification of the requirement.

Reasonable notice

Reasonable notice requires that a job seeker is given sufficient time
to:

-   receive notice of a requirement, appropriate to the delivery method,
    and
-   make the necessary arrangements needed to comply with the
    requirement

Note: the policy relating to timeframes that are considered 'reasonable'
varies depending on how the notice is issued.

Reminder notices

Job seekers may receive secondary or reminder notifications. For
example, when an appointment or activity is booked in the Calendar or
Online Diary. Eligible job seekers may also receive automatic reminder
SMS's on the day before an appointment. These act as a reminder only and
supports previous notification/s issued.

Non-receipt of mail

If a letter was correctly addressed and posted, it is deemed to have
been received by the job seeker:

-   after the appropriate amount of delivery time has elapsed, and
-   where it would normally be delivered by post

Note: deemed delivery does not necessarily mean the job seeker
physically received the letter. If the job seeker's only method of
communication is by mail and they advise that they have not received the
letter, reasonable excuse must be assessed. It is the job seeker's
personal responsibility to ensure they are aware of any upcoming
requirements, including those where notification may be issued verbally
or electronically.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the
Participation Obligations helpdesk.

Related links

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Rejecting a compliance action

Sending free text to providers when compliance action finalised

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
