
National Work Experience Programme 001-02280000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the National Work Experience Programme (NWEP),
including the objectives of participation in the programme and who is
eligible to participate. The NWEP seeks to increase the work experience
and employment opportunities available for job seekers.

On this Page:

Objective of National Work Experience Programme

The objectives of NWEP is to address barriers to employer demand by
providing opportunities for job seekers that increases their chances of
obtaining sustainable employment.

Participation in the National Work Experience Programme

Job seekers on JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Special
Benefit (SpB) and Parenting Payment both Partnered and Single are
eligible.

Job seekers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), who are under
the age of 35, are also able to participate in some circumstances.

Services Australia’s Role

The agency's role is:

-   enable job seekers to receive an approved programme of work
    supplement of $20.80 per fortnight on top of their income support
    payment
-   provide basic information about the programme to job seekers who are
    interested, and advise them they need to contact their Provider for
    further information and referral to the programme, and
-   implement appropriate compliance measures where necessary

Provider's Role

The jobactive organisations and DES Providers are responsible for job
seeker participation in NWEP. Providers will be able to place job
seekers in up to four weeks unpaid work experience, for up to 25 hours
per week or at their assessed capacity, where there is potential for
short term or ongoing paid employment.

While job seekers are undertaking NWEP, depending on the number of hours
per week they are doing, they may be required to continue undertaking
job search activities.

Job Plan

A new Job Plan will be negotiated by the jobactive Provider or
Disability Employment Services Provider when a job seeker is placed in
NWEP.

Failure to comply with a compulsory activity in job plan

A mutual obligation failure is committed where a Job Plan includes
participation in NWEP as a compulsory activity and the job seeker:

-   does not attend the NWEP activity
-   has unauthorised absences from their NWEP activity
-   fails to complete the required number of hours, or
-   engages in misconduct (disruptive or uncooperative behaviour) while
    attending a NWEP activity

A participation suspension will prompt the job seeker to contact their
provider. The provider has responsibility for notifying appropriate
reconnection requirements, and will determine when the conditions have
been met to lift the payment suspension. If the job seeker does not have
a valid reason for the mutual obligation failure a demerit or financial
penalty may also apply, depending on which Targeted Compliance Framework
zone applies.

Related links

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Provider responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Failing to attend or satisfactorily participate in a compulsory activity

Mutual obligation failures

Approved Program of Work Supplement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
