
Non-attendance at compulsory provider managed appointments 001-10070150

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the policy and procedures that apply when a job
seeker does not attend a compulsory appointment notified by their
Employment Services Provider or ParentsNext provider.

Requirement to attend a compulsory appointment

Job seekers, including ParentsNext participants, receiving a
participation payment are expected to attend compulsory appointments
arranged by their provider and to behave in an appropriate manner while
at the appointment.

This expectation applies to both provider appointments and third party
appointments arranged by the provider.

The provider has responsibility for ensuring the job seeker receives
proper notification and reasonable notice of compulsory appointments.

Attending a compulsory appointment includes the following requirements:

-   be punctual for the appointment and remain until the completion of
    the appointment
-   behave in an appropriate manner while at the appointment
-   contact their provider before the start time if they are unable to
    attend

When a job seeker fails to attend a compulsory appointment or act in an
appropriate manner while at a compulsory appointment, this is managed
using the relevant job seeker compliance system.

Prior contact

Job seekers who are unable to attend an appointment are required to
notify their provider why they are unable to attend prior to the
scheduled appointment start time. This reflects the same expectations
that an employer would have of an employee.

When the job seeker fails to comply with the requirement to make prior
contact a financial penalty may apply, even if the job seeker had a
reasonable excuse for their non-attendance, unless it was unreasonable
for them to make prior contact.

Behave in an appropriate manner while attending an appointment

Job seekers are required to behave in an appropriate manner while
attending an appointment. When inappropriate behaviour occurs while
attending an appointment, this is managed using the relevant job seeker
compliance system.

Behaving inappropriately means failing to behave in accordance with the
standards that would be commonly expected. This includes, but is not
limited to:

-   not following reasonable instructions
-   being disruptive or uncooperative
-   behaving in a manner that is aggressive, violent or offensive
-   harassing other people on the premises
-   behaving in a manner that causes risk to the health and safety of
    themselves or others
-   being intoxicated or consuming intoxicants during the appointment

Generally, this type of behaviour is only considered inappropriate when
serious in nature, deliberate and within the job seeker's control.

When a provider reports inappropriate conduct, and Services Australia
establish during a compliance investigation that the behaviour was not
in the job seeker's control, free text is sent to the provider to ensure
this can be considered for future servicing.

Managing non-compliance for job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, when a job seeker fails to
attend, is not punctual or behaves inappropriately at a compulsory
appointment, a mutual obligation failure has been committed.

When a job seeker has been notified that they are required to record
their attendance at a third party appointment and does not do so, a
mutual obligation failure has been committed

When providers report that a mutual obligation failure has been
committed, the job seeker's participation payments may be suspended.
Where payment is suspended, Services Australia will lift the payment
suspension when the provider electronically notifies that the conditions
for lifting the suspension have been met. Participation payments are
cancelled if the reconnection requirement is not met within four weeks.

Job seekers in the warning zone will accrue a demerit if the provider:

-   is not satisfied the job seeker made prior contact
-   is not satisfied the job seeker has a valid reason for not making
    prior contact, (even if the provider finds the job seeker has a
    valid reason for failing to attend) or
-   determines that misconduct has occurred and the behaviour was within
    the job seeker's control

Job seekers in the financial penalty zone will incur a financial penalty
unless:

their provider closes the Non-Compliance Report on contact with the job
seeker to discuss their non-attendance because they are satisfied the
job seeker has a valid reason, or

the job seeker satisfies Services Australia during a compliance
investigation that:

-   they had reasonable excuse for failing to attend and for failing to
    make prior contact or
-   the inappropriate behaviour was not within their control

Managing non-compliance for CDP job seekers - Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework, non-attendance at an
appointment arranged with or by a Community Development Program (CDP)
provider is managed in various ways. The action taken is based on agreed
processes, policy, and legislation for each type of appointment.

Appointment is with the CDP provider

When a CDP job seeker does not attend an appointment with their CDP
provider, or contact prior to explain why they are unable to attend,
their provider may submit:

-   a Non-Attendance Report (NAR), or
-   a NAR and a Provider Appointment Report (PAR)

A valid NAR will result in the suspension of the CDP job seeker's
payment 'Non-attendance report received' (ANR). Payment will remain
suspended until the CDP job seeker:

-   attends a re-engagement appointment, or
-   the provider determines the CDP job seeker is not required to
    re-engage

A valid PAR will result in a compliance failure for investigation by
Services Australia. The type of failure generated from a PAR will depend
on the type of appointment the CDP job seeker did not attend:

-   failure to attend a 'regular' appointment will result in a
    non-attendance failure
-   failure to attend an appointment that was a reconnection requirement
    will result in a reconnection failure

An applied non-attendance failure, will result in the CDP job seeker
entering into a non-attendance failure period. The non-attendance
failure period commences from the deemed date of notification by their
provider that their participation payment is not payable due to the
appointment they missed, and will end the day before the re-engagement
appointment or the day before the CDP job seeker is advised they are no
longer required to re-engage. The procedure, Non-attendance failure
penalties, contains further information.

An applied reconnection failure will result in the CDP job seeker
entering into a reconnection failure period until they comply, or are
notified they are no longer required to comply, with a further
reconnection requirement.

A reconnection failure period commences from the reconnection failure
event date and continues until the day before the CDP job seeker either
complies with a further reconnection requirement, or are notified they
are no longer required to comply with the requirement. The procedure,
Reconnection failure penalties, contains further information.

Once a valid NAR has been submitted, if the CDP job seeker does not
contact the CDP provider to discuss the missed appointment within 28
days, their participation payment may be cancelled 'Did not contact
provider' (DCP) and a new claim will be required if the CDP job seeker
wishes payment to restart.

Appointment is with a third party

Under the CDP Job Seeker Compliance Framework, a provider may choose to
manage failure to attend a compulsory appointment they have arranged for
a CDP job seeker with a third party by submitting a Participation Report
to Services Australia.

Upon receipt of the Participation Report:

-   a connection failure will be generated, and
-   the CDP job seeker will be sent a notification advising them to
    contact the Participation Solutions Team (PST) as soon as possible
    to discuss the non-compliance event

A PST-skilled Service Officer will investigate the compliance action and
if the CDP job seeker does not provide a reasonable excuse for failing
to provide suitable job search efforts, a connection failure will be
applied.

During the investigation, the PST-skilled Service Officer will notify
the CDP job seeker of a reconnection requirement to attend an
appointment with the CDP provider. Non-attendance with this appointment
will be managed through the NAR/PAR process.

Applied connection failures contribute to a pattern of non-compliance
for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA). An automatic CCA will
be generated based on the number of connection, non-attendance and/or
reconnection failures applied in a serious failure assessment period.
When a decision is made that a CDP job seeker has been persistently
non-compliant, a serious failure may be applied.

If the CDP job seeker does not comply with a reconnection requirement
within 28 days of first being asked to do so, their participation
payment may be automatically cancelled 'Customer failed to re-engage'
(CDR) and a new claim will be required if the CDP job seeker wishes
payment to restart.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers with their requirements

Restoring payment where a payment suspension (participation) has been
imposed for Community Development Program (CDP) participants

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a non-attendance failure

Investigating a reconnection failure

Investigating a connection failure

Re-engaging to a Community Development Program (CDP) provider

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
