[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the referral to employment assistance process
when a person completes a Claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Referral

One pathway for referral to employment assistance is when a person makes
a claim for DSP.

Employment Services Provider assistance

If a person is claiming DSP and is not on another payment with mutual
obligation requirements, they can be offered a referral to an Employment
Services Provider as a volunteer job seeker. When a claim for DSP is
lodged, claimants should be made aware of non-payment related services,
including information about employment assistance.

Some customers claiming DSP may need to meet the Program of Support
requirements for DSP.

If a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) is required to determine a person's
claim for DSP, an assessor will also determine the most appropriate
employment assistance service. If the claimant is assessed as having a
partial capacity to work, the assessor will be responsible for engaging
the claimant in participation discussions and referring them to the
appropriate Employment Services Provider.

Referral options may include Disability Employment Services (DES),
Workforce Australia, or the Community Development Program (CDP).

DSP recipients under 35 with participation requirements

DSP recipients with participation requirements who have employment
assistance as their compulsory activity will have those details in their
DSP Participation Plan. If the recipient is successful in gaining
employment they will be required to attend annual follow-up interviews.

DSP recipients who do not have participation requirements can volunteer
for referral to an Employment Services Provider. These recipients can
also choose to decline the offer of a referral at new claim stage.

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for Disability Support
Pension (SA466).

Related links

Employment assistance for people with disabilities

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Assessment Services

Mutual obligation requirements for people with an illness, injury or
disability

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Customer with an illness, injury or disability volunteers for employment
assistance

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
