
Eligibility and registration as a Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO)/No Remote Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker 001-02020050

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Training & Support

This document explains details about eligibility and registration for
Job Seeker Registration Only (JSRO) job seekers.

Definition of JSRO

JSRO customers need to be registered as job seekers in order to access
other help, but do not want to volunteer to participate in Workforce
Australia. As a result, they are not referred to a provider and do not
have access to provider services.

Job seekers in Community Development Program (CDP) are not eligible for
JSRO, however they may be eligible for No Remote Referral Required
(NRRR).

Eligibility is determined by the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations system.

Eligibility for registration as JSRO/NRRR job seeker

Customers eligible to be registered as JSRO/NRRR include:

customers who need a Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
record in order to be referred for an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt) such as customers claiming or receiving Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

full-time students applying for a supplementary allowance determination

full-time students receiving Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy who are
transferring to a job seeker payment, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
and contact prior to ceasing studies but within 4 weeks of their Student
End Date (SED)

principal carers with long term exemptions from their mutual obligation
requirements (greater than 16 weeks) who do not choose to volunteer with
employment services

certain customers receiving JSP, YA (job seekers), Parenting Payment
(PP) (with mutual obligation requirements) who are meeting their
requirements and do not wish to volunteer for employment services, but
require a Job Plan as part of their eligibility for income support
payment. This includes:

-   principal carers already meeting their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   people with a Partial Capacity to Work of 15 hours or more per week
    who are fully meeting their participation requirements
-   people with a Partial Capacity to Work of 0-14 hours per week who
    are considered volunteers in employment services
-   customers in receipt of an income support payments that have no
    mutual obligation requirements and who do not choose to volunteer
    with employment services are assessed as eligible for child Care
    Subsidy (CCS). If they want to apply for Additional Child Care
    Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) they will need to be registered
    as JSRO/NRRR job seekers in order for a voluntary Job Plan to be
    negotiated prior to applying for ACCS (Transition to Work)
-   New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)/Self-Employment Assistance
    participants presenting to Services Australia after the 39 weeks of
    participation in the Scheme to claim income support. Note: there is
    currently no JSRO reason for 'Self-Employment Assistance
    participants' available. If it is identified that the claimant is
    participating in Self-Employment Assistance, select the 'NEIS
    participant' reason to register them as JSRO job seekers. For more
    details on Self-Employment Assistance, see New Enterprise Incentive
    Scheme (NEIS) and Self-Employment Assistance

Management of registration as JSRO

Customers are registered for JSRO/NRRR using either the Participation
Interview or Job Seeker Registration workflow in Process Direct, and
selecting appropriate responses. However, if a job seeker has already
connected to a provider, they cannot also be registered as JSRO/NRRR.

A JSRO/NRRR registration lasts as long as it is appropriate, depending
on the job seeker's circumstances. If job seekers do not meet the
criteria for JSRO/NRRR registration at any time, such as a principal
carer no longer meeting their mutual obligation requirements, the
JSRO/NRRR flag must be removed. The customer's registration is changed
to Fully Eligible Participant (FEP)/Remote Fully Eligible (RFE) and they
are referred to a provider, if suitable. JSRO applies only to the
current period of registration and the flag must be removed before
re-registration, even if it continues to be JSRO.

Where a JSRO job seeker chooses to be assessed to determine eligibility
for additional services and allowances, a Job Seeker Snapshot is to be
completed so the job seeker can be referred to a suitable provider. A
Job Seeker Snapshot is not necessary for NRRR job seekers except where
an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required.

Related links

Registering customer as a job seeker

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through Workforce
Australia

Participation with Workforce Australia

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Eligibility for employment assistance as a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP)

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable
Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student)

Self service terminals

Community Development Program (CDP)

Participation Interview

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) and Self-Employment Assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
