
Refusing or failing to accept a suitable job offer 001-10100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines policy and procedures that apply where a job
seeker refuses, or fails to accept, a suitable offer of employment.
Note: ParentsNext providers cannot report this type of non-compliance
event.

Policy context

Australia's welfare system is designed to provide a strong safety net
for those who are unable to support themselves.

People of working age who are unemployed but have the capacity to work
have access to income support while they are looking for work. Job
seekers on a participation payment are expected to be actively seeking
work and meeting mutual obligation requirements in return for payment.

Job seekers receiving a participation payment, except ParentsNext
participants, are also required to accept offers of suitable work. Job
seekers who accept a suitable offer of employment are expected to
commence this employment.

Where a job seeker is not meeting mutual obligation requirements and/or
is not genuine in their efforts to find work, the job seeker compliance
systems are intended to act as a deterrent and to motivate future
compliance with requirements.

Suitable work

A failure has not been committed if the employment was not suitable work
for the job seeker or the job seeker had a reasonable excuse for
refusing, or failing to accept the job offer.

Consequences of refusing, failing to accept or commence suitable work

Where a job seeker refuses, fails to accept or does not commence
suitable work without a reasonable excuse, Services Australia is
required to apply legislation and policy in a firm but fair manner. This
ensures that the serious nature of this behaviour is consistently
reinforced.

The consequence for this compliance event depends on which job seeker
compliance system is appropriate.

Under the:

Targeted Compliance Framework a work refusal failure has been committed:

-   If a reasonable excuse is not established for the work refusal
    failure, the job seeker's payment will be cancelled and a post
    cancellation non-payment period affects the start date for a
    participation payment if they reclaim within 4 weeks

Job Seeker Compliance Framework:

-   A serious failure has occurred and the job seeker is required to
    serve an 8 week serious failure period during which a participation
    payment is not payable
-   Where a job seeker fails to commence a suitable job for which they
    received relocation assistance within the past 6 months, an
    Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) of up to 12 weeks may apply

Note: ParentsNext participants are not subject to compliance action
where they refuse, or fail to accept, a suitable offer of employment.

Identifying compliance events

Where a provider identifies a job seeker refused, failed to accept or
did not commence work as planned, the provider is required to talk with
the job seeker, assess whether the work was suitable and decide if the
job seeker has a valid reason for refusing the job offer. The provider
electronically notifies Services Australia where they are satisfied that
a non-compliance event occurred without valid reason. Automatic
validation occurs before compliance action is generated to ensure the
job seeker was receiving a participation payment on the event date.

Services Australia may generate compliance action where an employer
contacts Services Australia directly to advise that a job offer not
arranged by a provider has been refused or a job seeker failed to accept
or commence a job.

When compliance action is generated Services Australia are responsible
for determining if a failure has been committed.

Investigating refusal, failure to accept or commence suitable work

Participation Solutions Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers are
responsible for undertaking the compliance investigation and determining
if a failure has been committed.

The investigation will focus on the matters that are relevant to making
an evidence-based decision that is in line with the legislative
framework and policy intent.

Relevant matters include:

whether the employment was suitable work for the job seeker, and

whether the job seeker had a reasonable excuse for:

-   refusing, or failing to accept the job offer, or
-   not commencing suitable employment as planned

During the compliance investigation, the PST-skilled Service Officer is
responsible for:

-   investigating the reason why the job seeker refused, failed to
    accept or did not commence suitable work
-   delivering strong messages that reinforce the expectations that job
    seekers are prepared to enter into suitable work
-   gathering sufficient evidence required to make a good decision,
    including consultation with specialists if the impact of job seeker
    circumstances on the suitability of work or reasons for refusing the
    work are unclear
-   determining whether an work refusal failure has been committed
    (under Targeted Compliance Framework) or a serious failure is
    applied (under Job Seeker Compliance Framework)
-   explaining this decision to the job seeker, including their review
    rights

Related links

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Suitable/unsuitable work

Targeted Compliance Framework

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Work refusal failures

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

Job Seeker Compliance Framework waiver and hardship provisions

Waiving a serious failure period

Serious failure hardship provisions

Serious failure penalties

Gathering information and weighing evidence to establish facts for a
compliance investigation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
