
Not meeting job search requirements 001-10070110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the processes that apply when a job seeker does
not meet their job search or monthly points target in their Job Plan.

Job search requirements and monthly points target

Job seekers who are receiving a participation payment are required to
actively seek and be willing to accept any offers of suitable work.

Note: this type of non-compliance event cannot be reported by a
ParentsNext provider. Job search is not a compulsory requirement for
ParentsNext participants and cannot be included in their Participation
Plan.

Most Job Plans under the Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF) and the Job
Seeker Compliance Model (JSCM) include job search related activities as
a compulsory requirement.

From December 2020, all job seekers granted a participation payment in a
New Employment Services Model (NESM) region will have a Points Based
Activation System (PBAS) activity in their Job Plan. The monthly points
target is a new and flexible approach to meeting mutual obligation
requirements. Instead of having to apply for a set number of jobs, job
seekers will be required to meet a specified monthly points target each
reporting period. The monthly points target will be based on a
participant's individual circumstances. If the job seeker is with a
jobactive provider, their Job Plan may include a compulsory requirement
that involves either:

-   undertaking and providing evidence of a certain number of job
    searches each month, or
-   meeting a personalised monthly points target each month

TCF Job Plans can only contain one of these requirements at any given
time. Existing job seekers in NESM regions can choose to join the trial,
to do so they must talk to their provider.

JSCM Job Plans cannot contain a requirement to meet a monthly points
target. Most JSCM Job Plans will include a requirement to undertake and
report a specified number of job searches each month.

Providers are responsible for notifying job seekers of the job search
related requirement that applies to them, and for setting the monthly
target for that requirement.

Compulsory job search requirements

A compulsory job search requirement includes the:

-   number of job searches that must be undertaken each month, and
-   the date each month the job seeker is required to provide evidence
    they have met this requirement

When setting the number of compulsory job searches the job seeker is
required to do per month, the provider considers:

-   social security law
-   guidelines provided by the Department of Education, Skills and
    Employment, and
-   the job seeker's circumstances and assessed capacity

Providers are responsible for notifying the job seeker how and when they
are to report their job search efforts to them. Job seekers are required
to provide evidence they have met their job search requirement to their
provider by close of business on the date specified in their Job Plan.

Requirement to meet a monthly points target

The monthly points target only applies to job seekers who have a
jobactive provider and are living in a NESM region.

The monthly points target cannot be a compulsory requirement for a job
seeker with:

-   a Community Development Program provider, or
-   a ParentsNext provider, or
-   a provider outside of the NESM regions

The job seeker's Job Plan will specify that the job seeker must meet
their monthly points target. It will not include the number of points
the job seeker is required to get. The points target can be achieved
through a variety of work-related activities, such as:

-   applying for a job
-   updating their career profile
-   going for a job interview
-   accepting a job offer, or
-   doing paid work

A job seeker's monthly points target is flexible and can change. This
can occur when a job seeker exceeds their monthly points target in the
reporting period. The excess points can be carried over into the next
reporting period, reducing the number of points required to be met by
the job seeker.

The provider tailors a job seeker's monthly points target based on:

-   where they live
-   any activities they are doing
-   the job seeker's personal circumstances (such as caring
    responsibilities or assessed capacity)

The monthly points target is displayed on the job seeker's Dashboard and
points reporting page in their jobactive account.

The job seeker must record on their points reporting page the activities
they do to accrue points.

For more information about monthly points targets see Applying mutual
obligation requirements.

Acting on a job referral or opportunity

Job seekers are required to act on a job referral and job opportunity.

Specific job referrals or opportunities the job seeker is required to
act on are notified by their provider. Notification includes the
timeframe in which the job seeker is required to act on the specific job
referral or opportunity.

Job seekers having difficulty meeting their job search requirement or monthly points target

If a job seeker is having difficulties in meeting their job search
requirement or monthly points target, or following up a specific job
referral or opportunity the provider has notified, they must contact
their provider to discuss this as soon as possible.

Failing to meet a job search requirement or follow up a job opportunity

Providers are responsible for monitoring compliance with job search
efforts to ensure the job seeker has satisfactorily met their job search
requirement, and for monitoring compliance with job referrals.

Unsatisfactory job search efforts include:

-   failing to provide evidence the required number of job searches has
    been undertaken by close of business on the due date
-   looking for work in too narrow a field
-   falsifying job search efforts
-   failing to act on a referral from a provider to a specific job, or
-   submitting poor quality job applications

When job search efforts are unsatisfactory, the provider uses the
applicable job seeker compliance system to re-engage the job seeker and
manage the non-compliance event.

Failing to meet monthly points target

A job seeker's monthly points target and accrued points are displayed on
their points reporting page and the Dashboard in their jobactive
account. If a job seeker fails to meet their monthly points target a
mutual obligation failure is generated. The job seeker will need to
discuss the failure with their provider.

Related links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Mutual obligation failures

Reporting non-compliance - Targeted Compliance Framework

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeted Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a connection failure

Applying mutual obligation requirements

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Suitable/unsuitable work

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Assessing reasonable excuse for non-compliance with mutual obligation
requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
