
Registering a customer as a job seeker 001-02040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to register a customer as a job seeker.

On this page:

Eligible job seekers

Job seekers eligible for services from Employment Services Providers
need to register to access these services. Services Australia usually
conducts registration for job seekers with Mutual Obligation
Requirements, when the job seeker is claiming an income support payment
or registration may be done automatically on submission of online claim.

Types of job seeker registration

There are several types of job seeker registration for employment
assistance:

Customers claiming or receiving Job Seeker Payment (JSP), Youth
Allowance (YA) (job seeker) including early school leavers and Parenting
Payment (PP) recipients with Mutual Obligation Requirements are required
to register as Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers. Young
people who present with at least one non-vocational barrier are eligible
for FEP registration and will have either a Vulnerable Youth (VY) or
Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S)) flag recorded on their record. Other
customers claiming or receiving a payment without Mutual Obligation
Requirements may be eligible to be registered as a volunteer, such as
Disability Support Pension (DSP) recipients

Job seekers in a Department of Education, Skills and Employment
designated remote area are referred to a Community Development Programme
(CDP) provider. In CDP regions, there is no streaming. Job seekers in
CDP regions can be registered as Remote Fully Eligible (RFE) or No CDP
Referral Required (NRRR). In these areas, the job seeker will not have a
choice of providers, as there is only one CDP provider servicing each
area. The CDP provider will provide similar services to jobactive and
DES

Customers requiring registration only to access other assistance, and
who do not require a referral to a jobactive for Employment Provider
Services or a CDP provider, can be registered as No Stream Services
Referral Required (NSSRR)/No CDP Referral Required (NRRR). This
includes:

-   customers who need a Department of Education, Skills and Employment
    record to be referred for an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
    such as customers claiming or receiving Disability Support Pension
    (DSP)
-   full-time students who are transferring to a job seeker payment
    within 4 weeks of their student end date
-   some customers requiring a Job Plan as a condition of their family
    or income support payment. This includes principal carers or people
    assessed as having a partial capacity to work who already fully
    meeting their requirements by undertaking suitable work of at least
    30 hours per fortnight and do not want to volunteer for employment
    services during this period

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS) participants presenting to
Services Australia after 39 weeks of participation in the scheme to
claim income support

Registered young people

Young people who have registered will be able to access education, a
variety of youth services, or other programs according to their assessed
needs and availability. Note: any claimant for YA as a job seeker who is
under 22 and has not completed Year 12 or attained an equivalent
qualification but is currently undertaking a program of study or
training that would fully meet their Mutual Obligation Requirements must
be registered as a FEP/RFE.

Registration by Services Australia

The process of registering a job seeker is completed using either the
Participation Interview or Looking for Work (LFW) workflows. These tools
are used to assess the type of service a job seeker is eligible for.

Automatic registration

For some job seekers, registration might have already been completed
during the claim submission process. In these cases, the role of
Services Australia is to encourage completion of the job seeker
snapshot/JSCI online or complete with job seeker.

If eligible for jobactive services, job seekers are automatically
referred to Online jobactive Employment Services (unless already
connected to a jobactive provider) when they are registered.

On Submission of new claim, the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment via the Digital Services Contact Line will assess suitability
for Online Employment Services (OES) and refer customers to physical
jobactive provider where appropriate.

Job seekers eligible for CDP, TtW or ParentsNext are referred to a
provider of their choice who provide these services. Services Australia
will arrange an initial appointment with the provider.

Issuing a Job Seeker Identification (JSID) number

When a customer initially contacts Services Australia to register as a
job seeker, the agency issues a Job Seeker Identification (JSID) number.
This is done in person but if a JSID number has been issued previously
and the registration is still current, the job seeker can be advised of
the number over the phone.

Structural Adjustment Programmes

There are a number of Structural Adjustment Programmes that provide
recently retrenched workers from eligible companies with immediate
access to employment support services at the Stream B level to assist
them to find new employment. The current programmes are:

-   Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Programme, and
-   Forestry Industry in Tasmania Structural Adjustment Programme

Workers and contractors made redundant from the Tasmanian Forestry Industry

Assistance available

Workers and contractors who have been made redundant from the Tasmanian
Forestry Industry will be able to access immediate assistance to help
them get back into the workforce. Under these Structural Adjustment
Programmes workers who have been made redundant from an eligible company
in the forestry industry in Tasmania will be eligible for Stream B.

Service Officers must correctly identify Tasmanian Forestry Workers
before applying the Tasmanian Forest Industry Redundant Workers checkbox
during job seeker registration. For more information, see the Process
tab.

Workers made redundant from the automotive manufacturing industry

Assistance available

Eligible job seekers who have registered and commenced services under
the Automotive Industry Structural Adjustment Programme will have access
to employment support at the Stream B level.

Workers made redundant from eligible automotive manufacturing companies
may be eligible for immediate access to Stream B employment support
through jobactive to assist them to get back into the workforce.
Affected workers are required to provide evidence of redundancy when
they register with jobactive.

Workers not applying for income support may register directly with a
jobactive for this support.

Contents

Registering Fully Eligible Participant (FEP) job seekers in jobactive

Registering Volunteer job seekers

Identification Confirmation for registration as a Volunteer Job Seeker

Related links

Eligibility to access employment assistance services through jobactive

Eligibility for Employment Services as a volunteer

Eligibility for employment assistance as a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP)

Employment Services Providers

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Direct registration with a provider for disability employment assistance
services

Eligibility and registration for employment assistance as a Vulnerable
Youth (VY) or Vulnerable Youth (Student) (VY(S))

Eligibility and registration as a No Stream Services Referral Required
(NSSRR)/No CDP Referral Required (NRRR) job seeker

Community Development Programme (CDP)

Participation Interview

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
