
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customers returning to (or continuing in) part-time study 001-19051532

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect of part-time study on the payments of
a customer receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and the impact on their
mutual obligation requirements.

Eligibility for JSP

Students studying part-time may be eligible for JSP in certain
circumstances. Customers must:

meet all normal qualifications

be studying a course that is

-   deemed to be 'part-time' by the educational institution they are
    enrolled with, and
-   less than 20 hours per week study time including both contact and
    non-contact hours

Customers undertaking part-time study will be required to undertake
additional activities to meet their mutual obligation requirements.

For customers receiving JSP, approval of part-time study outside the
short course policy can continue as long as they continue to meet all of
their mutual obligation requirements, including attending appointments
and accepting offers of employment. For example, a customer may be
studying at night and willing to look for work during the day. The
customer will remain qualified for JSP, if they are:

-   seeking and willing to undertake suitable work, and
-   their studies do not restrict their ability to satisfy their mutual
    obligation requirements

This applies even when the course cannot be approved as fully meeting or
counting towards their mutual obligation requirements. Part-time study
can only be included as a compulsory activity in the customer's Job Plan
by their Employment Services Provider.

Principal carer parents and customers with a Partial Capacity to Work or
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity of 15-29 hours are the only customers
who can fully meet their mutual obligation requirements by undertaking
part-time study of 15 hours or more per week or a combination of study
and other approved activities.

While other customers may undertake part-time study, the activity will
be approved by their Employment Services Provider.

Study for provider managed customers

When the customer is managed by an Employment Services Provider, the
provider will approve the part-time study and negotiate their Job Plan.

Customers can undertake part-time study or training at any time. In some
circumstances it can meet their Annual Activity Requirement.

Before referring a customer to training, the provider will determine
whether training is in their best interests and identify a suitable
course.

Principal Carer Parents

Principal carers on JSP can participate in approved study of at least 15
hours per week (30 hours per fortnight) in any combination of contact
and non-contact hours to fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements. Single principal carers must first apply and qualify for
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) before study can be approved. If
they are not participating in suitable activities at claim they will be
referred to an Employment Services Provider.

If the study is less than 15 hours per week the principal carer must
participate in another activity to fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements. This could be a combination of paid work and study, or
self-employment and study. See Mutual obligation requirements for
principal carers for information on combinations of approved activities
for principal carers.

If no other activity can be approved to fully meet the customer's
requirements, they must be referred to an Employment Services Provider
and will have job search requirements in addition to their hours of
study. The Provider will determine if the part-time study can be
approved.

Customers with a Partial Capacity to Work (PCW) or Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (TRWC)

Customers assessed as having a PCW or TRWC of 15 hours or more per week
are able to fully meet their mutual obligation requirements if
participating in part-time study up to their assessed work capacity.

If their study is less than 15 hours per week they must participate in
another activity to fully meet their mutual obligation requirements.
This could be a combination of paid work and study, or self-employment
and study. See Approved activities for customers assessed as having a
partial capacity to work (PCW) for information on combinations of
approved activities for customers with a PCW.

If their study, or combination of approved activities is for fewer hours
than their assessed work capacity, they must be referred to an
Employment Services Provider and will be required to undertake other
activities to satisfy their mutual obligation requirements.

PCW or TRWC customers with an assessed capacity of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per
week will only be able to undertake study as a voluntary activity. These
customers will still be required to attend quarterly participation
interviews with Services Australia as their compulsory activity.

Customer entitled to Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

JSP (single principal carers) qualifies as a PES attracting income
support payment. This means Parenting Payment Single (PPS) customers who
transfer to JSP (single principal carer) will continue to be able to
qualify for PES at any point in time (where all other qualifications are
met). These customers will no longer be required to be continuing in the
same course of study to retain access to PES.

Activity is part-time course for Indigenous customers

If the activity is a part-time course, and the customer is Indigenous,
they may be eligible for assistance. For example, Incidentals Allowance,
under the ABSTUDY scheme. If the customer is thinking about applying for
ABSTUDY for the part-time course, then the customer must be made aware
that the course cannot be included as a compulsory part of the Job Plan.
A customer is not eligible for ABSTUDY assistance if the same course of
study is a compulsory part of the customer's Job Plan. Customers are
eligible to apply for ABSTUDY assistance if the course is only a
voluntary component.

The Resources page provides an example of a customer returning to
part-time study.

Related links

Initial contact with students claiming Pensioner Education Supplement
(PES) and ABSTUDY PES

Part-time or full-time study as an approved activity for JobSeeker
Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Austudy

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

Eligibility for ABSTUDY

Cancellation of, or changes to qualifying payment for Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), ABSTUDY PES or Assistance for Isolated
Children PES

Annual Activity Requirements for jobactive

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
