
Job Seeker Snapshot factors 001-02050050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines factors that contribute to the Job Seeker
Snapshot outcome.

Job Seeker Snapshot's 18 factors

The Job Seeker Snapshot is made up of 18 factors that contribute to a
job seeker's disadvantage in obtaining and maintaining employment. Each
factor is allocated a weighting or points that indicate the relative
impact the factor has on the job seeker's ability to find work. The Job
Seeker Snapshot is primarily used to determine the level of service for
the job seeker who is referred to Employment Services Providers.

The Department of Education, Skills and Employment have determined the
Job Seeker Snapshot factors and the number of points allocated to each
factor as a result of comprehensive research and analysis of data. The
Process page contains details of the 18 Job Seeker Snapshot factors.

Identifying disadvantage

The Job Seeker Snapshot is used to identify the relative disadvantage
that job seekers have in finding employment because of their personal
circumstances, labour market skills and local labour market environment.
Responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot questions will identify the job
seeker's appropriate level of service.

Based on their Job Seeker Snapshot results, job seekers may be referred
to:

-   an Employment Services Provider that best suits their needs
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
-   Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Employment barriers and ESAt

In addition, the Job Seeker Snapshot may indicate that the job seeker
has employment barriers that require further assessment and for this
further assessment to take place, the job seeker must be referred for an
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt). The ESAt will determine the most
appropriate employment assistance for the job seeker. Where barriers are
identified through the Job Seeker Snapshot that indicate a potential
need for the most intensive Workforce Australia assistance,
participation in Disability Employment Services (DES) or participation
in Community Development Program (CDP), the job seeker will undertake an
additional comprehensive assessment to determine referral to the most
suitable specialised service.

Where the Job Seeker Snapshot does not indicate that referral for an
ESAt is required, but the job seeker's behaviour or Job Seeker Snapshot
responses indicate that professional or specialist judgement or advice
is appropriate, referral for an ESAt can be made manually.

SEE and AMEP

Job seekers identified with language, literacy and numeracy needs as
well as the need for an ESAt are to be referred to Skills for Education
and Employment (SEE) at the same time the referral to the ESAt is done.
Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP) job seekers must be referred
immediately to AMEP before they are referred for an ESAt, CDP provider
or to a Workforce Australia provider.

Job Seeker Snapshot questions

The Job Seeker Snapshot questions are designed to determine the number
of points that are allocated for each factor. Some factors are
determined by questions asked directly of the job seeker. Other Job
Seeker Snapshot factors are based on information such as the job
seeker's age, gender and their geographic location that are already
recorded in the system. Some Job Seeker Snapshot factors are
supplemented by information obtained from the ESAt, if an ESAt was
completed.

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (other) job seekers can
complete the Job Seeker Snapshot online after submitting their online
claim. In these cases, the job seeker registration and the Job Seeker
Snapshot questions will be skipped in the Participation Interview.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment website.

Related links

Conducting a Job Seeker Snapshot interview

Job Seeker Snapshot factors for torture and trauma

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
