
Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE) 001-02090020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the referral process for Skills for Education and
Employment (SEE). It includes the process for when Services Australia
can complete the referral, and when it cannot.

Identifying and coding SEE referrals

A job seeker's need for language, literacy, numeracy or digital literacy
assistance is identified by their responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot
questions and/or their need for interpreter assistance during the income
support payment claim process.

The following items are created on the customer's record from the Job
Seeker Snapshot:

-   An action item on the Participation Summary screen with a message -
    Action referral to AMEP/SEE
-   A JSR Manual Follow-up (MFU) message on the Activity List (AL)
    screen stating - The Customer would benefit from referral to either
    SEE or AMEP program. Please make the referral

These action items are prompts to enter into a discussion with the job
seeker about the benefits of participating in SEE. If the job seeker
agrees, the Service Officer makes a referral to SEE.

The first step is a one hour appointment for a Pre-Training Assessment
with the SEE provider. Following this appointment, if assessed as
suitable for training, the job seeker commences SEE.

System Limitations

The Services Australia system does not support making a referral to SEE
for:

-   customers who are not in receipt of JobSeeker Payment, Youth
    Allowance (job seeker), Disability Support Pension, Parenting
    Payment (single or partnered), or Special Benefit
-   customers in receipt of an eligible income support payment but who
    are aged 65 to Age Pension age, or
-   customers aged 15 to Age Pension age and not in receipt of an income
    support payment (volunteer job seekers)

Contacting the SEE provider for Pre-training Assessment appointments

The Service Officer must:

-   obtain the jobseeker's consent to pass on their personal details to
    the SEE provider
-   contact the SEE provider to make an appointment for the Pre-Training
    Assessment while the jobseeker is present
-   tell the job seeker the date, time and location of the appointment

Referral for YA (job seekers) and Early School Leavers

Job seekers aged from 15 to 21 years, in receipt of Youth Allowance (YA)
(job seeker) will be RapidConnect exempt if they are identified as
eligible for SEE through their responses to the Job Seeker Snapshot.

If the referral to SEE is not made at the time of claim, the Action
Item/MFU is left open to prompt discussion at a later contact. The job
seeker must be connected with an employment services provider
immediately.

If, at a later time, the job seeker accepts the referral to SEE, follow
the Steps in the Process table to book an appointment.

Note: if the young person is currently registered in the Services
Australia ICT system as a child, the Service Officer will need to first
promote the job seeker's record to adult status to enable a referral to
be made.

Provider managed job seekers

If a referral to SEE is required for a provider managed job seeker, the
Service Officer must contact the provider to discuss the Job Plan before
referring the job seeker to SEE. The discussion can be with any staff
member at the provider office, not just the job seeker's Case Manager.
Unless the provider has reasonable grounds to oppose the referral to
SEE, such as the job seeker is about to commence employment, the Service
Officer should make the referral. The provider monitors the job seeker's
ongoing participation in the program.

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements continue in provider
services while they participate in SEE, when connected to Workforce
Australia, Community Development Program (CDP), Disability Employment
Services (DES), Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE), ParentsNext
(PN), or Transition to Work (TtW).

ESAt, JCA and SEE

Job seekers who are identified as requiring language, literacy, numeracy
or digital literacy training, may also require:

-   an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt), when claiming a job seeker
    payment, or
-   a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA), when claiming Disability Support
    Pension (DSP)

Service Officers may also refer these job seekers to a SEE provider for
a Pre-Training Assessment appointment as well as referring them for an
ESAt or JCA. Advise the Employment Services Assessor of the SEE
appointment by updating the notes section of the Online Diary.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
further information about the Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement
(LLNS) and to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment SEE
homepage. It also contains information and links to distance education
providers offering SEE.

Related links

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
