-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Community Development Program (CDP). CDP
provides an integrated and flexible approach to participation and
employment services for people living in 60 Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations designated remote servicing regions in Australia.

Aim of the Community Development Program (CDP)

The CDP is the Government's remote employment and community development
service. CDP is aimed at preparing participants for work while
contributing to the goals of their community. CDP providers tailor a
package of assistance suited to each individual participant based on
their needs and readiness for employment.

CDP activities are also designed to support local communities and be
responsive to available and future employment opportunities.

The CDP offers participants a pathway to learn new skills or build upon
existing skills, to increase their experience and work-readiness through
work-like activities and placements in real work settings.

For eligible participants living in one of 60 remote servicing regions,
CDP is the only Employment Services Provider type available. The
following employment services are not delivered in the 60 remote
servicing regions:

-   Workforce Australia
-   Transition to Work (TTW)
-   Disability Employment Services (DES)
-   ParentsNext

Key elements of the CDP

The key elements of the CDP are:

-   CDP providers deliver a range of services based on the needs of both
    the community and the individuals in that community
-   Each CDP region has only 1 or 2 CDP service providers
-   Community development to support economic and employment
    development - Indigenous and community organisations in partnership
    with local leaders, have a say in the design and implementation of
    community projects and voluntary activities
-   Catering to individual needs - participants are provided with
    personalised support and case management, including access to job
    opportunities, skills development and training

Eligibility for participation in CDP

There are two types of eligibility for CDP participants:

-   Remote Fully Eligible job seekers
-   Remote Community Volunteers

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations will determine the
participant's CDP employment services eligibility and therefore job
seeker registration type:

-   Remote Fully Eligible (RFE)
-   Remote Community Volunteer (RCV)
-   No Remote Referral Required (NRRR)

Remote Fully Eligible job seekers

Remote Fully Eligible job seekers are those who live in a designated CDP
remote region and meet one of the following 4 criteria.

Customers with mutual obligation requirements

Customers who have mutual obligations requirements and receive or claim
any of the following:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (other)
-   Parenting Payment (PP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP - under 35 years of age)
-   Special Benefit (SpB)

This also applies to customers who are fully meeting their mutual
obligation requirements through approved activities and volunteer for
CDP provider servicing, such as:

-   Principal Carer parents and CDP participants with a Partial Capacity
    to Work who are fully meeting their requirements through part-time
    paid employment or study
-   Mature Age (age 55 years and over) CDP participants who are fully
    meeting their requirements through part-time paid employment,
    self-employment, voluntary work, study or a combination of these
    activities

Volunteering for CDP during a mutual obligation exemption

These are customers where both of the following apply:

-   they have an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements
-   they volunteer for CDP provider services during their exemption
    period

Young people not receiving an income support payment, and vulnerable
young people

Young people aged 15-21 years who are either of the following:

-   not on an income support payment and are not employed for more than
    15 hours per week or in full-time education
-   vulnerable young people who are full-time students

Pre-released prisoners

Pre-released prisoners who:

-   are not receiving income support
-   are on approved day or partial day release
-   are referred by their correctional institution to engage in paid
    work through a work-release program

Remote Community Volunteers

Remote Community Volunteers are customers who live in a designated CDP
remote region, volunteer for CDP services, and meet one of the following
2 criteria:

Customers who receive or claim an income support payment with no mutual
obligation requirements, such as:

-   Parenting Payment customers (with a youngest child under 6 years of
    age)
-   Youth Allowance (student) and ABSTUDY recipients who do not meet the
    Vulnerable Youth criteria
-   customers who receive a non-activity-tested income support payment
    such as Carer Payment, Age Pension, Disability Support Pension (aged
    over 35 years)

People who are not eligible for CDP services as they do not receive an
income support payment:

-   CDP providers register Remote Community Volunteers directly.
    Services Australia cannot refer them.

CDP Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)

CDP participants may be eligible to receive the APWS if they are
participating in Work for the Dole, which is an approved activity.

Mutual obligation requirements

CDP providers are responsible for managing mutual obligation
requirements for provider managed participants in remote servicing
regions.

Participation in CDP activities is voluntary. This includes:

-   Work for the Dole
-   training
-   work experience

CDP participants are not penalised if they fail to attend these
activities. If they cease Work for the Dole, and the CDP provider
notifies Services Australia that the participant has exited the
activity, their Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS) of $20.80 per
fortnight will stop.

CDP participants need to meet other compulsory mutual obligation
requirements such as:

-   agreeing to a Job Plan
-   attending provider and third party appointments when notified
-   attending job interviews
-   meeting job search requirements if appropriate
-   accepting suitable paid work

Job Plans in CDP

Participants who are provider managed have a Job Plan negotiated with
their CDP provider.

In negotiating Job Plans with CDP participants, providers consider each
participant's assessed capacity and individual circumstances.

For 'assessed capacity', see Job seekers with a partial capacity to work
or a temporary reduced work capacity.

There are no specific requirements for CDP participants according to
their age group or participant category, e.g. for principal carer
parents or participants aged over 55.

Minimum hourly requirements do not apply for CDP participants. If a CDP
participant elects to participate in an activity such as Work for the
Dole, the provider records in the Job Plan the number of hours the
participant has volunteered to undertake. If the participant does not
participate in the activity for the elected number of hours, penalties
will not apply, as their participation is voluntary.

If a participant does not elect to participate in an activity, the
hourly requirements in their Job Plan are zero.

CDP participants who are Centrelink managed have a Job Plan negotiated
by Services Australia. The type of plan to be negotiated is determined
automatically by the system, based on information sent by the Department
of Employment and Workplace Relations IT system, and depends on whether
a CDP provider referral is in place or not.

Work for the Dole (WFD) in CDP

The key aim of Work for the Dole in CDP regions is providing real
pathways to long-term employment. Eligible participants will also have
access to support services and activities such as basic literacy and
numeracy training, driver's license training, and other training that is
linked directly to a job.

Work for the Dole (WFD) activities in CDP

Under the CDP, WFD activities:

-   can provide a combination of work-like experiences and
    vocational/non-vocational training linked to a job
-   can be individual or group based
-   can be delivered by the CDP provider or through the providers
    arranging a third party host organisation to undertake them
-   are not added as a compulsory activity within a Job Plan
-   are voluntary for any CDP participants who elect to undertake Work
    for the Dole
-   will not be subject to the Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Note: CDP providers may approve flexible participation hours for some
CDP participants, which may include activities outside of standard
business hours, or variation in the number of days per week. CDP
participants can discuss this in more detail with their CDP provider.

Payments, supplement and services during Work for the Dole in CDP

CDP participants remain entitled to their income support payment (that
is, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Special Benefit (SpB), Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Parenting Payment (PP)) and a
supplement of $20.80 per fortnight, to assist with the costs of their
placement. CDP participants cannot get the WFD supplement and the
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) at the same time.

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) may also be
available to CDP participants.

Supportive activity types and pathways

When deciding how best to support a CDP participant, providers have
access to a number of initiatives and pathways that can be added to a
Job Plan. These can include:

-   vocational and non-vocational training (including on-the-job
    training)
-   essential skills training and assistance to overcome personal
    barriers to employment (for example, literacy problems)
-   JobSearch assistance
-   Voluntary WfD activities designed to boost the CDP participant’s
    skills and experience
-   job placements and work experience
-   post-placement support, and
-   mentoring

Changing provider after change of address

If the CDP participant has moved to a new region, but remains linked to
the provider in their previous region, advise the participant to contact
their provider or to call the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations Customer Service Line. For further information see Job seeker
change of address.

Requesting a transfer to a new provider when a participant has not changed address

A CDP participant may request a referral to Workforce Australia or a
Workforce Australia job seeker can request a referral to CDP if they can
demonstrate extenuating circumstances as to why the transfer would be
beneficial to them.

Extenuating circumstances may include a range of factors or issues
impacting the participant. A contributing factor, for example, may be
that the participant lives close to the CDP/Workforce Australia boundary
or travels to the location where their requested provider operates on a
very regular basis. There are no specific criteria that are required to
be met, as the intent is that individual circumstances are assessed
within the local context.

A complaint regarding service delivery by the current provider is not a
valid reason for requests to transfer. These should be addressed using
the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) National
Customer Service Line (NCSL) complaints process as usual.

If a participant contacts Services Australia to request a transfer, or
advises Services Australia staff they intend to seek a transfer,
Services Australia staff:

-   must not advise the participant on the likely outcome of a transfer
    request, Services Australia is not able to advise whether a transfer
    will be approved
-   should advise the participant to discuss the request with their
    current provider
-   may advise the participant that a transfer can be approved where
    they can demonstrate extenuating circumstances as to why the
    transfer would be beneficial to them
-   may advise the participant of the transfer process
-   where appropriate, may support the participant to request the
    transfer, with the participant’s consent

See the Process page for more information about the transfer process.

Breakdown in relationship between a participant and their CDP provider

CDP participants who approach Services Australia about a breakdown in
their relationship with their CDP provider organisation should be
advised to discuss their situation with their provider in the first
instance. In situations when a CDP participant feels they cannot talk to
their provider, or are not happy with the provider's response to their
issue, participants should be advised to contact the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR) National Customer Service Line
(NCSL).

Changes to the CDP - New Remote Jobs Program

The CDP will be replaced with a new remote jobs program.

It will be developed in partnership with First Nations people, with
learnings from trials and consultation feeding into program design.

The new remote jobs program will:

-   increase economic opportunities and jobs in remote areas
-   support community needs and aspirations, and
-   give communities more control to determine local projects

The start date of the new program is to be decided. Up until the new
program commences, CDP providers will continue to deliver their services
as usual, including supporting CDP participants. Current CDP services
will continue through an extension of CDP provider agreements to 31
October 2024.

CDP Trials

Trials are currently in progress or are due to commence in 2023 in CDP
regions to help test ideas and approaches to remote employment:

Trialling Pathways to Real Jobs:

-   The Trialling Pathways to Real Jobs trial commenced from November
    2022
-   Under the initiative, CDP providers in most CDP regions are
    trialling new activities aimed to create pathways to work and
    address community priorities.

New Jobs Program Trial:

-   The New Jobs Program Trial is expected to commence in the second
    half of 2023
-   Under this trial, community organisations in selected trial regions
    will have the opportunity to develop local approaches to jobs
-   Wage subsidies will be provided to employ CDP participants in jobs
    that address community priorities, supporting them to move off
    income support and transition into employment

Ngaanyatjarra Lands Trial:

-   The Ngaanyatjarra Lands Trial commences from July 2023 and is
    focussed on testing approaches in very remote regions with thin
    labour markets
-   Under this trial, CDP providers will offer voluntary placements
    which are like having a job to eligible CDP participants
-   Participants who choose to participate in a placement for 15 hours
    per week will be paid a supplement of $190 per fortnight in addition
    to their usual income support payment

The Resources page contains links to contact details and the National
Indigenous Australians Agency webpage, which includes provider
information and information on the CDP.

Contents

Exits and suspensions from Workforce Australia or Community Development
Program (CDP)

Workforce Australia/Community Development Program (CDP) registration
inactivated and cancellation of income support in error

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Job seeker change of address

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
