
JSCI Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) flags 001-02050080

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the factors in the Job Seeker
Classification Instrument (JSCI) that trigger the need for a referral
for an ESAt. This is also known as a JSCI initiated ESAt. The
requirement for an ESAt may also be manually added or removed during the
JSCI process.

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

The JSCI identifies a job seeker's ability to find suitable employment,
determines the level of employment assistance they may require and
whether or not an ESAt is required. The ESAt determines the level of
support that best meets the job seeker's needs, that is, whether the job
seeker will benefit from referral to jobactive or if they are eligible
for a referral to Disability Employment Services (DES), or Australian
Disability Enterprises (ADE). Job seekers in Community Development
Program (CDP) regions do not require the JSCI to be run for streaming
purposes. A JSCI is required for an ESAt referral for CDP job seekers.

If an ESAt is triggered as part of the result of the Jobseeker Snapshot
(online JSCI), the Participation Interview or Looking for Work (LFW)
workflow, the JSCI status will display as pending and an outstanding
activity will be created on the customer's record. See Actioning a
pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) initiated Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) activity for details.

When the JSCI questions are presented

The JSCI question set is also presented online to some new customers of
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (other) as part of the
Jobseeker Snapshot (online JSCI). In these cases, the job seeker
registration and the JSCI question set will be skipped at the
Participation Interview and the workflow will go straight to the results
page.

In their responses to the JSCI question set, a job seeker may disclose
that they have barriers which raise a JSCI initiated ESAt flag.

Barriers may also be identified by Employment Services Providers during
the JSCI process. Employment Services Providers:

-   cannot refer a Stream A or Stream B job seeker for an ESAt
-   can run the JSCI for job seekers in Streams A and B but the possible
    outcomes are limited to Streams A and B. This is because a job
    seeker can only be referred to Stream C or other services if
    recommended in an ESAt or JCA

How the JSCI triggers an ESAt flag

Based on a job seeker's responses to the JSCI questions either while
completing the Jobseeker Snapshot, within the Participation Interview or
LFW workflow, the Department of Education, Skills and Employment system
may identify the requirement for an ESAt.

The need for an ESAt can be triggered:

-   by single issues such as if the job seeker identifies as having a
    medical condition that will impact on their ability to work for 3
    months or more, or
-   due to multiple responses to factors that have been identified as
    potentially impacting on the job seeker's ability to find and
    maintain employment

See Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity.

Job seekers who report family trauma, grief or family and domestic
violence should be referred to a Services Australia specialist officer.
This officer will determine when the job seeker should be referred for
an ESAt.

Manually adding an ESAt flag during the JSCI

Service Officers conducting a JSCI interview as part of Participation
Interview or LFW may manually add the requirement for an ESAt flag,
where the job seeker's responses have not already flagged an ESAt. This
can only be done before the workflow is completed.

This action may be appropriate where the Service Officer considers the
job seeker has significant non-vocational barriers to employment and the
job seeker either:

-   did not disclose when they completed the Jobseeker Snapshot as part
    of the new claim process
-   does not disclose during the Participation Interview, or
-   is unable to recognise or denies non-vocational barriers

The reasons for this manual action must always be documented on the
customer record, to assist staff when making a decision about management
of the pending JSCI. If an ESAt referral is required, the information on
the record must explain the reasons for the addition of the ESAt flag so
Assessment Services staff actioning the ESAt request can make
appropriate decisions related to the need for the ESAt and ensure
sufficient detail about the reasons for the referral is available to the
Assessor.

Manually removing an ESAt flag during the JSCI

Service Officers conducting a JSCI interview as part of Participation
Interview or LFW may manually remove the requirement for an ESAt flag
even where the job seeker's JSCI responses have flagged that an ESAt is
required. This can only be done before the workflow is completed.

This action should only be taken:

-   if there is a clear determination that the issues flagged by the job
    seeker responses to the JSCI do not have a significant impact on the
    job seeker's ability to work or participate in other activities and
    the job seeker does not have any other relevant barriers
-   when the job seeker has provided medical evidence clearly indicating
    they have a serious illness and a Temporary Incapacity exemption
    (serious illness) can be granted. In these circumstances, an ESAt is
    not required and employment assistance services would not be
    appropriate, or
-   for other circumstances where it would not be beneficial to refer
    for an ESAt, related to medical conditions, hospitalisation or
    rehabilitation programs

Manually removing the ESAt flag should only be done by suitably skilled
Service Officers and the reasons must be clearly documented on the
customer's record.

Note: it is not appropriate for refugee customers (first 12 weeks) to
have their ESAt flag removed. This customer group will have their ESAt
deferred at the new claim interview until the end of their activity
exemption period.

For more information see Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification
Instrument (JSCI) initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
activity.

Reapplying current and valid ESAt during JSCI

If the Service Officer confirms that the previous ESAt/JCA is current
and valid and should be reapplied, the system will automatically copy
the current ESAt/JCA details across. This removes the requirement for a
new ESAt, and will allow the customer to be referred immediately to
suitable employment assistance services.

A current and valid ESAt/JCA is one which:

-   was submitted within the past 2 years, and
-   reflects the customer's current circumstances and addresses the
    issues and barriers disclosed by the customer in the latest JSCI,
    and
-   contains a valid recommendation for referral to employment
    assistance services such as jobactive

See Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity.

Related links

Questions in the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)

Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) factors

Actioning a pending Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI)
initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) activity

Assessment Services

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Requirement for a JSCI Initiated Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
as a result of an Employment Services Provider update

Specialist officers and other internal supports for customers

Release of information to Employment Services Providers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
