-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about transfers from another payment
to Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker). The same payday code is maintained
for transfers.

Transfer process

All payment transfers for YA (job seeker) are actioned using the
Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) workflow. This determines the appropriate
employment assistance for the job seeker and will connect them with a
Workforce Australia provider where required. The level of job readiness
will determine whether an appointment with a specialist officer is
required.

The customer will need to [] contact Services Australia and complete an
online claim.

Note: a correspondence nominee (NOC/NOB) can submit a YA online claim
via Self service for nominees.

If the customer cannot lodge an online claim, the Service Officer will
need to:

-   run the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) workflow
-   obtain identity confirmation documents as required

Customers with no major changes who are transferring from another
payment will have fewer questions in their online claim.

As part of this process, the customer will need to:

-   attend a new claim appointment if required
-   provide identity documents as required
-   provide evidence of completion of Year 12 (or Equivalent
    qualification) or a Certificate III or higher. This may include a
    Year 12 certificate, a Certificate III, a letter from the school or
    institution, other appropriate evidence or where other evidence is
    not available, a statutory declaration detailing the name of the
    course, date completed, institution name and contact details

Customers with working credits or a Student Income Bank (SIB) in the
last 12 months, may be eligible to transfer or restore their balance.

Payments eligible for a streamlined claim

Customers currently in receipt of the following payments may be eligible
to use the JSP Streamlined claim:

-   Austudy (AUS)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) (student only)
-   Parenting Payment Single (before their youngest child turns 8)
-   Parenting Payment Partnered (before their youngest child turns 6)

Bereavement period

Customers receiving a bereavement payment for a deceased child or care
receiver will not have payments cancelled until the 14 week bereavement
period has ceased.

Transfer via a streamlined claim

A streamlined claim is offered to some customers when they are losing
qualification for their previous payment.

Eligible customers will be offered a 'task' on the home page of their
online account, allowing them to advise that they wish to claim YA. The
task is variable according to the payment type. It is available from up
to 28 days before qualification for their current payment ends, until
the date they lose qualification.

All streamlined claims can be processed while the customer is still in
receipt of their current payment and before the customer's booked
Student to Jobseeker or Participation Appointment. The customer's
benefit status will display as YA/PND RapidConnect.

Customers on the following payments may be eligible to access this
service:

-   Austudy (Student) - 'Confirm course end date' task
-   Youth Allowance (Student) - 'Confirm course end date' task
-   Parenting Payment - 'Your payment is ending' task

Eligibility criteria to access this service include:

-   current or Current Zero Rate (CZR) on 1 of the above payments
-   meets YA age eligibility requirements on the date they will lose
    qualification for the current payment
-   does not have a YA claim commenced/submitted, and
-   can access their Centrelink online account

Customers transferring from a student payment must:

-   be within 28 days before their recorded Student End Date (SED)
-   not have an outstanding study details Manual Follow Up (MFU)
    activity on their record

Customers transferring from Parenting Payment must:

be within 28 days before their youngest Parenting Payment (PP) child's
birthdate, where the child is turning:

-   6 years for Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP), or
-   8 years for Parenting Payment Single (PPS)
-   not be in a bereavement period for a child

Appointments

The customer will book a participation appointment, through the
streamlined claim task, as required. The appointment types are:

-   Student to Job seeker Transfer (SJT) for customers transferring from
    a student payment
-   Participation Transfer Appointment - PTT for customers transferring
    from PP

Note: the appointment must be booked using the online task. It cannot be
booked by Service Officers. Appointment times will only be available to
be booked after their current payment ends. The Participation Interview
workflow cannot be conducted while the customer is receiving Parenting
Payment.

Parenting Payment 'Your payment is ending' task requires:

PPP customers claiming YA to:

-   book a Participation Interview phone appointment from their child's
    birth date + 1, and
-   submit the simplified YA claim

PPS customers claiming YA to:

-   book a Participation Interview phone appointment from their child's
    birth date + 1, and
-   submit the simplified YA claim

PP customers who do not meet YA age eligibility requirements on their
youngest child's birthdate are still presented with the task, however
they will be directed to the Payment and Service Finder to assist them
in identifying the most appropriate payment for their circumstances.

Transfer from Disability Support Pension (DSP) to YA (job seeker)

Customers may transfer from DSP to YA (job seeker) if their payment of
DSP has been suspended due to the customer commencing work (that is,
they no longer have a continuing inability to work), or they have been
assessed by an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) as having a partial
capacity to work. These customers may be deemed to be unemployed and
thus considered to be an eligible job seeker if:

-   the work is suitable work (taking into account their capacity to
    work, as determined by an ESAt)
-   the hours worked is less than 70 hours per fortnight, and
-   the income earned is less than the allowance income test

YA (Student/trainee) ceases studies

If a YA (Student) customer ceases full-time study they must notify
Services Australia and register as a job seeker within 14 days. Failure
to notify cessation of study within 14 days will result in cancellation
of YA from Study End Date plus one day. Payment of YA (job seeker) may
only commence from the date a fully completed claim and all supporting
documentation is supplied. A debt may be generated for students who fail
to notify cessation of studies. There is no change to policy or process
for customers advising an intention to study.

Note: end of study must be updated in the customer's record.

See Student to job seeker transfers.

Previous employment and earnings

If a customer left work or was terminated from a job in the last 12
months, check whether:

-   they declared earnings and/or ceasing work
-   an income maintenance period (IMP) should apply, for example where
    their previous income support payment was not IMP affected

If they did not advise earnings or ceasing work, an Employment
Separation Certificate (SU1) must be requested to assess the reason for
leaving work and if an IMP should apply.

If they became unemployed due to a voluntary act or misconduct, a
compliance investigation may be required before granting payment.

Transfer date

If a claim for YA (job seeker) is lodged:

-   within 14 days of their benefit or pension ceasing, the transfer
    date will also be the start date for YA
-   more than 14 days after the cessation date, the start date is the
    date they lodged the claim

This period may be extended if the customer, a person they care for, or
their partner is suffering from an illness or incapacity that prevents
them from lodging a claim within 14 days of their transfer date. The YA
start date may be the transfer date if the claim is received within 13
weeks of the transfer date or as soon as the illness or incapacity
ceases.

RapidConnect and start date

Job seeker's subject to RapidConnect have 14 days from the date they are
advised of their RapidConnect requirements at the Participation
Interview to attend the appointment with their employment services
provider. The day the Participation Interview is counted as Day Zero,
with Day One being the following day.

In most cases, attendance at the first provider appointment is used to
determine the start date of the job seeker's income support payment,
subject to any waiting periods and qualification requirements being met.

There are a number of factors that may impact the RapidConnect
payability start date, refer to Calculating the start day general rule.
The RapidConnect payability start date is displayed on the JMRC
(RapidConnect) screen in Process Direct.

If after 29 days, the job seeker has not attended their initial
appointment, the claim will be automatically rejected.

'With child' and 'higher rate' of YA

Single customers with a dependent child in their care are entitled to
the 'with child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared
care.

Single YA customers who have been assessed as a principal carer are
entitled to the 'with child' rate of YA as well as assessment under a
separate YA single principal carer allowance income test.

Customers may be entitled to the 'higher rate' of YA for single
principal carers if they have one of the following exemptions from
mutual obligation requirements:

-   a registered and active foster carer
-   providing home schooling for their children
-   facilitating distance education for their children
-   caring for a large family (where the customer is the principal carer
    of at least one child under 16 years of age and a total of 4 or more
    dependent children and secondary pupil children from 16 to 19 years
    of age)
-   caring for a child when the customer is a relative (other than a
    parent), as directed by a Parenting Order made through the Family
    Court

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and a link to Office
Locator.

Related links

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Confirming a customer's identity

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Student to job seeker transfers

Viewing and processing online and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Rapid Connect

Processes for Rapid Connect appointments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
