
6 month activity requirement 001-21090319

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 1 October 2021, job seekers who have completed six months in
jobactive or Online Employment Services (OES) will have a Six Month
Activity Requirement. This is in addition to the job seeker's Annual
Activity Requirement.

On this page:

Participation to meet the Six Month Activity Requirement

Job seekers must participate in an approved activity to meet their Six
Month Activity Requirement.

Generally, the approved activity will be up to 25 hours per week, for up
to eight weeks. The requirement is activity based. Some activities can
be finished in less hours per week or over a shorter period, for example
a 3 week Employability Skills Training course.

Job seekers:

have reduced requirements under the Six Month Activity Requirement when
they:

-   have a reduced work capacity
-   are a principal carer parent (PCP)

do not need to meet the Six Month Activity Requirement when they:

-   have paid work for 20 hours or more per week
-   are doing full time study

Online Employment Services (OES)

Job seekers participating in OES will be sent an online notice by the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment (DESE) about their Six
Month Activity Requirement before it starts.

Job seekers in OES:

-   can use their jobactive account to agree to an approved activity to
    meet their Six Month Activity Requirement
-   need to start the activity within 4 weeks of the start date of the
    requirement

If the job seeker doesn’t start in an activity, they will be referred to
a jobactive provider who will help them get into an activity, for
example an eight week Work for the Dole (WfD) activity. Job seekers
referred to a provider cannot return to OES.

Job seekers with concerns or questions about doing an approved activity
to meet their Six Month Activity Requirement can contact the Digital
Services Contact Centre (DCSL).

jobactive

The jobactive provider will:

-   notify the job seeker about their Six Month Activity Requirement
-   consult with the job seeker and set an appropriate activity to meet
    the requirement
-   include the activity in the job seeker’s Job Plan

Job seekers will need to:

-   start the activity within 4 weeks of the start date of the
    requirement
-   do WfD as a default activity when they don't start within 4 weeks.
    Note: the job seeker will need to be eligible for WfD
-   speak to their jobactive provider if they have concerns or questions
    about their approved activity

Job seeker obligations

Most job seekers will continue to have job search requirements while
meeting their Six Month Activity Requirement.

Job seekers must meet their mutual obligation requirements to continue
to receive their income support payment. This includes participating in
any approved activities set by their provider and outlined in their Job
Plan.

Failure to participate in a compulsory activity may result in compliance
action. See the Targeted Compliance Framework.

Job seekers who do not have a Six Month Activity Requirement

The following job seekers do not have a Six Month Activity Requirement:

Centrelink managed job seekers:

-   principal carer parents (PCP) and customers with a partial capacity
    to work (PCW) (15 to 29 hours per week) and are fully meeting their
    part-time mutual obligation requirements through 30 hours per
    fortnight of paid work or approved study
-   job seekers aged 55 years and over and are meeting their full-time
    mutual obligation requirements through 30 hours per fortnight of
    paid work or approved voluntary work
-   job seekers with a PCW or temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC) (0
    to 14 hours per week)

Job seekers participating in:

-   Community Development Program (CDP)
-   Disability Employment Services (DES)
-   Transition to Work (TtW), or
-   ParentsNext

Early School Leavers with full-time Mutual Obligation Requirements
already undertaking 25 hours a week of approved Activities or full-time
study

Participants with Community Service Orders of 20 or more hours per week

Participants who have reached Age Pension age

Related links

Employment Services Providers

Job Plans

Targeted Compliance Framework

Work for the Dole (WFD) under jobactive

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
