-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement
(LLNS).

LLNS eligibility

The Language, Literacy and Numeracy Supplement (LLNS) may be available
to customers who participate in Skills for Education and Employment
(SEE).

Job seekers receiving a SEE qualifying income support payment who
participate in at least one day of SEE within a pay period, may be
eligible to receive a supplement paid fortnightly. The supplement is a
recoverable, non-income tested, non-indexed, and non-taxable payment.
The LLNS payment can be included in amounts available for Centrepay
deductions.

The LLNS provides financial assistance for job seekers who want to
improve their language, literacy and numeracy skills to assist them in
gaining employment. This assistance is to enable job seekers undertaking
SEE to meet the additional costs associated with attendance and provides
an incentive for them to participate in the program.

LLNS payability

Job seekers will be paid LLNS automatically as long as they are in
receipt of an eligible payment, even if the qualifying payment is
reduced to nil as a result of the application of the income test during
an employment income nil rate period. There is no requirement for a job
seeker to claim payment of LLNS.

LLNS is not paid on a pro rata basis. The full amount is paid as long as
the job seeker participated in the activity for at least one day in the
pay period, irrespective of whether the qualifying income support
payment is cancelled in the entitlement period. A change in payday code,
which may be considered to ease lodgement of fortnightly forms, will not
result in multiple payments.

Where a job seeker is suspended from participating in SEE they will only
receive the supplement for those entitlement periods during which they
participated in at least one day of training.

LLNS is not to be split between weekly payments but paid on a
fortnightly basis for job seekers who are receiving their other Services
Australia entitlements by weekly payment.

Customers already receiving add on payments

Customers in receipt of Parenting Payment (PP) or Disability Support
Pension (DSP) may find it more beneficial to apply for the Pensioner
Education Supplement (PES), which can also entitle them to the Education
Entry Payment (EdEP).

Customers who are already receiving any of the following add-on payments
are not eligible for LLNS:

-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) or ABSTUDY PES

or

-   Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS) for participation in
    Workforce Australia - Work for the Dole (WFD) or CDP Work for the
    Dole (RWD)

Impact of tax treatment, Income Management and overpayments

LLNS is non-taxable and is not income managed.

Overpayments of LLNS may be recoverable. If a LLNS debt is incurred a
debt shell will be created through normal debt TAG processing. LLNS
debts can also be manually raised.

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Customers who are participating in SEE may receive the EdEP if they meet
all the other eligibility criteria for EdEP. Participation in SEE is not
an automatic qualifying activity for EdEP, as qualification will depend
on how the study component of the SEE is structured.

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrelink Payments Support
Team (CPST).

Related links

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Eligibility for Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Referral to Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Approved Program of Work Supplement

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Calculating the effect of Job Seeker Compliance Framework failure
penalties on fortnightly instalments

Serious failure penalties

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
