-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines barriers that Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander job seekers may face. It contains information to help Service
Officers identify and understand these barriers and assess exemptions
from mutual obligation requirements. This applies to customers claiming
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Parenting Payment (PP).

When assessing issues for Indigenous job seekers, the Service Officer
may need to consult their local Indigenous Service Officer.

Cultural obligations and other barriers faced by some Indigenous people

Some additional challenges faced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander customers may include:

English as a second language
English may be the second or third language for some job seekers and in
remote communities, this would be the case for a large percentage of
those. Many of these customers may require an interpreter

Kinship
Staff need to be aware of the kinship obligations that customers may
have. If these obligations are not acknowledged in planning, it may
affect customer participation. Kinship obligations may also include
cultural, caring and financial responsibilities

Cultural obligations
Ceremonies or requirements such as initiation, mourning and women's or
men's business, may affect a job seeker's availability for participation

Caring responsibilities
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people often share child rearing
practices between relatives of a child's parents, extended family, other
community members and determination by kinship responsibilities. These
cultural practices are part of life that provides a child with a sense
of family and support beyond just their next of kin. There may also be
cultural obligations where child caring responsibilities are expected of
the job seeker.

Child care
Infrastructure in many regional and remote communities is either limited
or not suitable for child care arrangements

Financial management
For many remote Indigenous customers, management of finances can be a
barrier to participation due to the high cost of living, high transport
costs and strong cultural pressures to share income with other family
and community members.
Rural and remote customers are often exploited by businesses by being
able to book/pick up items and then are often unable to cover the costs
of repayment

Isolation from mainstream services
Inability to access services is particularly relevant for people living
in remote communities. Some Indigenous job seekers may also perceive
that available services are not for their use or considered not
culturally appropriate, and so may use them less often than
non-Indigenous people

Community attitudes
Indigenous job seekers may sometimes face prejudice from prospective
employers

Homelessness
Indigenous concepts of homelessness often differ to mainstream concepts
and may include:

-   public place dwellers who may or may not view the public place as
    their home
-   people with transient lifestyles
-   those who are separated from land or kinship networks
-   overcrowding, where it causes significant stress to family or
    community, and

Contact difficulties
Many remote Indigenous customers do not have their own phone, and many
are not comfortable talking on publicly available phones with limited
privacy. Mail sent to remote community offices has long delivery times
and is rarely picked up. Limited and unstable internet access also
impacts the ability to contact customers or for them to contact the
Agency via online channels

Feelings of 'displacement'
Feelings of cultural ambiguity (caught in the middle or between
cultures) can affect how people view themselves. People may feel
displacement from both their traditional and urban culture/communities,
particularly young Indigenous people

Remoteness
One of the key barriers to participation is geographical remoteness
itself. Remoteness of some Indigenous customers impacts adversely on
access to and participation in fundamental services such as education,
health services and access to income support services. They also
experience a very limited local labour market

Training & Support contains the course codes of in depth training
products for further learning about these factors.

Assessment of barriers at initial contact

As part of the new claim process, the Participation Interview will
determine a customer's job readiness, any barriers to participation and
capability to look for and accept work. This will result in an
appropriate level of service being identified for the job seeker and may
include an appointment with a Service Officer or specialist officer (for
example, social worker).

Assessment of barriers at subsequent contacts with the agency

Where a customer indicates a change in circumstances, or discloses an
existing circumstance not previously discussed, it is always important
that the Job Seeker Snapshot be reviewed and updated where appropriate.
By discussing and updating the Job Seeker Snapshot with the customer,
any barriers can be reviewed which may lead to a more appropriate
pathway solution or further assessment. For more information about a Job
Seeker Snapshot change of circumstance, see Conducting a Job Seeker
Snapshot interview.

Job seekers should be encouraged to discuss with their provider any
personal circumstances that are likely to have an ongoing impact on
their capacity to comply with compulsory requirements. Where
circumstances are identified by Services Australia that are likely to
have an ongoing impact on their capacity to comply with compulsory
requirements, these should be recorded on the Circumstances Impacting
Compliance screen. For more information, see Circumstances impacting job
seeker compliance.

Assessment interviews with Service Officers or specialists

An appropriate amount of time should be allocated for a new claim
interview where barriers have been identified, to ensure thorough
assessment of the customer's situation. Effective interviewing,
preparation before interviews and the ability to rapidly build rapport
with the customer will always be the key to identification of any
challenges and issues faced by an individual job seeker.

Service Officers must conduct a thorough, detailed and accurate
assessment of a job seeker's situation and their needs, including their
individual and family circumstances, to ensure that they are offered the
right help and support as early as possible.

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for Indigenous and/or Remote Area customers

All job seekers are able to request an exemption from their mutual
obligation requirements if their circumstances mean they are unable to
meet their requirements. Reasons can include, but are not limited to, a
temporary incapacity caused by a medical condition, including a serious
illness, principal carers with caring needs, expectant mothers, refugees
or customers experiencing a major personal crisis. In addition,
Indigenous job seekers have access to a special circumstances exemption
in order to undertake Indigenous Cultural Business or Sorry Business
activities.

Community Development Program (CDP)

When a job seeker lives in a Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations designated remote area, they are referred to a Community
Development Program (CDP) provider.

The Resources page contains contact details for Language Services.

Related links

Participation Interview

Indigenous homelessness

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements for serious
illness

Circumstances impacting job seeker compliance

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Accessing an Indigenous interpreter

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
