-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when part-time or full-time study can be accepted
as an approved activity mutual obligation requirement for JSP.

Full-time study and mutual obligation requirements

Job seekers in receipt of JSP are expected to focus on job search. JSP
is not payable to full-time students, unless they are doing a short
course approved by Services Australia or an employment services
provider.

Most of the time, a person who is studying full-time should test their
eligibility for a student payment. However, some short courses (less
than 12 months) may be appropriate where the job seeker is unlikely to
find work with their existing skills, and the course will enhance their
immediate employability. Participation in these courses is subject to
short course approval policy.

Full-time study in a short course will preclude a job seeker from
qualifying for JSP only where:

-   they have been advised (either at grant or at a later time) by their
    provider that their full-time study will not meet their mutual
    obligation requirements, and
-   the job seeker is not willing to undertake other approved
    activities, such as job search, to meet their requirements

Otherwise, it is up to the provider to negotiate appropriate activities
for the job seeker, including whether the study is included in the Job
Plan or not, and to instigate compliance action as necessary for failure
to meet compulsory requirements.

If a JSP job seeker is already connected with a provider, or has claimed
JSP and is referred to a provider through normal processes, they should
be advised to discuss approval for any full-time study with their
provider.

Provider managed job seekers will continue to be required to undertake
job search and/or other approved activities, in conjunction with their
study, even where the study is full-time.

Job seekers completing a tertiary qualification who have run out of
allowable time for a student payment, may be eligible for Jobseeker
Payment. It is the responsibility of the employment services provider to
accept or not accept study as an approved requirement in their Job Plan.
Job seekers will also need to be willing to undertake other approved
activities such as job search to meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Services Australia role

In limited circumstances, when a job seeker is Centrelink managed,
Services Australia can approve full-time short courses as fully meeting
requirements.

In accordance with the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
short course guidelines, Services Australia staff should not approve and
code a short course for a job seeker who is provider managed. The job
seeker is referred to their provider to discuss their participation and
approval in a short course. This is important because it may impact on
the level of servicing the provider can offer. If the provider approves
the short course, the course details will be coded in the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations system.

If a job seeker is enrolled in a course of study that makes them
eligible for a student payment, this should be discussed with the job
seeker and where necessary a transfer to a more appropriate income
support payment completed.

If a job seeker is undertaking a course of full-time study, which cannot
be approved under short course policy, they will not remain qualified
for JSP. To remain on JSP, they must reduce or reorganise their hours of
study so that the course is considered part-time, and they can still
undertake job search or other activities to meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Job seekers completing a tertiary qualification who have run out of
allowable time for a student payment, may be eligible for Jobseeker
Payment. It is the responsibility of the employment services provider to
accept or not accept study as an approved requirement in their Job Plan.
Job seekers will also need to be willing to undertake other approved
activities such as job search to meet their mutual obligation
requirements.

Services Australia full-time short course approvals

In limited circumstances, Services Australia can approve a full-time
short course as an approved requirement if the job seeker is undertaking
qualifying study for JSP job seekers. Services Australia can only
approve full-time study for JSP job seekers who are Centrelink managed
(that is, if they have not commenced in employment services) if the job
seeker has been identified as:

requiring training under the Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
program or the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP), or

all the following conditions apply:

-   the course is less than 12 months (2 semesters) in duration
-   the course is full-time (or at least 15 hours per week for principal
    carers or partial capacity to work 15-22 hours per week)
-   the job seeker has a confirmed offer of employment in writing from
    the employer, pending the completion of a specified short course
-   the course has a clear vocational application
-   the job seeker is prepared to meet any costs involved

Provider full-time short course approvals

Employment Services Providers have the primary role in the approval of
full-time short courses for JSP job seekers.

The same short course policy applies to all JSP job seekers, including
those with 'part-time' requirements, such as principal carers and job
seekers assessed as having a partial capacity to work.

The provider can approve a full-time short course for JSP job seekers at
any time after they have begun service with the provider and if all the
following conditions apply:

-   the full-time course is less than 12 months in duration
-   the course is full-time (or at least 15 hours per week for principal
    carers or partial capacity to work 15-22 hours per week)
-   the course is of a vocational nature
-   the provider has identified that the job seeker is unlikely to find
    work with their existing skills
-   the course is likely to provide a job seeker with a qualification
    and/or greater employability

When an Employment Services Provider approves a job seeker to undertake
a full-time short course as part of their requirements, Services
Australia will receive notification automatically from the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations.

JSP single principal carers

Providers can approve full-time study, including courses longer than 12
months, if the job seeker is a JSP single principal carer who has been
granted Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) for the course.

If a JSP single principal carer contacts Services Australia about
undertaking study, advise them they must first apply and be approved for
PES. If PES is approved, the PES approval letter/documentation needs to
be taken to the Employment Services Provider. If the course is:

-   30 hours or more a fortnight, the job seeker fully meets mutual
    obligation requirements and is exempt from short course approval.
    The provider will enter this as an approved short course, which will
    suspend the job seeker from employment services and make them
    Centrelink managed
-   less than 30 hours per fortnight, the job seeker will remain
    connected to employment services and will continue to be treated as
    a job seeker, including being required to undertake other approved
    activities or requirements

Mutual obligation requirements and full-time short courses

If a full-time short course is approved, the job seeker will be deemed
to be meeting their requirements for the duration of the course.

When a provider approves the short course and includes it as a
compulsory requirement, job seekers are still required to look for and
accept work, but not where it conflicts with the time of the course or
if it would prevent them from completing the course. Job seekers are
required to accept any suitable work that does not conflict with the
course and they are not permitted to limit their job searches only to
areas relating to the course.

Job seekers with full-time requirements who are undertaking full-time
short courses are required to remain connected with their provider.
These job seekers are also required to attend an appointment with their
provider or Services Australia if notified of a requirement to do so.
Appointments should be scheduled for times that do not conflict with the
job seeker's study timetable.

Job seekers with part-time requirements (for example, principal carers
or people assessed with a partial capacity to work of 15-29 hours per
week) undertaking an approved full-time short course are deemed to be
fully meeting their requirements and have no other requirements with
their provider. They are still connected with the provider, although
their Employment Provider Services would be suspended.

Part-time study

For JSP job seekers, any type of part-time study which cannot be
approved under short course policy can be undertaken if the job seeker
continues to meet all of their requirements, attending appointments and
accepting offers of employment. For example, a job seeker may be
studying at night and willing to look for work during the day. A job
seeker will remain qualified for JSP, even where the course cannot be
coded as an approved requirement and count towards meeting their
requirements if:

-   the job seeker is seeking and willing to undertake suitable work,
    and
-   their studies do not appear to restrict their ability to meet their
    mutual obligation requirements

Principal carers on JSP can participate in approved study of at least 15
hours per week (30 hours per fortnight) in any combination of contact
and non-contact hours to fully meet their mutual obligation
requirements. This is regardless of whether the institution regards the
course as full-time or part-time. If the study is less than 15 hours per
week, the principal carer must participate in another requirement. This
could be a combination of paid work and study, or self-employment and
study. If no other task can be approved to fully meet the job seeker's
requirements, they may have job search requirements, in addition to
their hours of study.

Studying during a period of temporary reduced work capacity or partial capacity to work

Job seekers assessed as having a temporary reduced work capacity or
partial capacity to work of 0-7 or 8-14 hours per week can volunteer to
participate in part-time or full-time study. These job seekers will
still attend Quarterly Appointments as their only compulsory
requirement.

Job seekers transferring to JSP from Parenting Payment (PP)

If job seeker is undertaking full-time or part-time study as a PP
customer and then transfers to JSP, they can continue their course of
study even if where the remainder of the course is longer than 12 months
in duration. They will be taken as fully meeting requirements while
completing their course as long as they continue studying in the same
course for at least 30 hours per fortnight (including contact and
non-contact hours).

The job seeker does not have to be a principal carer on JSP following
the transfer for the study to continue to be allowed.

Approval for remaining in study beyond the allowable time

A full-time academic course cannot be approved as a short course for a
JSP job seeker just because they have exhausted their allowable time on
a student payment. In exceptional circumstances, the provider may
approve the full-time academic study as a compulsory requirement. An
example of when full-time academic study might be approved is where a
person has been unsuccessful in their job search but has only a single
study period (for example, a semester, or between 6 and 12 months) to
complete in order to obtain a degree that would greatly improve their
employment prospects. If a provider approves full-time study as per the
guidelines above, there is no need for the person to test their
eligibility for a student payment even if the job seeker is undertaking
an academic course and could qualify for Austudy.

Full-time academic study

Generally, full-time study of more than 12 months duration or higher
academic study such as Masters or Doctorate study cannot be approved for
JSP recipients except for the groups to which the short course exception
rules apply:

-   people transferring to JSP or Youth Allowance (Job seeker) from PP
-   single JSP principal carers who have been granted PES for a course

Study as a Work Experience Phase requirement

Part-time and full-time study, are approved Work Experience Phase
activities. Workforce Australia providers will manage job seekers during
the Work Experience Phase, including approval of study or other
activities to meet Work Experience Phase requirements. Services
Australia will receive system advice when a job seeker has commenced in
the Work Experience Phase.

Mutual obligation requirements for Community Development Program (CDP) job seekers

For CDP job seekers, activities such as study may be included in their
Job Plan as a voluntary requirement only.

For CDP job seekers:

-   CDP providers consider each job seeker's assessed capacity and
    individual circumstances when negotiating Job Plans
-   minimum hourly requirements do not apply, and
-   there are no specific requirements, or rules regarding combinations
    of requirements, for CDP job seekers based on their age group or
    participation category

For information on mutual obligation requirements for job seekers in
CDP, see Community Development Program (CDP).

Eligibility for Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Job seekers undertaking part-time or full-time study as an approved
requirement for JobSeeker Payment may be eligible to receive the
Education Entry Payment (EdEP). The EdEP assists participants with the
up-front costs of education and training. For information on eligibility
and coding requirements, see Education Entry Payment (EdEP).

The Resources page contains a table of questions and answers relating to
full-time short course approval for job seekers, a link to a table of
full-time study options for working age job seekers, the Request for
course approval (SS362) form and contact details for the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR).

Related links

Part-time or full-time study as an approved requirement for Youth
Allowance (YA)

Part-time or full-time study as an approved requirement for Parenting
Parent (PP)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) job seekers returning (or continuing in) to
part-time study

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Mutual obligation requirements for Youth Allowance job seekers under 22
years of age who have not completed Year 12 or an equivalent level of
education (Certificate III or higher) qualification

Youth Allowance (YA) job seeker or Australian Apprentice returning to
full-time study

Youth Allowance (YA) job seekers returning to part-time study

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

Education Entry Payment (EdEP)

Approved courses of study for Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy and
Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)

Coding new study details

Pensioner Education Supplement (PES) qualifications

ABSTUDY Incidentals Allowance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
