
Determining failure hierarchy when there are multiple failures 001-10120040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the failure hierarchy that applies when multiple
Job Seeker Compliance Model failures or compliance action occurs.

Compliance action hierarchy

Compliance Action is applied based on the following Job Seeker
Compliance Model hierarchy:

-   Unemployment Non-Payment Periods (UNPP)
-   Serious failures
-   Non-attendance Failures
-   Reconnection failures
-   No Show, No Pay failures, connection failures and Non-Attendance
    Reports (NAR)

When multiple failures of the same type exist, Participation Solutions
Team (PST)-skilled Service Officers should investigate the oldest
failure first.

Failures during an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP)

Serious, non-attendance Failures, reconnection, No Show, No Pay or
connection failures and Non-Attendance Reports (NAR) do not apply when
the failure event occurs while a Community Development Program (CDP) job
seeker is serving a UNPP. This is because a CDP job seeker does not have
mutual obligation requirements during a UNPP.

Note: other compliance actions may occur when a UNPP has been waived
under hardship provisions or the CDP job seeker is receiving Payment
Pending Review.

Failures during a serious failure period

Non-attendance failure, connection, reconnection and No Show, No Pay
failures and Non-Attendance Reports (NAR) do not apply when the failure
event occurs while a Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker is
currently serving a serious failure period.

Note: other compliance actions may occur when the serious failure period
has been waived because the CDP job seeker is undertaking a Compliance
Activity or is eligible for payment under hardship provisions, or when
the CDP job seeker is receiving Payment Pending Review.

During a serious failure period, an Unemployment Non-Payment Period
(UNPP) will need to be investigated and may affect the payment
recommencement date.

Failures during a non-attendance failure period

Connection, reconnection and No Show, No Pay failures cannot be applied
if the compliance action occurs during a non-attendance failure period.
This is because more than 1 penalty amount cannot be recovered for the
same day and a Community Development Program (CDP) job seeker is not
required to comply with their mutual obligation requirements during the
non-attendance failure penalty period; however the non-attendance
failure penalty will always end 1 day prior to a CDP job seeker's
reconnection appointment.

Failures during a reconnection failure period

Non-attendance failures, connection failures and No Show, No Pay
failures cannot be applied if the compliance action occurs during a
reconnection failure period. This is because more than 1 penalty amount
cannot be recovered for the same day and a Community Development Program
(CDP) job seeker is not required to comply with their mutual obligation
requirements during a reconnection failure period; however a CDP job
seeker will need to comply with a further reconnection requirement to
end the existing reconnection failure period.

A Non-Attendance Report (NAR) can be submitted during a current
reconnection failure period, but only if the submitted NAR is for an
appointment set as a reconnection requirement in the same sequence of
events. NARs and Provider Appointment Reports (PARs) that are not within
the same sequence of events will be automatically rejected.

Existing Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

When a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA) has been either
manually or automatically triggered, connection, reconnection or No
Show, No Pay failures, Non-Attendance Reports (NAR) and Provider
Appointment Reports (PAR) cannot be generated. Compliance actions that
have been submitted but not yet finalised are automatically rejected.

Related links

Reviewing and validating Community Development Program (CDP) Provider
Reports

Investigating a reconnection failure

Investigating a No Show, No Pay Failure

Investigating a non-attendance failure

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept a suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Reconnection failure penalties

No Show, No Pay failure penalties

Serious failure penalties

Calculating the effect of Job Seeker Compliance Model failure penalties
on fortnightly instalments

Manually adjusting non-payment period start and end dates

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
