
Serious failure penalties 001-10120030

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the penalty that applies as a result of a serious
failure under the Job Seeker Compliance Framework.

Serious failure definition

The Job Seeker Compliance Framework focuses on encouraging Community
Development Program (CDP) job seekers to remain engaged with their
provider and to comply with their mutual obligation requirements.
Financial penalties are only imposed for failures within a CDP job
seeker's control, for example, as a result of deliberate or persistent
non-compliance.

A serious failure occurs where a CDP job seeker:

-   refuses, or fails to accept or commence suitable work without
    reasonable excuse, or
-   a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA) has been completed and
    the CDP job seeker is assessed as persistently non-compliant

Serious failure period

Where a serious failure has been applied, the CDP job seeker is required
to serve an 8 week serious failure period during which a participation
payment is not payable unless:

-   the CDP job seeker agrees to attend a waiver re-engagement
    appointment in lieu of serving the serious failure period, or
-   the CDP job seeker does not have the capacity to attend a waiver
    re-engagement appointment and serving the serious failure period
    would cause the CDP job seeker to be in severe financial hardship

Serious failure period start date

The serious failure period starts from the first day of the instalment
period immediately following the one in which the decision has been made
to apply or reapply a serious failure.

If the serious failure period has been reinstated following a
conditional waiver, the serious failure period will recommence from a
different date.

Effect of serious failure period on payments

During the serious failure period, the CDP job seeker's participation
payment remains 'current' at a zero rate (CZR) provided that all
reporting for entitlement periods prior to the start date of the serious
failure period has been finalised.

Finalising outstanding reporting

Service Officers should encourage the CDP job seeker to finalise all
reporting for entitlement periods prior to the serious failure period,
and ensure that these are processed. This prevents the record from
cancelling 'Failed to Report' (FRP) or 'Did Not Lodge' (DNL) during the
serious failure period. Once the serious failure period commences, the
system will automatically 'turn off' reporting requirements for the
duration of the serious failure period.

Add on payments

Most add on payments paid with the income support payment are not
payable when a CDP job seeker is serving a serious failure period. This
includes:

-   Pensioner Education Supplement (PES)
-   Energy Supplement
-   Work for the Dole (WFD) Supplement
-   Language Literacy & Numeracy Supplement
-   Approved Program of Work Supplement (APWS)
-   Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA)
-   Telephone Allowance (TAL)
-   Remote Area Allowance (RAA) and Rent Assistance (RA)

Family assistance payments and the Remote Engagement Program Payment are
not affected.

Concession cards

CDP job seekers retain their access to a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC)
or Health Care Card (HCC) during a serious failure period.

Rates of payment and eligibility for other payments

-   CDP job seekers may test their eligibility for other income support
    payments during a period of non-payment. However, the remaining
    serious failure period will transfer to the new payment if they are
    granted another participation payment.
-   Partners of CDP job seekers are not able to apply to be paid at a
    higher rate during the serious failure period.
-   CDP job seekers serving a serious failure period will not qualify
    for payment of Crisis Payment during the period of non-payment
    unless they claim after the end of their non-payment period and
    within allowable timeframes for an incident that occurred during the
    serious failure period.

Mutual obligation requirements during serious failure period

CDP job seekers serving a serious failure period are not required to
meet mutual obligation requirements during the serious failure period.
Any compulsory appointments or requirements scheduled within the serious
failure period need to be rescheduled to a period after the non-payment
period is completed.

Connection failures, non-attendance failures, reconnection failures, No
Show, No Pay failures and serious failures cannot be applied where a CDP
job seeker is in a serious failure period at the time the incident
occurred. However, if a customer:

-   voluntarily leaves employment without reasonable excuse, or
-   is dismissed due to misconduct

during a serious failure period, an Unemployment Non-Payment Period
(UNPP) will need to be investigated and may affect the payment
recommencement date.

Access to Employment Services Providers

CDP job seekers will be considered fully eligible job seekers for the
purpose of access to employment services from a CDP provider during the
serious failure period (or from a Workforce Australia provider should
they relocate from the designated remote area).

CDP job seekers cannot be compelled to comply with mutual obligation
requirements during this period.

Recommencement of payment at the end of the serious failure period

Payment remains current but at zero rate throughout the serious failure
period, and no action is required to restart payment. CDP job seekers
will be reminded by letter two weeks before the end of the serious
failure period that it is about to end, and they need to tell us about
any changes in circumstances, and resume requirements included in their
Job Plan as soon as the serious failure period has ended.

CDP job seekers will be able to report as usual after the serious
failure period has ended. Payment will become current immediately after
the end date of the serious failure, but payment will not be made until
the CDP job seeker reports. Payment will not be made where the CDP job
seeker fails to report.

Related links

Assessing a serious failure for refusing or failing to accept suitable
job offer

Persistent non-compliance for Community Development Program (CDP) job
seekers

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Determining failure hierarchy when there are multiple failures

Job Seeker Compliance Model waiver and hardship provisions

Waiving a serious failure period

Reinstating a serious failure period where re-engagement appointment not
attended

Serious failure hardship provisions

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Effect of a compliance action on Income Management

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
