
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas 001-19051503

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document helps Service Officers decide if JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
is payable to the customer while they are overseas and for how long. It
also explains action to be taken by the Service Officer and the customer
before their departure. The portability script should always be used
when assessing a customer's departure from Australia.

Leaving to live in another country

If a JSP customer leaves Australia to live in another country, JSP and
any concessions or add-ons will stop on the date of departure. This is
because the customer stops being an Australian resident and loses
qualification.

Temporary absence - approved reason for travel

JSP customers (including principal carers of a dependent child) who
temporarily leave Australia for an approved reason may be entitled to
payment for a specific negotiated period but no more than 6 weeks. JSP
may be portable for:

temporary absences (of any length, but unlikely to be more than a few
weeks) to attend a training camp with Australian Defence Force Reserves

a specific negotiated period (expected to be only a few weeks but not
more than the maximum portability period) for people who are absent for:

-   eligible medical treatment of a kind not available in Australia
-   humanitarian reasons such as custody or adoption proceedings
-   acute family crisis such as the death of a family member or a family
    member suffering an illness which is serious

Customers will be exempt from their mutual obligation requirements while
absent for these reasons.

The allowable absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.

The rate paid for JSP customers who are payable overseas will include
add-ons (if qualified) for the period of the absence up to the maximum
portability period.

Supporting documents - acceptable proof of the absence

Customers will need to provide acceptable proof of the absence to
determine if they satisfy one of the approved reasons, preferably before
their departure.

In an emergency, if it is accepted that the customer is leaving for an
approved reason they will need to provide supporting documents on their
return. If the documents are not acceptable or not provided, a debt will
be raised.

If a customer provides evidence or supporting documents to a service
centre about a previous temporary absence, which was not for an approved
reason at the time, there is no need to run the Review officer script as
a decision on their portability has not yet been made. Refer the case to
Centrelink International Services (CIS). See Resources for contact
details.

JSP will stop from the date of departure if the reason for leaving
Australia is not acceptable or proof of the reason is not provided
either before or after the absence.

Portability interview

Use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns to assess the
customer's entitlement to payment while they are outside Australia. If
the script is available, use it to code the absence from Australia.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason or where the customer is leaving
Australia to live in another country.

If a customer has indicated their overseas travel meets the initial
criteria for an approved reason, refer the case to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) to assess entitlement and code the
departure. The portability script will guide service centre and Smart
Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to CIS.

Only CIS have the delegation to assess, approve and record an approved
absence.

Portability period

A person's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not inside Australia for any
part of the day they departed Australia regardless of the time of
departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia on a cruise,
the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last Australian
port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence. They are considered to be inside Australia on that day and
therefore no longer affected by portability. If they leave and return on
the same day, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system
assesses portability of the payment regardless of whether the customer
contacted or not. Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should
not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates, if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In most cases, customers do not have to tell the agency if they are
leaving Australia temporarily for less than 6 weeks, or when they have
returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular circumstances where customers must advise
of a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[]In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
by the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. When a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will still need to contact the agency.

Customer advises change to departure or return dates

If a customer who is travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and then departs Australia more than 3
days before or more than 3 days after the advised date:

-   any specific negotiated period of portability approved for the
    original date of departure will no longer apply
-   the customer's approved reason for travel outside Australia may no
    longer be valid, and payments will stop when the immigration
    datalink verifies the customer's actual date of departure
-   it is essential that a customer advises of any change in their
    departure details before they travel if they want to be paid for the
    absence

If the customer is unable to return to Australia at the end of the
specific negotiated period, they should contact Centrelink International
Services (CIS) or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is
needed, this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly
extended.

Services Australia has the discretion to extend the period of
portability under certain circumstances:

-   if the customer is unable to return to Australia for a reason other
    than an approved reason (for example, they are hospitalised), or
-   the customer is still needed overseas at the end of the maximum
    portability period

In both situations, refer the customer to CIS for assessment and coding.

Customer's dependent child leaving Australia

If the customer is the principal carer of a dependent child (or
children) and that child (or all dependent children) leaves Australia,
it can affect the customer's entitlement. It may also have an impact on
the mutual obligation requirements that apply to a customer.

If the child goes overseas to live in another country, they stop being a
dependent child and the customer will stop being considered the
principal carer for that child immediately on the child's departure. Any
payment or concession paid to the customer for the care for the child
will stop on the departure date. The customer's Job Plan may need to be
reviewed with this change in carer status.

If a child leaves Australia temporarily or was born outside Australia,
the customer will generally still be regarded as the principal carer for
up to 6 weeks, even if the customer remains in Australia.

A person cannot be the principal carer of any child who has been outside
Australia for more than 6 weeks unless the customer is outside Australia
with that child and they are still entitled to the social security
payment they were receiving when they left Australia (that is, the
customer's maximum portability period has not stopped).

If the customer returns to Australia without the child and the child has
already been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks, the customer will
stop being considered the principal carer for that child from the date
of their return.

If a customer has stopped being the principal carer of a child because
the child has been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks and the child
returns to Australia for less than 6 weeks before going overseas again,
the customer will stop being the principal carer of that child for the
entire period of the later absence.

If the child returns to Australia and the customer remains overseas, the
customer continues to be the principal carer for the child for the
remainder of the customer's portability period. If the child leaves
Australia again less than 6 weeks from return and re-joins the customer
overseas, the customer will continue to be considered the principal
carer for that child for the remainder of the customer's portability
period.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored if they return to Australia within 13
weeks of their payment stopping. See Returning to Australia.

JSP granted under the New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

If a customer has been granted JSP under the New Zealand 10 year,
residence exemption, their payment cannot be restored on return to
Australia if there is any gap between the date of
suspension/cancellation and the date of restoration. As this exemption
can only be used once, the customer will not be able to be re-granted
JSP again under this exemption.

If a customer has been granted JSP under the New Zealand 10 year
residence exemption, they can only receive JSP for 6 months. Any
portability paid for an approved reason cannot be paid past the date JSP
is due to stop under these provisions.

The Resources page has examples of portability of JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), links to Services Australia website for information about
portability of payments and travelling overseas with Pharmaceutical
Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicines and contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Australian Defence Force Reserves

Discretion to extend portability period

Portability of Add-ons

Pension Supplement overseas absences

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Recording and correcting employment income details

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Exempting a job seeker from their mutual obligation requirements when
going overseas

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

View/update overseas travel online

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
