
Managing compliance with compulsory requirements 001-18030200

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to job seeker compliance
arrangements which may apply to job seekers in receipt of a
participation payment or compulsory ParentsNext participants who do not
meet their compulsory requirements.

Key objective

The job seeker compliance system is aimed at encouraging job seekers and
ParentsNext participants to meet their compulsory mutual obligation
requirements which may include looking for work and participating in
approved activities. The compliance system helps in reinforcing
expectations with job seekers who are not looking for work and meeting
compulsory requirements by ensuring they are appropriately held to
account for their actions. At the same time, job seekers who have a good
reason for not meeting their requirements are not penalised.

Key principles

There are 2 different job seeker compliance systems used to manage
non-compliance with compulsory requirements. They are the:

-   Targeted Compliance Framework, and
-   Job Seeker Compliance Framework

The following key principles underpin both systems:

-   job seekers are expected to remain actively engaged with employment
    services and to participate to the full extent of their capacity and
    capability to help ensure the earliest possible entry (or re-entry)
    to the workforce
-   non-genuine job seekers who deliberately avoid meeting requirements
    will be appropriately held to account for their actions

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job seekers managed under this compliance system include those who
receive services from Workforce Australia, Workforce Australia Online
and Disability Employment Services (DES). Participants in the
ParentsNext programme who do not meet their compulsory requirements may
also be subject to this system.

The Targeted Compliance Framework has a strong emphasis on personal
responsibility. Job seekers negotiate compulsory requirements with their
Employment Services Provider or their ParentsNext provider (provider).
They are expected to ensure their provider is aware of their
circumstances (for example, when negotiating their Job/Participation
Plan) to help ensure requirements are appropriate and achievable. They
are expected to maintain contact with their provider, engage to their
full capacity and record their own attendance at requirements, including
activities.

Job seekers who do not meet a compulsory requirement commit a mutual
obligation failure. A mutual obligation failure means that participation
payments are not payable until the job seeker complies with a
reconnection requirement notified by their provider.

All job seekers subject to the Targeted Compliance Framework will start
in the green zone with zero demerits. A job seeker will accrue demerits
if they commit a mutual obligation failure without a valid reason,
moving to the warning zone (amber) only if they start to accrue
demerits. Providers are fully responsible for managing demerits.

To ensure that job seekers have the capability to meet compulsory
requirements, accrual of:

-   three demerit points in an active 6 months triggers a Capability
    Interview conducted by the provider, and
-   five demerit points in an active 6 months triggers a Capability
    Assessment conducted by Services Australia

Job seekers move into the financial penalty zone if both a Capability
Interview and a Capability Assessment find the job seeker's current Job
or Participation Plan is appropriate. In this zone, fortnightly payments
are dependent on full compliance with compulsory requirements. Those who
continue to be non-compliant once they have moved to the financial
penalty zone will incur a financial penalty, or payment cancellation
with a 4 week wait to receive payments if they reapply.

Job seekers who refuse suitable employment without reasonable excuse
commit a work refusal failure. A job seeker who voluntarily leaves
suitable employment without a reasonable excuse or is dismissed due to
misconduct commits an unemployment failure. Payment is cancelled and
customers have a 4 week, or in some cases 6 week, wait to receive
payments if they reapply. This applies regardless of the zone the job
seeker is in at the time.

Work refusal and unemployment failures do not apply to ParentsNext
participants.

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

The Job Seeker Compliance Framework applies to declared program
participants who are receiving a participation payment. Declared program
participants are all job seekers in the Community Development Program
(CDP).

Providers have responsibility for monitoring job seeker engagement with
mutual obligation requirements.

CDP providers manage attendance at provider appointments and are
responsible for actioning Non-Attendance Reports (NAR), including
notifying reconnection requirements, and recording appropriate outcomes
in the Online Diary in a timely manner.

Providers submit a Participation Report or Provider Attendance Report
where they consider investigation of a non-compliance event by Services
Australia is required.

Services Australia has responsibility for making decisions under Social
Security legislation relating to non-compliance. This means that, once
reported by the CDP provider, Services Australia is responsible for
determining whether a connection failure, non-attendance failure,
reconnection failure, No Show, No Pay failure, or serious failure has
occurred, or an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) will be applied.
Services Australia also conduct Comprehensive Compliance Assessments
(CCA) where a pattern of non-compliance has emerged, before a decision
is made to apply a serious failure for persistent non-compliance.

Roles and responsibilities

The effectiveness of both job seeker compliance systems is reliant on
providers and Services Australia working together to keep job seekers
actively engaged.

This means applying compliance policy with consistency and fairness by:

-   delivering strong, consistent messages about the importance of
    complying with mutual obligation requirements at every participation
    contact
-   re-engaging job seekers with their requirements as quickly as
    possible
-   making evidence-based decisions that apply compliance and other
    relevant policies and legislation consistently in a firm but fair
    manner

Administering the policy as intended will help to ensure:

-   job seekers remain engaged with the services and activities designed
    to help them find a job
-   job seekers are appropriately held to account if they are not
    meeting their requirements
-   job seekers are deterred from non-compliance and motivated to change
    behaviour

Key message for job seekers reinforced at every participation related contact

The importance of complying with compulsory requirements and the
consequences of not doing so, should be reinforced at every
participation-related contact.

This includes reminding job seekers:

-   'If you have compulsory requirements, it is a condition of your
    payment that you meet these requirements if you wish to remain
    eligible for payment'
-   'If you are unable to attend an appointment or an activity you must
    contact your provider and the organisation that you have the
    appointment or activity with as soon as possible to advise why you
    are unable to attend'
-   'If you do not attend an appointment or activity and you have not
    contacted beforehand, your payment may be reduced or stopped and you
    may lose some of your payment, even if you had a good reason for not
    being able to attend'
-   'If you are found to have been deliberately and persistently not
    meeting your requirements, or refused a suitable job, your payment
    may stop and you may need to wait to reapply'

Job seekers, excluding ParentsNext participants, should also be
reminded:

-   'If you become voluntarily unemployed without a good reason or are
    dismissed from your job due to misconduct, your payment may stop'

Transferring between compliance systems

Job seekers will transition between job seeker compliance systems where
they change residential address and either commence in, or cease to
participate in the Community Development Program (CDP).

Contents

Roles and responsibilities for managing compliance with compulsory
requirements

Non-compliance events

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

Targeted Compliance Framework

Job Seeker Compliance Framework

Conducting compliance investigations

Non-compliance with compulsory requirements - review and appeals

Participation Compliance workflow

Related links

Employment assistance and Employment Services Providers

Mutual obligation requirements

ParentsNext appointments and processing

ParentsNext suspension and restoration

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
