-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to process JSP claims. This includes online
claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Claiming JSP

Claims for JSP can be lodged by:

-   [] completing an online claim
-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Intent to claim for vulnerable customers

Customers are considered to be vulnerable if they experienced a
vulnerable circumstance at any time in the 8 weeks before contact and
this was the reason they were unable to submit their claim on the
contact date. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Early claims

Customers can start an early claim for JSP up to 13 weeks before the
first day of eligibility. For the day they become qualified, the
customer must provide their:

-   bank account balances
-   employment separation details, and
-   any other income

If an early claim lodgement is accepted, the start date is the first day
the customer becomes qualified for the payment. See Early claims.

Streamlined claims

A streamlined claim is offered to some customers transferring to JSP
from another payment.

Reassessment of JSP claims

A customer can apply for a formal review of the decision to reject their
claim at any time.

If they apply more than 13 weeks after the rejection notice was given,
payment or concession may be affected by date of effect rules. See
Customer initiated review of decisions. A new claim will be required for
reviews lodged more than 13 weeks after the rejection letter was sent.

No additional evidence or information is required before an application
for a formal review can be made.

If a customer applies for a formal review, record the application.

Make sure all outstanding documents have been supplied before
re-indexing the original claim.

See Request to reassess a rejected claim when JSP claim is rejected for:

-   not supplying documents (FSD)
-   not lodging (DNL)
-   not reporting on time (FRP), or
-   Proof of Identity (POI)

Processing claims in Process Direct

Use Process Direct to review the JSP claim information and to process
the claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the JSP claim has been
submitted online or via ACC.

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer or their
    correspondence nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a JSP claim activity
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   has functions to view scanned documents, request information and
    make referrals

Pre-population of claim responses in the Job Seeker Snapshot

Responses to some questions in the JSP claim will be used to
pre-populate similar questions in the Job Seeker Snapshot. The job
seeker will have the opportunity to review responses, either online or
staff assisted and make changes where required.

RapidConnect

Job seekers who are subject to RapidConnect requirements are advised of
their requirements or exemption to RapidConnect during their
Participation Interview.

Job seekers who are referred to Workforce Australia Online for
Individuals are required to agree to a Job Plan.

Job seekers who are referred to a Workforce Australia Employment
Services Provider or other specialist provider will have an initial
appointment booked during the Participation Interview. Attending the
first provider appointment is known as the job seeker’s RapidConnect
requirement.

In most cases, meeting RapidConnect requirements will determine the
start date of the job seeker’s income support payment. This is subject
to job seekers meeting any waiting periods and qualification
requirements.

JSP new claims and re-indexed claims must have the Participation
Interview completed and a RapidConnect determination. For more
information, see RapidConnect.

Mutual obligation requirements

Mutual obligation requirements apply to all job seekers receiving
participation payments including JSP, unless exempt.

Mutual obligation requirements are designed to make sure unemployed
people receiving activity tested income support payments are actively
looking for work and are participating in activities that will help them
into employment.

Job seekers will satisfy their mutual obligation requirements if they:

enter into a Job Plan, if required, with Services Australia or an
Employment Services Provider without unreasonable delay

fully comply with the terms of the Job Plan, and

either:

-   actively seek and are willing to undertake suitable paid work
-   undertake suitable paid work, or
-   participate in some other approved training, program or course which
    is likely to improve their employment prospects

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements.

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

A job seeker who is unable to meet their mutual obligation requirements,
in certain circumstances, may be eligible for an exemption.

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements exemptions.

Negotiating a Job Plan during claims processing

Some jobseekers may meet the requirements to have their Job Plan managed
by Centrelink.

For jobseekers that meet this criteria, staff should negotiate the Job
Plan as part of the new claim finalisation process.

For eligibility criteria and coding, see Negotiating Centrelink Managed
Job Plans.

Higher rate of JSP for 55 years and over

Single customers aged 55 years and over who have been receiving an
income support payment or allowance for 9 or more continuous months may
be entitled to a higher rate of payment. The system will automatically
calculate this and apply the appropriate rate for eligible customers.

The Resources page contains a link to Process Direct resources and a
list of common screens for JSP claims. It also contains approved text
for Q888 letters sent to principal carers who may be eligible to claim
Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Related links

Job seeker online claim appointment

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessment of income for Centrelink payments

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Early claims

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Exempt income and assets for Centrelink payments

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Principal carer of a dependent child

Process Direct

Rapid Connect

Reporting requirements for job seekers

Transfers to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) from another payment

Unemployed eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance
(job seeker)

Waiting periods for income support payments

Withdrawal of claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB and income support payment new claim processing
interactions)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Shared care for social security payments

Straight through processing

Rates and Thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
