
Release of information to Employment Services Providers 001-02070020

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the guidelines for the release of customer
information to providers.

On this Page:

Limits on release of information

There are limits to the information Services Australia can provide to
Employment Services Providers. While some information collected by
Services Australia is available to providers through the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment computer systems, other information can
only be disclosed to the providers where the job seeker gives
permission. This includes some information contained on the Job Seeker
Snapshot screens, assessment statements and sensitive or personal
information.

Contracted provider services

Providers are contracted by the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment to provide assessment or assistance services for working age
customers. These include:

-   Employment Services Providers
-   Disability Employment Services (DES) providers
-   Indigenous Employment Centres (IECs)

Legislation governing release of information

Information exchanged between the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment, providers and Services Australia is governed by sections 202
to 204 of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 and the Privacy
Act 1988.

Section 202(2A) of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
outlines the reasons for disclosing protected information. These reasons
include:

-   facilitating a customer's access to services offered by the provider
-   facilitating the provider's efficient and effective performance of
    their duties under their contract with the Commonwealth
-   facilitating effective administration by the Commonwealth in matters
    relating to the provider's contract to deliver services. (This
    includes facilitating the provider to make claims for outcomes
    payments in relation to a customer)

Guidelines when releasing information to providers

When contacted by a provider with a request to release customer
information, Service Officers need to follow these guidelines:

-   Authenticate the provider. Where a Service Officer does not know the
    provider, they need to use callback procedures in order to verify
    the provider before discussing job seeker details
-   When verbal confirmation is received from the provider that the
    customer has signed a Department of Education, Skills and Employment
    consent to release information form, or if the customer is giving
    consent over the phone while with the provider, confirm the job
    seeker's identification and obtain verbal consent for the release of
    information from the job seeker
-   Document the event on the job seeker's record including method of
    consent and information released

Assessment reports

As part of the Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) process, the Assessor is required to complete an
electronic report. This report is created and maintained in the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment, Employment Services
System (ESS).

Services Australia staff may access the entire contents of the completed
ESAt/JCA report electronically and may print the report for the purpose
of appeals or other valid reasons.

Medical information not released

Employment Services Providers with access to the ESS will be able to
view some parts of the report electronically. However, they do not have
access to medical information which is provided by the Assessor
specifically for Services Australia to make an income support decision
and is, therefore, not appropriate for a provider to view.

Release of information to Assessment Services

Assessment Services have access to all relevant information required to
make an accurate assessment of an individual's work capacity. This
information includes relevant historical and current information
relating to the individual currently held by Services Australia, service
providers and the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Medical evidence required by Assessment Services

In order for the Assessor to consider a partial capacity to work status,
medical evidence of the customer's impairment is required. A Services
Australia Medical Certificate (SU415) or equivalent which provides
information about the permanency of the condition is sufficient for this
purpose. Customers should be advised that no assessment for reduced
requirements can be completed by the Assessor without this medical
evidence. Customer consent for this information to be forwarded to an
Assessor is included on the SU415. Medical evidence will be collected by
Assessment Services before the scheduled appointment.

Information available to Assessment Services

Direct contact may take place in some circumstances between Services
Australia and Assessors who are undertaking or have undertaken an
ESAt/JCA for a customer. This may include cases where Services Australia
contacts the Assessor to query an outcome, or an Assessor contacts
Services Australia seeking medical information about the customer.

The following additional information must also be made available to the
Assessor on request:

-   Job Seeker Snapshot responses and history
-   medical certificate lodgement history
-   previous exemption history
-   program referral and outcomes history
-   payment history
-   DES Program Summary Reports where appropriate
-   other appointment bookings, and
-   impairment ratings and manifest history

A DOC should be raised to record the request from the provider. This
same DOC should be annotated to reflect that the request was acted upon.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia fax
template and examples of what types of information can be exchanged with
providers.

Related links

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
