-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the financial penalties that apply under the
Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF) following a mutual obligation
failure, work refusal failure or unemployment failure.

Mutual obligation failure penalties

Under the Targeted Compliance Framework, financial penalties apply where
a job seeker, including a ParentsNext participant, has persistently
committed mutual obligation failures. Job seekers are considered to have
persistently committed mutual obligation failures if they have incurred
sufficient demerits to enter the financial penalty zone, their
requirements have been determined as appropriate during a Capability
Assessment, and a subsequent mutual obligation failure is committed
without reasonable excuse.

A penalty count is used to determine the applicable financial penalty.
The penalty is calculated based on the penalties which have already been
applied in the same failure group:

-   the first financial penalty results in a 50% payment deduction for
    the payment period
-   a second financial penalty result in a 100% payment deduction for
    the payment period
-   a third financial penalty results in payment cancellation and a
    post-cancellation non-payment period

Note: work refusal failures and unemployment failures committed while a
job seeker is in the financial penalty zone are not included in the
penalty count or failure group.

Where payment is cancelled as a result of a third financial penalty and
a participation payment is re-claimed within 3 active months, the job
seeker will return to the financial penalty zone. A new failure group
commences for the purpose of calculating the penalty count, this means,
a subsequent mutual obligation failure after re-commencement of payment
will be a first mutual obligation failure and will result in a 50%
payment deduction, a second will result in a 100% payment deduction,
etc.

Payments affected by a financial penalty for a mutual obligation failure

Financial penalties for mutual obligation failures are calculated based
on the total amount of participation payment that is payable after
application of the income test, including supplementary payments that
are included in the rate, of:

-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Parenting Payment (Single), or
-   Special Benefit (SpB)

The amount of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payable to the job seeker or
their partner, including Rent Assistance (RA) paid with FTB, is not
affected by the financial penalty.

Generally, a penalty for a mutual obligation failure will affect the
instalment period in which the mutual obligation failure was committed.
Where payment has already been released for this instalment period, the
penalty amount will be calculated against, and deducted from, or the
cancellation applied to, the next available instalment period.

Effect of changes to the penalty count

A penalty count for a failure group may change due to an applied mutual
obligation failure being revoked as a result of:

-   retrospective payment cancellation with a date of effect prior to
    the failure event date
-   retrospective exemption from compulsory requirements covering the
    period of the failure event date
-   a favourable outcome returned for a review of decision to apply a
    financial penalty where the review was sought within 13 weeks of
    being notified of the decision to apply a financial penalty

Non-compliance cancellations

A non-compliance cancellation may occur as a result of:

-   failure to re-engage within 4 weeks of a re-engagement requirement
    being notified for a work refusal failure or mutual obligation
    failure
-   a work refusal failure
-   an unemployment failure committed while the job seeker was in
    receipt of a participation payment
-   a third financial penalty applied for a mutual obligation failure

Post-cancellation non-payment period

When a non-compliance cancellation is applied, the post-cancellation
non-payment period is:

-   4 weeks for a third mutual obligation failure or a work refusal
    failure
-   generally 4 weeks for an unemployment failure, or 6 weeks where an
    unemployment failure is related to a relocation job

During a post cancellation non-payment period a participation payment is
not payable. There are no waiver provisions for job seekers in financial
hardship during this period, however the job seeker will maintain
concession card and benefit rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) eligibility.

Job seekers may reclaim payment at any time after a non-compliance
cancellation. They may be subject to RapidConnect. The start date of a
return to payment will be affected by the post-cancellation non-payment
period. Job seekers generally return to the Targeted Compliance
Framework zone they were in prior to the non-compliance cancellation.

The Resources page contains scenarios about financial penalties and
payment cancellations.

Related Links

Targeted Compliance Framework

Unemployment failures

Work refusal failures

Mutual obligation failures under the Targeted Compliance Framework

Reclaiming a payment after a Targeted Compliance Framework (TCF)
non-compliance cancellation

Referral to external support services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
