
Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the circumstances, which may result in the
suspension or cancellation of Farm Household Allowance (FHA) payments,
when to restore payments, and relevant processing information.

Suspension of FHA

When a customer's payments are suspended, they must be advised of the
reason and their rights of review and appeal to avoid placing them in
financial hardship.

Suspension may be imposed for the following reasons:

qualification failures, failure to

-   agree to Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA)
-   comply with activities in FIA

compliance failures, failure to

-   enter into Farm Financial Assessment (FFA)
-   report employment income
-   notify change of circumstances
-   reply to correspondence

customer travelling overseas without an approved reason

compensation settlement under investigation

a direct credit payment has been returned

Suspension does not necessarily indicate a loss of entitlement. Full
arrears may be issued if the payment is subsequently restored.

Before a manual suspension is considered, the decision maker must be
satisfied that:

a notice was issued to the customer

the notice contained details of:

-   the information/action required by the customer
-   the timeframe for response
-   the consequences of non-compliance
-   a reference to the relevant legislation under which the notice is
    given, and

the customer has not complied with the request. Note: if a compliance
failure was recorded, payments will only restart from the date the
customer complies.
A conduct failure results in an 8 week non-payment period rather than a
suspension

For more information on qualification and conduct failures, see Mutual
obligations, exemptions and failures from the activity test for Farm
Household (FHA) customers.

Cancellation of FHA

When a customer's payments are cancelled, they must be advised of the
reason and their rights of review and appeal rights to avoid placing
them in financial hardship.

Entitlement to FHA may be cancelled for various reasons. Most
cancellations will be due to new information supplied by the customer
under their obligations to notify of changes, and others may be due to a
failure to comply with notification obligations.

FHA may also be manually cancelled if the customer asks for payments to
be stopped or if they advise they have left farming or commenced study
or work.

FHA will be cancelled if payment remains suspended after 13 weeks or if
the customer:

-   fails to report income within 15 days of their reporting due date
-   asks for their payments to be cancelled
-   ceases to qualify for FHA
-   is granted an alternative income support payment
-   is imprisoned/on remand
-   fails to reply to correspondence
-   fails to provide financial documents for business income
    reconciliation by the due date (non-lodger)
-   employment income precludes for 6 consecutive fortnights
-   partner’s employment income precludes for 6 consecutive fortnights

If a customer asks for FHA to be cancelled, they may have to submit a
new FHA claim to receive payments in the future.

Cancellation of FHA for customers reaching 1,460 days of payment

Customers are only eligible for 1,460 days on payment of FHA. At the end
of this time:

-   customers may be required to report one last time to release the
    final amount of FHA up to the 1,460 day mark
-   this reporting date may be after the Predicted End Date of FHA

When the customer completes their final report this will release their
final payment and trigger the cancellation of FHA.

For more information, see Fourth year exit pathway for Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) customers.

Suspension and cancellation reason codes

When coding a decision to suspend/cancel FHA, a reason must be recorded.
The Resources page contains a list of reason codes used for FHA.
Processing staff must select the code that most accurately reflects the
reason for the cancellation.

The reason code Other (OTH) should only be used if the reason for the
suspension/cancellation does not correspond to any of the existing codes
available. The reason must be clearly recorded on a DOC as a request may
be made to explain the decision at a later stage. A manual
suspend/cancel letter must be sent to the customer (and nominee if
applicable) when the code OTH is used.

Before a payment is suspended or cancelled, the decision maker must be
satisfied that there is sufficient evidence that the customer is either:

-   not qualified for the payment, or
-   the payment is not payable

If there is none, information must be requested from the customer via a
notice under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

Note: outstanding reports for suspended customers must be completed to
prevent cancellation for failing to report (FRP) overriding the
suspension reason.

Restoration of FHA

FHA can only be restored after a review of a decision to suspend FHA. If
there has been a change of circumstances, the relevant information must
be updated on the customer's record before restoring or re-granting
payment to avoid incorrect arrears being generated.

If payment is suspended because the customer did not provide a Farm
Financial Assessment (FFA) or has committed a qualification failure, FHA
can only be restored after actioning the failure.

To restore payment after:

-   an FFA failure has been applied, the failure must be resolved first.
    See Farm Financial Assessments (FFA)
-   a qualification failure has been applied, the failure must be
    resolved first. See Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from
    the activity test for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Once the failure has been resolved, complete the Change Process.

If FHA has been cancelled and circumstances have changed, they may need
to submit a new claim to receive future FHA payments.

If the customer is suspended and or cancelled for multiple reasons, the
restoration may only occur when a customer's qualification for payment
has been fully re-established. This can be checked using the Benefit
Status (XBS) screen.

Customer contact

When FHA is suspended or cancelled a letter will be sent to the customer
advising of:

-   the suspension/cancellation and the reason
-   any information or documentation required to allow FHA to be
    restored, and
-   their review and appeal rights

If a customer contacts about a suspension or cancellation, explain the
reason for the suspension or cancellation. Give details about what they
need to do to have their payment restored after suspension. If the
customer's payment was cancelled, advise how to apply for a formal
review of the decision or re-claim FHA.

Contents

Advising verbally of an unfavourable decision (CLK)

Related links

Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity test for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Farm Financial Assessments (FFA)

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Fourth year exit pathway for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
