
Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02050040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of reconciling estimated business
income with actual business income after the end of a financial year.
Customers must provide copies of their income tax return(s) and
financial statements so actual business income can be assessed to
calculate their correct FHA entitlement.

Business income reconciliation

Unlike income from employment, business income for farm and non-farm
businesses can be hard to predict due to factors such as commodity
prices, business expenses and seasonal conditions. To account for these
factors, estimate(s) of business income are used to determine the rate
of FHA paid during the financial year. At the end of the financial year,
customers provide their tax returns and other financial statements.

Business income reconciliation is a process that enables a comparison of
the estimated and actual income to accurately determine the customer’s
entitlement for the year being reconciled.

Business income estimates

Each financial year, customers are required to give a reasonable
estimate of their business income. This is initially set up when
claiming FHA and is revised every year.

The business income estimates should only include income and expenses
derived through the activities of the business. Income from non-farm
businesses is recorded separately on the customer's record.

Customers are obliged to advise any changes in their circumstances
during the financial year. They can provide a revised estimate for a
farm or non-farm business at any time to reduce the risk of overpayment.

When a customer contacts the agency, prompt them to check that their
current business income estimate for all farm and non-farm businesses is
still accurate.

Actual business income

Actual business income is verified income provided by the customer after
they have lodged their tax return. Items listed on the tax return are
separated into farm and non-farm items to apportion the correct amount
of income and expenses to each source of income to determine the amount
of the business income.

Consistent with social security law, expenses incurred by a business are
deducted to calculate a person's ordinary income. For FHA, if a person
operates a non-farm business as well as the farm enterprise, the net
income from both businesses is used to calculate actual business income.

Note: non-controllers of a trust and/or company cannot estimate the
entities business income. They will be assessed on distribution income,
see Assessing and recording distribution income. Distribution income is
assessed as ordinary income and must be updated before BIR being
completed. If a non-controller does not have a separate farm business
outside the trust or company, they will have no actual income to be
assessed. BIR will be completed using nil farm and off farm business
income.

Small Business Entity (SBE) depreciation

For consistency between estimated business income and actual business
income, policy advice has been received to ensure in circumstances where
SBE depreciation was allowed when the customer lodged their business
income estimate that the BIR assessment also treat SBE the same way. The
majority of customers would have estimated their business income with
SBE as an allowable deduction before the change.

Sole traders and partnerships:

-   SBE depreciation will be an allowable deduction for all BIR years
    (2014-15 through 2019-20) for sole traders and partnership as these
    rules were clarified in July 2019

Trust and Companies:

-   for 2014-15 through 2016-17 financial years: SBE depreciation will
    be an allowable deduction for Trust and Companies as these rules
    were clarified in March 2017
-   for 2017-18 through 2019-20 financial years: where the estimate was
    received before 16 March 2017 or later, but not assessed by a
    Complex Assessor Officer (CAO), SBE will be an allowable deduction
    for Trust and Companies for the entire BIR year being assessed

Off-farm income offset

The off-farm income offset recognises farmers experiencing financial
hardship. Farmers are often forced to rely on off-farm income to support
the farm enterprise rather than using that income for their own support.
The offset can be applied if specific conditions are met.

The amount of the allowable deduction for the off-farm income offset is
determined by the value of the farm business loss. This is initially
determined by the estimated amount of the farm business income loss and
is revised when the actual farm business income is known following the
income tax assessment. This ensures the correct entitlement is paid. If
the actual income shows the farm business made a profit, the customer's
eligibility for the off-farm income offset and FHA must be reassessed.

When the actual farm business income is known, the amount of the
deduction allowed for the financial year may change.

If the actual loss is:

-   greater than the estimated allowable deduction, an arrears payment
    may be generated
-   less than the estimated allowable deduction, the customer may have
    been overpaid and a debt shell may be created

If the actual farm income is a profit:

-   eligibility for the off-farm income offset is reassessed and the
    customer will not qualify for the off-farm income offset
-   the new determination will be applied retrospectively, meaning the
    customer may have been overpaid and a debt shell may be created

For the 2014 -15 financial year, debts resulting from this process may
be waived under the Farm Household Support (Waiver of Debts) Minister's
Rule 2016.

For the 2015-16 to 2019-20 financial years, any debts created from this
process:

before 24 July 2021

-   zero rate Business Income Reconciliation (BIR) debts can be offset
    by customers using available clock days. Customers with full rate
    BIR debts had these days added back to their available clock days
    when the debt was raised
-   partial rate BIR debts may be waived. No trade of clock days is
    required as no days were re-credited when the debt was raised

from 24 July 2021 BIR debts may be waived under the Farm Household
Support Amendment (Debt waiver) Act 2021. Note: this process commenced
in 2022

Request for tax returns

In June each year, customers were requested to provide their income tax
returns and other financial statements for the previous financial year.
This enables Services Australia to commence business income
reconciliation. If the customer is unable to supply their documents by
the due date, an extension may be granted if evidence from the ATO shows
an extension to lodge has been provided.

If granted an extension by the ATO, the customer should contact before
the due date and provide a copy of the ATO extension letter.

If operating a business as a sole trader, customers must lodge a tax
return even if their income is below the tax-free threshold. This
includes:

-   a tax return for individuals including the supplementary section
-   business and professional items schedule for individuals

All FHA customers paid as farmers are required to lodge a tax return.
This is because businesses are not exempt from lodging an income tax
return. Sole trader and partnership businesses must lodge a tax return
even if the income is below the tax-free threshold.

Only FHA customers, who are paid as the partner of a farmer and not
involved in a business, may not be required to lodge a tax return.

Providing financial documents

To assess business income, FHA customers are required to provide copies
of the documents listed below:

their personal income tax return; and if partnered, their partner’s
personal income tax return

business income tax return(s) if different to their personal tax return.
For example a partnership, trust or company tax return

financial statements for each business:

-   profit and loss statement
-   balance sheet
-   depreciation schedule

Note: separate profit and loss statements may be required for unrelated
sources of business income.

There are times when no Income Tax Returns or Financial Statements are
prepared for some businesses. Generally, this is when a customer has
multiple related businesses and one is an asset holding business.

These must be provided:

-   [] by uploading documents online
-   by post to Reply paid 7800 Canberra BC ACT 2610
-   in person at a service centre, Rural Agent or Access Point

Note: documents sent to a personal or positional Services Australia
email address will not be accepted.

Business income reconciliation process

For members of a couple, business income reconciliation cannot occur
until their partner's financial documents are provided.

When the financial documents are received and recorded, they are used to
assess the customer's actual business income. The system:

-   calculates the customer's correct FHA entitlement for the financial
    year based on actual business income
-   compares this with the total amount of FHA they have been paid for
    that financial year based on estimated business income
-   issues a top-up payment, raises a recoverable debt, or records nil
    adjustment
-   issues a letter to the customer advising the outcome

Reconciliation timeframes

Business income that relates to a Primary Production Enterprise is
reported to the ATO for the period 1 July to 30 June each financial
year. Business income reconciliation covers the corresponding tax
period.

This means that business income reconciliation will cover the full
financial year (1 July to 30 June) whether or not payment has actually
been delivered for all days in the financial year.

For example, if the Entitlement Period End Day (EPED) finishes on 26
June and the final payment was on 27 June, reconciliation will cover up
until 30 June, based on the calculated entitlement.

Reconciliation covers the 2014/2015, 2015/2016, 2016/2017, 2017/2018,
2018/2019 and 2019/2020 financial years.

Manual rate periods and business income reconciliation

If a customer has had a manual rate applied at any time during the
financial year, the system will not automatically calculate the
reconciliation.

Using the information contained in the financial documents, staff will
manually calculate the customer's entitlement based on actual business
income.

If the outcome of reconciliation is a debt or the customer is entitled
to an arrears payment, this needs to be actioned manually.

2014-15 financial year only

Payments of Interim Farm Household Allowance (IFHA) are not included
within the calculations of the 2014-15 financial year reconciliation.
Business income reconciliation is only to include any payments paid as
FHA.

For customers on a manual rate of entitlement at any time during the
2014-15 financial year, manual rate periods will be excluded from the
calculation except for when the customer may be entitled to a top-up. If
a top-up for the 2014-15 year has been determined, a manual calculation
will be required for the period a customer has received a manual rate of
entitlement.

For FHA paid in the 2014-15 financial year, customers with a
reconciliation debt may receive a debt waiver for the full amount.
Because of this, they are not required to repay this debt.

This waiver is only available for the 2014-15 financial year and will
only cover debts from the 2014-15 FHA reconciliation process.

Farm Household Support Amendment (Debt Waiver) Act 2021

The Act permanently waives the repayment of certain classes of debts for
FHA recipients arising from the BIR process for FHA payments between 1
July 2015 and 30 June 2020. The Act received Royal Assent and came into
effect on 24 July 2021.

Pre-commencement debt: Reconciliation debt (FHA) (RCN) raised before
Royal Assent 24 July 2021. Pre-commencement RCN debts fall into 2
categories:

-   Partial rate RCN debts: customers with a pre-commencement RCN debt,
    where they were entitled to a partial rate (reduced rate but not to
    NIL) at any time during the relevant financial year, are eligible to
    have the RCN debt waived in full, without the need to ‘trade’ clock
    days. Partial rate BIR debts did not have days re-credited as
    available clock days when the debt was raised
-   Nil rate RCN debts: customers with a pre-commencement RCN debt where
    they were entitled to a NIL rate (zero rate for entire BIR period),
    will be required to 'trade' any available clock days to have their
    debt reduced or waived. This is because they had the benefit of
    clock days being re-credited when the original BIR debt was raised.
    FHA recipients with days to trade, will have the choice of whether
    to accept the waiver. Some recipients may wish to continue to
    receive FHA, rather than reduce their debt by trading days.

Post-commencement debt: Reconciliation debt (FHA) (RCN) raised on an
after Royal Assent 24 July 2021

-   Customers with a post-commencement RCN debt will have their debt
    automatically waived in full without the need to trade any clock
    days regardless of whether they received a partial rate or NIL rate
    during the financial year/s being assessed for BIR. This process
    will be automatic, the new BIR system functionality will apply the
    debt waiver and will not re-credit clock days where the customer had
    zero or partial entitlement for the year being reconciled

Reconciliation debts

-   Pre 24 July 2021 BIR debts. Once a debt is determined (raised or
    waived) and results in the customer not being entitled to any FHA
    payment for the period, the customer is deemed not to have received
    FHA for the period of zero entitlement.

For the days there was zero entitlement, the clock must be checked. If
the corresponding period of time has not automatically been added onto
the clock, a manual adjustment must be actioned. See Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) clock.

From 24 July 2021. BIR debts raised post Royal Assent are waived by law
and will not adjust available clock days

-   this waiver applies to reconciliation debts only. Outstanding
    non-lodger debts will be assessed separately. Customers must be
    encouraged to provide all relevant documents for the financial year
    in order for BIR to be completed

Reviews of trusts and companies by Complex Assessment Officer (CAO)

The designated and controlled private trusts and private companies in
which customers have a financial interest each have their own separate
organisation record.

Reviews prompt the CAO to ensure that the organisation's details are
correct. For example, income, assets, and the customers who are linked
to the organisation.

-   Before 1 July 2020. CAOs should not update the entity income for FHA
    customers on the Trust and Companies record for the 2014 to 2020
    financial years when undertaking an update in the BIR process. The
    CAO must Note/DOC the income details on the customers file for when
    BIR is undertaken. Lodgement of tax returns or the annual review is
    not an automatic request for BIR to be completed. In some instances,
    the Trust and Companies record may have been updated due to the
    partner being on an Income Support Payment at the time, or as result
    of a request reassessment
-   From 1 July 2020. FHA customers will have current estimated income
    recorded for both farm and off-farm income. CAOs should not update
    the income from the latest tax return where an estimate is in place.
    If the entities controllers are on a combination of FHA and also
    other ISP, CAOs should seek policy advice on income coding

Once the CAO completes the review, the entity record is updated and a
Note/DOC will be placed on the customer record. As the review is likely
to take place outside of the reconciliation process, staff should not
update business income until after the customer's reconciliation comes
due.

If the business income advised by the CAO report is significantly
different to the customer's current estimate, it may be appropriate to
contact the customer and request a revised estimate.

Note: under no circumstances should business income related debts be
raised outside the reconciliation process.

Business income reconciliation after death of customer

If a single FHA customer dies, business income reconciliation may occur
as soon as the executor has lodged the required tax return. If a debt is
raised for the period after the estate is disbursed, the debt should be
written off as legally unrecoverable.

If the deceased FHA customer was a member of a couple at any time during
the financial year, business income reconciliation cannot occur until
both partners' financial documents are submitted.

Business income reconciliation after customer separates

If a customer has separated from their partner, they cannot be compelled
to supply their ex-partner's tax return if they are unable to obtain the
information.

Forced disposal of livestock - treatment of income

Money received on or after 1 July 2019 from the forced disposal of
livestock will not be considered income for FHA on the condition that
the money is or will be deposited into a Farm Management Deposit (FMD).
This exemption does not apply to other income support payments.

The exemption applies to money received in the relevant financial year
and only for that year by reducing the farm business income.

Assessment of income from forced disposal of livestock

Customers are expected to deposit the money into a Farm Management
Deposit (FMD) within 42 days of receiving it:

-   Services Australia will not actively seek confirmation from
    customers about the deposit into the FMD
-   Customers are not required to provide evidence of the amount
    received or the deposit being made into the FMD
-   If a customer has not told the agency about the forced sale of
    livestock at the time of the sale and the agency finds the money
    during business income reconciliation, an exemption will still be
    provided for the relevant financial year if all other conditions are
    met

If the customer voluntarily advises that the amount was never deposited
into the FMD the exemption will be removed for the entire financial
year. Update the farm business income estimate. The customer may have a
debt raised when business income reconciliation is completed.

Related links

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessment of income and assets from business structures for Centrelink
payments

Business deductions

Business income estimates for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) clock

General Centrelink debt recovery information

Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO)

Upload documents service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
