
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer going overseas 002-02080020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to help Service Officers decide if
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) is payable to the customer while they are
overseas and for how long. It also explains the actions the Service
Officer and the customer are to take before the customer’s departure.
The portability script cannot be used when assessing a customer's
departure from Australia for FHA.

Leaving to live in another country

If an FHA customer leaves Australia to live in another country, the
customer would cease to be an Australian resident, and would no longer
qualify for FHA from the date of departure.

Temporary absence - approved reason for travel

FHA customers (including principal carers of dependent children) who
travel overseas temporarily may remain eligible for payment if they are
absent for an approved reason only for a specific negotiated period but
no more than 6 weeks. FHA may be portable for:

temporary absences (of any length, but unlikely to be more than a few
weeks) to attend a training camp with the Australian Defence Force
Reserves

a specific negotiated period (expected to be only a few weeks but not
more than the maximum portability period) for people who are absent for:

-   eligible medical treatment of a kind not available in Australia
-   humanitarian reasons such as custody or adoption proceedings
-   acute family crisis such as the death of a family member or visiting
    a family member hospitalised with a serious illness

Customers will be exempt from their mutual obligation requirements while
absent for these reasons.

The allowable absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.
FHA will be stopped if the reason for leaving Australia is not
acceptable, or if acceptable proof of the absence is not provided at the
interview or after the customer has returned to Australia.

The rate paid to FHA customers who are payable overseas will include
add-ons (if qualified), for the period of the absence up to the maximum
portability period.

Supporting documentation - acceptable proof of the absence

Customers must provide acceptable proof of the absence to determine if
they satisfy one of the approved reasons, preferably before their
departure.

In an emergency, if it is accepted the customer is leaving for an
approved reason they will be required to provide supporting
documentation on their return. If the documentation is not acceptable or
not provided, a debt will be raised.

If a customer provides evidence or supporting documentation to a service
centre that relates to a previous temporary absence which was not for an
approved reason at the time, there is no need to run the 'Review
officer' script as a decision on their portability has not yet been
made. Refer the case to Centrelink International Services (CIS) for
assessment.

Portability interview

If an FHA customer contacts, transfer them to the Farmer Assistance
hotline. Farmer Assistance hotline staff are responsible for handling
the portability interview and any departure coding.

If a customer has indicated their overseas travel meets the initial
criteria for an approved reason, refer the case to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) to assess entitlement.

Only CIS can approve payment for the absence.

Once CIS have recorded their decision, the Farmer Assistance hotline
Service Officer undertakes remaining coding.

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns cannot be used for
assessing portability entitlement for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Portability period

A person's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day (for example,
airline crew) this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Customer advises change to departure or return dates

If a customer travelling for an approved reason departs Australia more
than 3 days before or more than 3 days after the advised date, any
specific negotiated period of portability approved for the original date
of departure will cease to apply. The customer's approved reason for
travel outside Australia may no longer be valid. It is essential a
customer advise any change in their departure details before travel.

If unable to return to Australia at the end of the specific negotiated
period, the customer must contact Centrelink International Services
(CIS) or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is required,
this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly extended.
However, if they are unable to return to Australia for a reason other
than an approved reason (for example, they are hospitalised), or they
are still required overseas at the end of the maximum portability
period, Centrelink has the discretion to extend the period of
portability under certain circumstances. In both situations, refer the
customer to CIS for assessment. CIS are responsible for making and
recording the decision. The Farmer Assistance hotline Service Officer is
responsible for completing the activity and ensuring correct payment is
made.

Immigration Datalink

Customers with an active immigration datalink, will generally have their
departure or return date to Australia automatically recorded.

Customers without an active immigration datalink, will need to have the
datalink manually triggered to record the departure or return date to
Australia.

The departure and return dates are not automatically used in assessments
for FHA customers.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Immigration Datalink. If adversely affected, the customer can provide
evidence of alternative dates. Services Australia must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex, they
must contact Services Australia.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

Partner of a farmer remains in Australia during farmer's absence

Suspension for a portability reason only applies to the person who
leaves Australia. When the farmer is overseas but their partner receives
FHA and remains in Australia, FHA continues to pay. That is until it is
determined that the farmer no longer meets the qualification criteria.

If a farmer advises they are leaving Australia to live in another
country, FHA for the farmer will stop from the departure date. The
partner’s FHA may also be stopped from the departure date or be
reassessed to determine eligibility as a farmer in their own right. This
is dependent on whether the partner stays in Australia and adopts the
responsibilities of the farming enterprise.

Customer's dependent child leaving Australia

If the last dependent child of an FHA customer leaves Australia to live
in another country, the customer will cease to be eligible for a 'with
child' rate of payment immediately on the child's departure. Any payment
to the customer or concession for the care for the child will cease on
the departure date.

If a child leaves Australia temporarily or was born outside Australia,
the customer is generally still eligible for a 'with child' rate, even
if the customer remains in Australia.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
customer information about payments while overseas and travelling
overseas with PBS medicines, a link to the Department of Agriculture,
Water and the Environment website, a link to the Concession, Allowances,
Rent and Payment Summaries intranet page, and examples of the
portability of FHA.

Related links

View/update overseas travel online

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences for acute family crisis

Overseas absences for Armed Forces Reserves

Discretion to extend portability period

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Social Services Plans (SSP)

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
