
Residence assessment for customers claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-17050800

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine whether a customer for Farm
Household Allowance (FHA) satisfies the residence requirements necessary
to qualify for payment. The assessment includes whether the customer is
residentially qualified to lodge a legal claim for payment and whether
they are required to serve the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period
(NARWP).

On this Page:

FHA residence requirements

To meet residence criteria for FHA, the customer must meet all of the
following requirements:

-   be an Australian resident
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident throughout the period of payment; and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) Newly Arrived
    Resident's Waiting Period

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the visa subclass and grant date of the customer's first permanent
residence visa.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first permanent residence visa was granted before 1 January
    2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer is required to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Note: there are exceptions to these requirements.

New Australian residents claiming FHA need to have been in Australia as
an Australian resident for the duration of the NARWP before FHA is
payable. Alternatively, they may have an exemption from the NARWP in
certain circumstances.

In addition, if the FHA claimant is the partner of a farmer, they must
be residing in Australia.

New Zealand citizens

Non-protected Special Category Visa (SCV) holders cannot qualify for FHA
unless they apply for and are granted a permanent residence visa.

Section 94 of the Farm Household Support Act 2014 modifies the Social
Security Act preventing the application of the New Zealand 10 year
residence exemption for FHA.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Farm Household Allowance are required to have been an
Australian resident and physically in Australia for the required
duration of the NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods
before Farm Household Allowance is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Farm
Household Allowance may have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave
Australia temporarily for 3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence,
but the absence extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the required duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods
of residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Generally it is not a requirement that the period of residence required
for the NARWP occurred immediately before claiming. However, if a person
is claiming an exemption from the NARWP for the reason that they became
a Lone Principal Carer (applies to Parenting Payment Single (PPS),
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) and FHA only), they need
to have become a lone parent since the start of the current period of
Australian residence.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Department of Home Affairs datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the datalink will automatically record a
customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994, and
grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. If Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, it will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home Affairs record is
matched with a customer's record, ongoing updates to movement
information and visa changes will be automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not provided by the datalink.

The Resources page contains a link to staff contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Australian Residence Rules for New Zealand citizens

Australian residence requirements for payment

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
