
Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-20102102

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of income for Farm Household
Allowance (FHA). The assessment of FHA income tests are linked to those
used for social security benefits and allowances. There are importance
differences for FHA.

Income

The income test for FHA is linked to the allowance income test for
Social Security payments such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP). However, from
11 June 2020 the rate of FHA is set under the Farm Household Support
Act. Resources contains a link to information about the income and
assets test for FHA on the Services Australia website.

Ordinary income for FHA is assessed under Social Security Law. Key
differences apply for FHA customers:

-   From 11 June 2020 after the income and assets test is run and the
    customer's rate of FHA is payable at a rate more than zero (0)
    dollars, the customer must receive the maximum rate of Basic FHA for
    their circumstances
-   A Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Disability Pension is
    excluded from the assessment of income for FHA purposes

Farm business income

-   Farm business income is income derived from the farm and directly
    related to business activities of the relevant farm enterprise
-   The customer's estimate of farm business income is used to assess
    the rate of FHA that is payable during a financial year
-   For any FHA payments received up to 30 June 2020 (end of the 2019/20
    financial year), actual farm business income is reconciled against
    the estimate after the end of each financial year. As a result of
    reconciliation, adjustment to the customers FHA entitlement may be
    calculated. Do not apply business income reconciliation to any
    payments received from 1 July 2020 (2020/21 financial year onwards)

Non-farm income

Non-farm income is any income that is not derived from the activities of
the relevant farm enterprise, or directly related farm business, this
can include but not limited to:

-   Employment income
-   Profit from non-farm businesses
-   Business income that is not derived from farm enterprise activities
    (such as sale of shares owned by the farm business)
-   Income from financial investments (deeming)
-   Foreign income
-   Income from non-farming trusts and companies

Income nil rate period provisions apply to FHA as under Social Security
Law.

Working Credit provisions are not applicable to FHA.

A loan to a trust or private company assessed as a farm asset is no
longer considered a financial asset and is exempt from deeming rules.

Estimated farm business income and all non-farm income is assessable
under the income test.

See Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA) to calculate a
customer's daily FHA rate and income test reduction.

Exempt income

Lump sums received from the Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate grants
are not assessed as income. They are exempt lump sums and the associated
expenses are non-allowable capital expenditure. These grants are known
by different names in various states, including Emergency Water
Infrastructure Rebate (NSW and QLD), Far North Water Infrastructure
Grant Scheme, Great Artesian Basin Sustainability Initiative 3IP (GASBI)
and South Australian River Murray Sustainability Irrigation Industry
Improvement Program (SA).

Farm business losses

A farm business loss occurs when the amount of income from the farm
enterprise and directly related farm businesses, is below zero for the
financial year. From 16 December 2019, farm business losses can reduce
the assessable amount of non-farm income up to the amount of $100,000.
'Allowable reduction' is the amount of farm business losses that can
reduce the assessable amount of non-farm income.

Any customer that has a farm business loss recorded will automatically
have the farm business losses rules applied. Customers do not need to
apply for an allowable reduction. If a farm business loss is recorded,
the customer's allowable reduction will exclude a daily amount of
non-farm income from the rate calculation. This is up to the customer's
maximum amount in the financial year.

Maximum allowable reduction

The maximum allowable reduction for a financial year is the lower of
the:

-   threshold of $100,000
-   farm business loss for the financial year, or
-   non-farm income amount earned for the financial year

For partnered customers the $100,000 reduction threshold applied to both
the customer and their partner combined (that is, the threshold for a
couple is $100,000 between them, not $100,000 each).

If the farm and their partner are both in receipt of FHA, they can both
claim a portion of the reduction, but the total reduction cannot exceed
the maximum allowable. Customers can request to change the apportionment
at any time. There is no limit on the number of times the apportionment
can be changed.

Note: a person's allowable reduction is applied across the entire
financial year.

During the financial year, the farm business income estimate can be used
to determine the allowable reduction for that year. If the customer
advises of a change of circumstances, the farm business income estimate
must be updated.

Multiple farm businesses

Customers who operate more than one farm business and have a combined
net farm business loss will be able to reduce their non-farm income.

An allowance reduction can only be applied where the total net farm
businesses are running at a loss.

Note: there is a difference between the terms 'farm enterprise' and farm
business'. The Farm Household Support Act, 2014 defines a 'farm
enterprise' to mean an enterprise carried on within any of the
agricultural, horticultural, pastoral, apicultural or aquacultural
industries. The term farm business refers to a business that is
operating in one of the industries mentioned above.

There may be more than one farm business in a farm enterprise. For
example, a person may have 3 businesses (farms), located next to each
other that share equipment. Together they are a farm enterprise, but
separately, they are 3 farm businesses. Two or more farm businesses,
depending on how related they are, may be the same farm enterprise or
multiple, separate farm enterprises. Farm business includes related farm
businesses such as agistment or contracting.

All losses for farm businesses are:

-   combined to get a single total loss figure that can be offset, and
-   up to a maximum of $100,000 per single or couple as per the maximum
    allowable reduction

New financial year assessment

At the end of each financial year, the customer will provide an updated
income estimate for the new financial year for all farm and non-farm
businesses. The new estimate can be based on income from the previous
financial year and their estimated circumstances for the new financial
year. For example, they may be expecting a loss, even though they
profited last year based on environmental circumstances such as drought.

Change in circumstance

A customer's eligibility for the offset of a farm business losses must
be checked when a change of circumstance occurs, for example when the
customer:

-   advises changes in non-farm income
-   changes their business income estimate. This may indicate the farm
    business is now making a loss for the financial year, or is no
    longer making a loss

When any change in circumstances is reported or identified.

-   combine all farm business(es), and directly related business net
    income
-   determine the total farm business income
-   if the total is a loss, it can be used to reduce the assessable
    amount on non-farm income up to the maximum allowable reduction

If eligibility criteria is met:

-   review their income and apply the new rules from the relevant date,
    and
-   if the customer and their partner both receive FHA, and both have
    non-farm income, they may change the portion of the allowable
    reduction each person claims

Trusts and Companies

Farm enterprises and/or businesses may include trust or company
structures. These may run independently or in conjunction with other
business structures. Trust and company cases are referred to a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) for assessment.

Controllers of trusts and companies will be assessed based on their
income and assets, including those held by the trust or company.
Controllers can provide an estimate of their business income for FHA.

Non-controllers may qualify for FHA but will not be able to estimate the
trust or company business income. Non-controllers are assessed on
distribution income, see Assessing and recording distribution income.

A loan from the beneficiary of a trust to that trust, or from a
shareholder of a company to that company, is exempt from deeming rules
if all the following apply:

-   the loan was used to purchase farm or farm business assets owned by
    the trustee of the trust or company
-   the underlying assets of the entity are illiquid in nature. That is,
    the liquid assets held by the entity are not sufficient to repay the
    loan
-   the beneficiary loan value does not exceed the original cost of the
    asset

Note: if a beneficiary loan has been assessed as a farm asset and not a
financial asset, it should not be deemed.

Date of effect

Apply the FHA income test to all customers when:

-   assessing new claims, and
-   a reassessment of their income occurs

Business income reconciliation (BIR)

The allowable reduction of the farm business losses is determined by the
value of the farm business loss. During the financial year this can be
based on an estimate. At the end of the financial year when the actual
income is known, apply the correct allowable reduction using the actual
farm business loss (or income).

BIR will be removed for payments received from 1 July 2020 onwards. BIR
processing is still undertaken for payments received up until 30 June
2020 (financial year 2019/20).

Forced disposal of livestock - treatment of income

Money received on or after 1 July 2019 from the forced disposal of
livestock is not considered income for FHA if the money has, or will be
deposited into a Farm Management Deposit (FMD). This exemption does not
apply to other income support payments.

The amount deposited or intending to be deposited will not be assessed
as income. This lets customers choose the amount they want to deposit.
However, only this amount is exempt. Any money from the sale deposited
in another kind of account or kept as cash is assessed as farm business
income for FHA.

The gross or net amount can be exempted if the customer is deducting
business expenses.

The amount deposited or to be deposited in the FMD is an assessable
asset and deeming rules apply.

The exemption applies to money received in the relevant financial year
and only for that year.

Customers will need to have or open an FMD account in their name, not
held jointly with their business partner. Customers can find more
information about FMDs and the conditions on the Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website or by talking to their bank,
Rural Financial Counsellor or accountant.

Forced disposal of livestock income from an entity (company, trust or
partnership) may be exempted. The exemption only applies when the money
is or will be deposited into the FMD owned by the person who has a
membership interest in the entity.

Assessment of income from forced disposal of livestock

It is expected customers deposit the money into the FMD within 42 days
of receiving it:

-   Services Australia will not actively seek confirmation from
    customers about the deposit into the FMD
-   Customers are not required to provide evidence of the amount
    received or the deposit being made into the FMD
-   If a customer has not told the agency about the forced sale of
    livestock at the time of the sale, and the agency finds the money
    during farm business income reconciliation, an exemption will still
    be provided for the relevant financial year if all other conditions
    are met

After a forced disposal of livestock, each business partner can choose
to deposit their share of the sale into their own FMD. If one of them
deposits 100% of the money received into their own FMD, only that person
will have the funds exempt from the income test. Whereas, if each
business partner deposits 50% of the funds into their own FMD the amount
each person deposits or intends to deposit will be exempt from the
income test.

If the customer voluntarily advises the amount was not deposited into
the FMD, the exemption is removed for the entire financial year. Update
the farm business income estimate. The customer may have a debt when the
farm business income reconciliation is completed.

The customer's farm business income estimate is updated to ensure it
does not include the money going to the FMD. Customers can update their
estimate at any time when they become aware their farm business income
is going to change.

If a customer withdraws the money from the FMD in the financial year
received, the exemption does not stop. This is because the exemption is
not determined by the length of time the money is in the FMD. The amount
held on withdrawal in other accounts or in cash, is included in the
assessment of assets and deemed.

Income from deeming of the amount in the FMD is non-farm income and
therefore can be included in the FHA farm business losses.

Effect of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)/Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) on FHA

From 1 October 2016, PPL and DAP are treated as ordinary income
(non-farm) for calculating the rate of payment for FHA.

Note: where an FHA customer is still entitled to $1 of entitlement under
the income test they will be entitled to full rate of FHA during their
PPL/DAP entitlement periods.

Reporting requirements

If FHA customers have no employment income they are required to report
every 6 weeks. Customers are still required to notify within 14 days of
changes in their circumstances that can affect their FHA payments.

If the customer or their partner receives employment income from their
employer, they must report every 2 weeks.

Customers can report on their Entitlement Period End Date (EPED) via:

-   []phone self service
-   []Centrelink online account
-   Farmer Assistance hotline

Genuine attempts must be made to transition customers to report via self
service options before assisted reporting is completed, unless an
Exception applies.

To record employment income, see Recording and correcting employment
income details.

Review of decision

For FHA, reviews and appeals are the same as for social security
payments.

If the customer requests an explanation of a decision to reject/cancel
FHA due to the value of their farm assets, non-farm assets, or due to
income assessment. See Request for an explanation, quality check or
review (CLK).

Information for customers

Customers can view information about farm business losses on the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry website.

Customers can also contact the Farmer Assistance hotline, or speak to
their Financial Adviser or Rural Financial Counsellor.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry website, contact details, customer scenarios,
document templates, off farm income, offset for processing claims
submitted before 16 December 2019 and FAQs.

Contents

Business income estimates for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Related links

Recording and correcting employment income details

Assessing and recording distribution income

Coding income and assets for Centrelink payments and services

Employment income nil rate period

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Reporting overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
