
Remote Area Allowance (RAA) eligibility and payment 002-04010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to Remote Area Allowance
(RAA), including eligibility and payment of RAA. RAA is paid to assist
customers with the higher costs of living in a remote area.

Remote Area Allowance (RAA)

RAA assists with the higher costs associated with living in remote
areas, recognising many customers who do not pay, or pay very little
tax, do not receive the full benefit of tax zone rebates.

Eligibility for RAA

RAA is payable as an add-on payment to income support recipients who
receive an RAA eligible payment and:

are physically present in, and whose usual place of residence is within
an RAA Specified Area

have temporarily moved to an address:

-   that is within the specified area and
-   the length of their stay is expected to be more than 12 months

Youth Allowance (YA), Austudy Payment and ABSTUDY customers qualify for
RAA if:

-   they have an entitlement to payment, and
-   their usual place of residence is situated in a RAA Specified Area.
    See Payment of Remote Area Allowance (RAA) when term address changes

RAA Specified Area

To see if the customer's usual place of residence is within an RAA
Specified Area, search for the location in Office Locator.

RAA Specified Areas are determined by the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) and include:

-   Taxation Zone A
-   Special Taxation Zone A, and
-   Special Taxation Zone B

The following areas specified in the Special Taxation Zones are not part
of the RAA Specified Area:

-   Macquarie Island
-   The Territory of Heard Island
-   The Macdonald Islands, and
-   The Australian Antarctic Territory

Note: Norfolk Island residents became eligible for RAA from 1 July 2016

Except in some RAA borderline cases, the allowance is not payable if the
usual place of residence is not in a RAA Specified Area. When a customer
advises that they are permanently departing the RAA Specified Area,
payment of RAA is to cease from the day following the date of actual
departure. RAA will be automatically cancelled if the customer's usual
place of residence is changed to a non-RAA Specified Area.

Determining usual place of residence

To determine if the RAA Specified Area is the customer's usual place of
residence, there are a number of indicators that can assist in making
this decision. These indicators are detailed in the Resources page.

Temporary absence from remote area

If a customer's usual place of residence is in a remote area and they
are temporarily absent from the remote area (including overseas
absences), RAA continues to be paid for the first 8 weeks of the
customer's temporary absence. However, to be temporarily absent, a
customer must intend to return to their usual place of residence.

FTB child living outside RAA Specified Area

RAA is payable for the first eight weeks that a customer's FTB child
lives outside the RAA Specified Area providing:

-   the child is an FTB child or Regular Care Child, and
-   the child's usual place of residence is in the RAA Specified Area

For example, if the child attends boarding school outside the remote
area.

Change of circumstances

RAA is reviewed when a change in the customer's circumstances may
affect:

-   qualification for RAA
-   payability of RAA, or
-   rate of RAA

Note: if the change of circumstances causes a customer’s income or
assets to exceed the test limits for the income support payment, RAA is
not payable.

If a customer changes address for a short period (for example, due to
the wet season), record a temporary change of address. If the customer
is still absent from their usual place of residence after 8 weeks,
entitlement to RAA stops.

Payability of RAA

RAA is a flat rate payment and is not subject to a separate income test.
It is not income for the assessment of entitlement to any pension,
benefit or allowance.

RAA is payable to a customer whose usual place of residence is within
the remote area and who is physically present in the remote area. If the
usual place of residence is not in a RAA Specified Area RAA is not
payable, except in some RAA borderline cases.

When a customer advises that they are permanently departing the RAA
Specified Area, payment of RAA is to cease from the day following the
date of actual departure. RAA is automatically cancelled if the
customer's usual place of residence is changed to a non-RAA Specified
Area.

Frequency of payment

RAA is paid fortnightly along with the customer's relevant pension or
income support payment. Payment of RAA is usually automatic, following
an update of the customer’s home or temporary address.

Income and assets

RAA is not income and assets tested. If, after applying the income and
assets test for the income support payment, a customer is entitled to
any amount of income support payment, they receive the full RAA amount.

If income and assets test limits are exceeded for income support
payment, RAA is not payable to the customer. Customers eligible for
Working Credit will not be paid RAA during an employment income nil rate
period.

A review should be conducted whenever a change in circumstances
affecting payment of RAA is notified.

Tax treatment

RAA is a non-taxable component that is reportable to the ATO and must be
displayed on the payment summary.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator and information and
indicators to determine 'usual place of residence'.

Contents

Payment of Remote Area Allowance (RAA) when term address changes

Remote Area Allowance (RAA) overseas absences

Related links

Payment rates and thresholds

Working Credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
