
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) clock 002-02080030

-   Background
-   
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how a clock is used to count the number of days a
customer has been paid Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and how many
remaining days of FHA entitlement of the maximum cumulative period of 4
years (1,460 days).

Cumulative entitlement

The Australian Government announced changes to increase the cumulative
period that individuals can receive FHA. From 1 August 2018, eligible
farmers and their partners can access up to 4 years (1,460 days) of
payment. This is designed to give farm families time to get back on
their feet and the opportunity to take steps to address their long-term
financial security.

FHA is only payable for a maximum of 4 cumulative years (1,460 days).
The 4 year eligibility period does not need to be continuous: if FHA
payments stop, the count of days towards their 4 years of help will
pause. This means that the 1,460 days of payment may be delivered over
an extended period.

If a customer receives FHA as both a farmer and a partner of a farmer,
they are not entitled to more than 1,460 days payment in total. The
cumulative total includes days on payment as a farmer, and days on
payment as a partner.

The system will automatically cancel FHA payments when the clock
calculates that the customer has reached the maximum number of days on
payment.

Note: 1,460 days is not always equal to 4 years, it is set to cater for
leap years.

Clock calculation

The system will calculate a customer’s cumulative period of entitlement
using a clock.

All allowances payable with FHA will be counted towards the clock,
except bereavement payments.

The clock only counts days a customer has actually received a payment
associated with FHA and updates at the end of each payment period, the
count does not include payments scheduled for future delivery. Days
serving a waiting period do not count towards the allowable 1,460 days
on payment.

The system will start and stop the clock as a customer comes on and off
FHA payments:

-   days for which a payment is received will add a day to the clock
-   days for which a nil rate of payment is received will not count
    against the clock, except if a debt is raised because of fraud,
    where a customer has not acted in good faith or where payments have
    been made for periods over the 1,460 days of entitlement

Interim FHA

If a customer received Interim FHA payments for any period from 1 July
2014, the days for which they received Interim FHA payments must be
counted against the clock. This includes periods where the partner may
have received the payment of FHA on behalf of the customer.

Periods on Interim FHA payment have to be manually added to the clock.

Change of circumstance

A change of circumstance may result in days being added to or removed
from a customer’s clock.

If the adjustment results in:

-   a nil rate of payment for days previously counted as paid on the
    clock, those days are deducted from the clock count (for example if
    payment received for a day is raised as a debt, a day is added to
    the customer’s remaining entitlement)
-   a payment of FHA for an additional number of days, those days are
    added to the clock count (for example if an arrears payment is made,
    a day is removed from the customer’s remaining entitlement for every
    day covered by the arrears payment)

Bereavement

If a customer receives a bereavement payment due to the death of their
partner, the amount of the bereavement payment is not limited by the
number of days remaining on either person’s clock.

Business income reconciliation

As with other change of circumstances, business income reconciliation
for FHA may result in an adjustment to a customer’s clock.

-   If a top-up is calculated and paid, days may need to be removed from
    the customer's remaining entitlement calculation
-   If a customer has a reconciliation debt, the customer may choose to
    ‘cash in’ their remaining clock days to pay-off their reconciliation
    debt
-   If a debt is raised for a period, days may need to be added to the
    customer's remaining entitlement calculation

Debts

Undetermined debt shells will not have any impact on the clock. Once a
customer’s clock reaches 1,460 days on payment, FHA will be cancelled
whether or not there is any undetermined debt activity on the record.

For determined debts raised where a notice is given that it must be
repaid resulting in the customer not being entitled to any FHA payment
for the period, the customer is deemed not to have received FHA for days
of zero entitlement.

Partial rate debts: If the rate of FHA is reduced during the period of
the debt (but not $0) the clock will not be adjusted. Only the days
where there was zero entitlement are added back to the clock.

Waived debts, do not re-credit the clock.

If a zero entitlement debt is:

-   fully waived, manually reverse the auto clock adjustment that occurs
    when the debt is determined, prior to waiving. Add the days back as
    days the customer has been on FHA
-   partially waived, manually reverse the period that is waived. Do not
    add the days back to the available clock days. There is no change
    for a waived partial rate debt as the clock is not adjusted when the
    debt is raised to waive.

Exception: if a debt has resulted from payments being issued for a
period outside the 1,460 days of entitlement, a manual clock adjustment
is not needed, as there was never any entitlement to the period to need
an adjustment.

If a debt is determined for a period inside the 1,460 days of
entitlement after the customer's FHA payments have been cancelled due to
receiving 1,460 days of payment, the clock will need to be adjusted and
FHA restored via the change process. If the debt is determined more than
13 weeks after the FHA cancellation date, a new claim may be needed.

Farm Household Support Amendment (Debt Waiver) 2021

The Act permanently waives the repayment of certain classes of debts for
FHA recipients arising from the BIR process for FHA payments between 1
July 2015 and 30 June 2020.

Pre 24 July 2021: BIR debts existing prior to royal assent may be waived
under this legislative change.

-   Partial rate debts will not require a clock adjustment as no days
    were re-credited to the available clock days when the debt was
    raised
-   Full rate debts may be waived under a trade of available days.
    Customers with full rate BIR debts had these days added back to
    their available clock days when the debt was raised

Post 23 July 2021: BIR debts raised post royal assent are waived by law
and will not adjust available clock days.

Manual adjustments

The clock may need manual adjustment as the result of a decision made by
an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT). Adjustments to the clock are made in SAP using the
manual adjustment functionality.

If a customer received Interim FHA payments for any period from 1 July
2014, the days for which they received those payments must be counted
against the clock. Interim FHA payment days must be added to the clock
manually. If a customer's partner received Interim FHA payments, the
days where Interim FHA was received must be added to the customer's
clock manually.

Clock milestones

If the customer has been paid FHA (including periods of Interim FHA) for
a total of:

-   730 days, the customer has reached the beginning of their third year
    of receiving FHA. They may now be entitled to claim an additional
    $1000 of activity supplement
-   1,370 days, the customer has only 90 days of their FHA entitlement
    remaining. A notification letter will be sent to the customer
    advising when their entitlement is likely to end
-   1,460 days, the customer's FHA will cancel (O4Y) as they have used
    their entire FHA entitlement. FHA will cancel whether or not there
    is undetermined debt activity on the customer record

The Process page details the steps for manual clock adjustment.

Related links

Actioning an undetermined debt on the Debt Management and Information
System (DMIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
