
Eligibility and payability for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility requirements for Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) and waiting periods that may apply.

Payment of FHA

FHA is paid to eligible farmers and/or the partner of a farmer. Both
members of a couple can be paid as a farmer if qualification criteria
are met.

FHA cannot be paid in conjunction with any other social security
benefit, social security pension or a Service Pension, Income Support
Supplement or Veteran Payment.

The Australian Government extended the period farmers and their partners
can receive FHA on 1 August 2018 to 4 years (1,460 days). A further
change introduced on 16 December 2019 allows FHA to be payable for 4
years in every specified 10 year period. The first specified 10 year
period commenced on 1 July 2014. Customers that have already received
1,460 days of payment can reapply for FHA again from 1 July 2024.

Definition of a farmer

For the purpose of FHA, a farmer means a person who:

-   has a right or interest in land, and
-   uses the land wholly or mainly for the purposes of a farm enterprise

The definition of a 'farmer' captures customers:

-   who have a right or interest in land used for the purposes of a farm
    enterprise
-   if they have legal or equitable interest in the land. For example,
    sharefarmers (customers who have entered into an agreement to
    contribute resources to a farm enterprise for a share of profits)

A customer does not need to have total financial or legal control of the
farmland to meet the definition.

Qualifying as a farmer

The customer must meet all of the following eligibility requirements:

-   they are a farmer who contributes a significant part of their labour
    and capital to a farm enterprise (or is unable to do so due to a
    temporary illness or injury)
-   the farm enterprise has significant commercial purpose or character
    and is in Australia
-   they are aged 16 years or over (partnered customers must be over the
    age of consent in their State or Territory)
-   they meet Australian residence requirements for payment
-   they meet the income and asset test
-   they are willing to enter into and comply with a Financial
    Improvement Agreement (FIA), or they have an existing FIA
-   they have received FHA for a cumulative period of less than 4 years
    in the specified 10 year period

Qualifying as the partner of a farmer

A customer must meet all of the following requirements:

-   they are not qualified to be paid FHA as a farmer in their own right
-   they are a member of a couple and their partner qualifies for FHA as
    a farmer Note: the farmer does not have to claim or receive FHA for
    their partner to claim and be eligible for FHA
-   they meet the income and asset test
-   they are aged 16 years or over, and over the age of consent in their
    State or Territory
-   they meet Australian residence requirements for payment
-   they are willing to enter into and comply with a Financial
    Improvement Agreement (FIA), or they have an existing FIA
-   they have received FHA for a cumulative period of less than 4 years
    in the specified 10 year period

Right or interest in land

A farmer may have a right or interest in farm land through:

-   ownership of land
-   leasing of land
-   sharefarming
-   private companies and trust that own land
-   being an apiarist

Farm enterprise

A farm enterprise is the business associated with the farm land.

An enterprise is described as being a business within the following
industries:

-   agricultural
-   horticultural
-   pastoral
-   apicultural
-   aquacultural

Exclusion

Forestry is not considered to be an activity falling within the above
industries. It does not meet the definition of a ‘farm enterprise’ for
the purpose of FHA. Therefore, individuals who have a right or interest
in land used wholly or mainly for forestry purposes do not meet the
definition of a ‘farmer’.

Significant labour

As assessment of the labour a farmer contributes to a farm, will
establish that the labour is both significant to the farmer and to the
farm enterprise. An assessment should examine the farmers time spent
working the farm enterprise as compared with their other activities (for
example, off-farm employment). When balancing labour from other
activities such as employment, it is important to consider if the
off-farm work is irregular and how it works around the requirements of
the farm.

Note: where a farmer is incapacitated by a temporary illness or injury
which results in an exemption from the activity test, they will be taken
to contribute a significant part of their labour to a farm enterprise
if, immediately before the temporary illness or injury, they had been
contributing a significant part of their labour to a farm enterprise.

Significant capital

The assessment of significant capital is not a defined proportion of
capital for the qualification requirement to be met. Rather, it is
determined on a case-by-case basis. Assessment of significant capital
contribution is in comparison to other capital and liabilities the farm
holds. The capital contributed by the farmer must also be significant to
the farmer's enterprise. The assessment of capital looks at only the
farmer's contributions of capital to the farm enterprise and is not a
comparison of the total contribution where others are involved in the
farm enterprise.

Significant commercial purpose or character

Under section 5 of the Secretary's Rule, what must be considered when
determining if a farm enterprise has a significant commercial purpose or
character for FHA purposes are:

whether a business plan has been drawn up for the farm enterprise

if the farmer or their partner (where the partner is not a farmer) is
not an expert in respect of the farm enterprise

-   whether relevant expert advice has been sought about the farm
    enterprise from a relevant authority, an experienced farmer or an
    agent, or
-   whether relevant technical literature on the farm enterprise has
    been obtained

whether it has been established that the land that is used for the
purposes of the farm enterprise is suitable for the farm enterprise,
including by analysing soil and water samples

whether the farmer of their partner (where the partner is not a farmer)
has

-   considered if there is a commercial market, or a potential
    commercial market, for the farm enterprise, and
-   investigated the capital requirements of the farm enterprise,
    including planning how capital for the farm enterprise will be
    obtained and used, and
-   conducted research into the farm enterprise confirming (based on
    market prospects, the expected level of production, and the running
    costs, of the farm enterprise) that profits can be expected, and
-   ensured the size and scale of the farm enterprise is sufficient for
    a commercial enterprise

whether legal requirements required to operate the farm enterprise on a
commercial basis have been, or could at the appropriate time be,
complied with

whether there is

-   an intention to make a profit in respect of the farm enterprise, and
-   a reasonable belief that the farm enterprise is likely to generate a
    profit

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption does not apply for FHA

Section 7(7) of the Social Security Act allows that under certain
circumstances, a customer may receive an exemption from meeting the
residence requirements, in order that they can be paid JobSeeker Payment
or Youth Allowance for a period of 6 months, see New Zealand 10 year
residence exemption.

This exemption does not apply for FHA due to the modifications to the
Social Security Act imposed by section 94 of the Farm Household Support
Act 2014. A customer who falls into this residence category may wish to
test eligibility for JobSeeker Payment, and will be subject to the
income and assets tests relevant to that payment.

Waiting periods

A waiting period may be applied when a customer qualifies for FHA but it
is not immediately payable. Waiting and preclusion periods are not
included when calculating the maximum 4 years entitlement to FHA.

Waiting and preclusion periods that may apply:

-   Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP) if the customer has been
    engaged in high income seasonal, intermittent or contract work in
    the 6 months before claiming
-   Income Maintenance Period (IMP) if the customer has received
    termination or leave payments from an employer
-   Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

FHA customers are also subject to a Compensation Preclusion Period

From 5 April 2017, the Liquid Assets Waiting Period (LAWP) or Ordinary
Waiting Period (OWP) no longer apply to FHA customers.

If more than 1 waiting or preclusion period applies to a customer, they
are served concurrently and the end date is the day on which the longest
period ends.

Customers in severe financial hardship

Customers who do not meet the assets tests for FHA may qualify under
Asset Hardship rules as assessed for other income support payments. No
distinction is made between personal and farm assets in determining if
certain assets can be disregarded.

From 11 June 2020, the asset test will combine personal and farm assets
under one single test with an increased limit of $5.5 million, either
for a single customer or a couple.

Preclusion periods may be partly or fully waived if the customer is in
severe financial hardship.

The customer may seek a waiver on severe financial hardship grounds when
claiming FHA or while serving a preclusion period. The waiver takes
effect from the date the customer claimed severe financial hardship.

For more information, see Waiting periods for Centrelink payments.

Mutual obligations for FHA customers

To receive payment customers are required to:

-   complete a Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) with a financial assessor
-   enter into and comply with a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA)
    that they negotiate with a Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO)

An FHCO will be assigned to the customer when they are granted FHA. The
FHCO will regularly review the customer's progress towards meeting their
activity requirements. Where agreed by the customer, a Rural Financial
Counsellor (RFC) may attend meetings with the customer and the FHCO to
provide additional support and guidance towards improving the customer's
circumstances.

Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) provides free,
independent and confidential assistance to eligible farmers to help them
better understand their financial situation. They offer a range of
services and information to support customers assess their business
finances and plan for the future. For FHA claims, the Rural Financial
Counsellor (RFC) is authorised to sight, copy and certify a person’s
original identity documents for the purpose of completing linkage with
the customer, as part of the Identity Confirmation process.

They help customers to access government and industry programs as well
as help with short term issues like negotiating loans, debt mediation
and succession planning. They can even help customers prepare and lodge
claims for FHA.

The RFCS can also help customers access professional services to assist
them manage and cope with stress.

Customers may consent to have their RFC attend meetings with them and
their FHCO. This will ensure they receive support from both services
that complement each other as the customer works to improve their
financial situation.

A person does not need to be in receipt of FHA to be referred to RFCS
and access the RFCS services.

The Resources page includes a link to the National Emergency Management
Agency website for information about the RFCS.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry for Farm Household Allowance information, the
National Emergency Management Agency for Rural Financial Counselling
Service information and examples, and scenarios to help assess if the
farm enterprise definition and significant contribution of labour and
capital requirements are met.

Contents

Residence assessment for customers claiming Farm Household Allowance
(FHA)

Related links

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Australian residence requirements for payment

Change of circumstance for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) clock

Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity test for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Waiting periods for income support payments

New Zealand 10 year residence exemption

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
