
Financial Improvement Agreements (FIA) 002-02070040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure outlines how Farm Household Case Officers (FHCO)
negotiate Financial Improvement Agreements (FIA) with customers
following the grant of Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and update
existing FIAs.

Purpose of FIA

The FIA is a measurable, incremental planning tool for each FHA customer
(farmers or their partners) to work towards improving their capacity for
financial self-reliance and long-term financial security.

The FIA is negotiated between the FHA customer and the FHCO. If a
customer is engaged with a Rural Financial Counsellor who has Permission
to Enquire, the Rural Financial Counsellor (RFC) may also attend FIA
negotiations. The FIA considers the customer's needs, goals, resources
and any barriers that limit the customer's ability to take action to
improve their circumstances. Regular compliance reviews or 'activity
testing' make sure the customer is undertaking their obligations as
outlined in the FIA.

The FIA is based on the customer's long term goal and sets out
objectives and activities designed to help them achieve their objectives
and make progress towards their goal.

Objectives are based around one of the following prescribed goals:

-   increasing capacity to generate income on-farm
-   increasing capacity to generate income off-farm
-   increasing capacity to generate income from a mixture of on-farm and
    off-farm activities, or
-   preparing to exit farming

Requirement to enter into the FIA

The FIA forms part of the customer's mutual obligations. To be eligible
for FHA, customers must enter into an FIA.

Payment of FHA is available for a cumulative period of 1,460 days.
Customers can choose to preserve their entitlement by claiming the
payment several times over this period. They can claim FHA when they
need it and cancel it when their financial position improves. The FHCO
will re-negotiate the FIA with the customer each time they claim.

Customers granted an exemption from the activity test are still required
to enter into an FIA. Compliance with these activities will be
considered met for the length of the exemption period. See Activity
testing.

Negotiating the FIA

Customers must enter into an FIA within 28 days of being advised. This
period may be extended once by no more than 28 days if the circumstances
support this.

Customers negotiate the FIA with their FHCO. The FIA is based on the:

-   assessment and recommendations in the Farm Financial Assessment
    (FFA)
-   customer's capacity to comply with the requirements
-   customer's needs, and
-   other relevant information provided by the customer and, if
    Permission to Enquire exists, by the Rural Financial Counsellor that
    the customer is engaged with

Note: although a request to enter into an FIA is issued following the
return of the FFA, where an FFA cannot be completed for an extended
period of time (for example, more than 2 months), FHCOs manually
initiate the FIA.

The goals, objectives and activities should take into account:

-   a realistic assessment of the customer's current financial position,
    and
-   achievable strategies that can be measured to help the customer
    improve their circumstances within their 4 year entitlement to FHA

Agreed milestones and due dates are specified in the FIA and are used to
determine whether the customer has met the requirements of the activity
test.

Note: from 27 April 2020 customers can make a verbal declaration to
agree to the FIA. This means they do not need to sign and return their
negotiated FIA. The customer will be sent a copy of their new FIA. If an
existing FIA has been updated, a copy of the updated FIA will be sent.
Customers can view their FIA activities, activity due date and activity
supplement balance via their Centrelink online account.

Members of a couple/ partner of a farmer

Each member of a couple is required to enter into and comply with their
own FIA. Their goals and activities may complement each other. They may
also be different. Both members of a couple can participate in a joint
review, but one recipient cannot complete the review for both.

When a partner of a farmer has little or no involvement in the farming
operation, the objectives and activities in the FIA will reflect the
circumstances and aspirations of the individual. For example, if the
partner of a farmer works off-farm and wants to gain new skills for
employment, the FIA should include activities that support this outcome.

If a person does not enter into an FIA they will not be eligible to
receive FHA.

Role of FHCO

The FIA is developed in 3 stages:

-   the FHCO reviews the FFA and notes the SWOT analysis and assessment
    of the farm business by the Financial Assessor. This is done before
    meeting with the customer
-   the FHCO completes the Questionnaire on the customer's record as
    they gather information about the customer to help them negotiate
    the FIA
-   the customer(s), FHCO, and the RFCS if requested, meet to negotiate
    and agree on goals, objectives and activities in the FIA

Meeting with the customer

The meeting can be arranged in the way that best suits the situation:

-   a phone interview
-   a face-to-face interview in a service centre or another site

Face to face interviews must not be held at the customer's home or farm.
A face-to-face meeting should take place:

-   at least once during the first 2 years of receiving FHA, and
-   at least once in the final year

Wherever possible, the customer's Rural Financial Counsellor should be
included in the interviews.

Role of the Rural Financial Counsellor (RFC) and the FIA

The Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS) can be accessed by a
customer regardless of the outcome of their FHA claim. The RFCS provides
free, independent and confidential assistance to farmers with long term
financial planning for their farming business. They can also help with:

-   short term assistance to access government and industry program
-   referrals to professional services, and
-   negotiating with creditors, debt mediation and succession planning

A customer must provide express consent for Services Australia to
disclose their personal information to the RFCS and for them to attend
meetings with the FHCO. Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) has been
agreed as a minimum requirement for sharing information from the FFA and
FIA.

The RFC:

-   may offer suggestions for activities to be included in the FIA
-   meets the qualification or expertise criteria for a Financial
    Assessor and can complete the FFA
-   does not agree, authorise or approve any activities in the FIA
-   does not do the activity test or approve payment of the Activity
    Supplement

Case Notes

Case Notes provide free text capability to enable staff in Services
Australia to capture and view customer information not recorded in other
areas of the system.

FHCOs can record 2 different types of Case Notes 'Sensitive' and '
Non-sensitive'.

Sensitive Case Notes - used by the FHCO to record information that
contain sensitive or personal information.

Non-sensitive Case Notes - used by FHCOs to record information relevant
to and supports decisions relating to a customer's FIA and activity
testing. Non-sensitive FHA Case Notes will replicate each time an update
is made on a DOC in the customer's record. DOC guidelines and 'Getting
it Right' standards apply to FHA Case Notes.

Types of activities to be included in the FIA

The FIA must contain at least one measurable activity that is due within
the next 90 days, and subject to the activity test. The activity is
assessed at the next review (unless an exemption applies). Activities
align with the SMARTA principles, providing customers with clear
directions giving them a realistic opportunity to achieve their goals.
The customer must undertake an activity from one of the following
categories:

-   undertaking training
-   obtaining professional advice
-   undertaking study
-   actively seeking, or being willing to undertake paid work in
    Australia (other than paid work that is unsuitable for the person)
-   any other activity approved by the FHCO that focuses on a direct
    improvement to the customers circumstances

FHA customers are not required to undertake activities for a minimum
number of hours to satisfy the activity test. This recognises the
substantial workload of running a farm which may vary over time, and
between different types of farms.

The FIA must not require the customer to undertake unlawful activities,
activities outside Australia, or an activity that would aggravate a
disability, illness or medical condition.

Activities not subject to the activity test may also be included in the
FIA, recognising additional efforts a customer wants to undertake to
improve their situation. FHCOs should indicate in the Activity to be
completed free text field if an activity is being undertaken for the
purposes of the activity test or as an additional voluntary activity.

Note: counselling services can only be added for a person who has
exhausted funding received through the Better Access Initiative
Commonwealth Government mental health program, or to cover the gap
payment for the Better Access Initiative. The FHCO can verbally confirm
with the customer they have accessed and exhausted this funding or if
they will be liable for a gap payment.

Activity supplement

While receiving FHA, customers can claim an activity supplement to help
pay for activities agreed in their FIA.

From 11 June 2020, the total amount to support FIA activities increased
from $4,000 to $10,000 (including GST). The increased amount of $10,000
is the total available over the customer's lifetime. The supplement can
be used to cover reasonable travel and accommodation associated with the
improvement activity.

Before 11 June 2020:

The activity supplement was:

-   limited up to $3,000
-   available on entering the FIA, and
-   for activities undertaken over the cumulative 4 years of FHA

An additional activity supplement of $1,000 was available to do high
value activities from the third year of payment. This was in addition to
the $3,000 activity supplement the customer may have already accessed in
full or part

Note: not all activities included in the FIA are eligible for the
activity supplement. Activities considered a part of normal farm
operations, or expenses incurred implementing any advice or training
will not be eligible. For more information about eligible activities,
how to claim the activity supplement and the maximum amount payable, see
Activity supplement and voucher for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).

Activity testing

Customers should advise their FHCO when they have completed an activity
from their FIA.

Customers must contact their FHCO if they are unable to comply with
their FIA. The FHCO can check if an exemption from the activity test can
be granted. The FIA must be updated to take into account the customer's
change in circumstances.

Unless an exemption has been granted or the customer has a reasonable
excuse, failure to enter into an FIA and undertake activities agreed in
the FIA may result in FHA payments being stopped. Customers granted an
exemption from the activity test are still required to enter into an
FIA. See Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity
test for FHA customers.

Reviewing the FIA

Regular reviews of the FIA and associated activities will be conducted
by the FHCO once every 12 weeks or more often if appropriate.

With the customer’s consent, their RFC can be invited to attend the
review.

The customer's compliance with their mandatory activities will be
checked and discussed at the review. It is important FHCOs discuss the
customer's progress towards financial self-reliance, and evaluate the
effectiveness of the current strategy in achieving this.

If the customer is not on track to improve their financial circumstances
by the end of their 4-year FHA entitlement, it may be necessary to
reassess the goals and objectives in the FIA.

The FIA can be varied or replaced in consultation with the customer. If
the circumstances of the customer or the farm enterprise have changed
significantly, it may be appropriate to negotiate a new FIA
incorporating the customer's changed goals and objectives. If there is a
significant change to the farm business structure or operations, a new
Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) may be required to support the
development of the new FIA.

At the final quarter FIA review, the FHCO should check if the customer
has a current farm business income in place and provide the customer
with the options to update their estimate. Farm business losses can
reduce the assessable amount of non-farm income.

Resources contains links to FarmHub, User Guides, ICT Service Desk
referrals, letter, email and facsimile templates.

Related links

Activity supplement and voucher for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) clock

Mutual obligations, failures and exemptions from the activity test for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Suspending, cancelling and restoring Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
