
Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-03030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the rate of Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) and FHA payments.

Rate of FHA

The FHA rate for a customer aged:

-   21 years or under is equivalent to the independent rate of Youth
    Allowance (YA)
-   22 years or over is equivalent to the rate of JobSeeker Payment
    (JSP)

From 11 June 2020, all FHA customers receive the maximum rate of payment
if their FHA rate of payment is greater than zero dollars after the
income test is applied.

The income test for FHA is linked to the allowance income and assets
tests for YA/JSP. However, there are key differences when assessing
income for FHA, including:

The customer's estimate of farm business income is:

-   combined with the income from any directly related businesses, and
-   used to apply the FHA income test

The total farm business losses can be used to reduce non-farm income:

-   up to $100,000 per couple
-   per financial year

From 11 June 2020, a single asset test was introduced for FHA. It
combines personal and farm assets into one asset test with a threshold
of $5.5 million

Working Credit provisions do not apply for FHA.

Employment income nil rate provisions can apply.

A customer's rate may include additional entitlements depending on the
customer's circumstances.

Additional entitlements

The following are payable with Farm Household Allowance (FHA):

Bereavement Payment

Energy Supplement. Note: a higher rate of Energy Supplement is not paid
to customers over pension age

Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA). Note: eligibility for PhA is different
for FHA customers

PhA is payable to FHA customers at standard rates if:

-   they are a single principal carer of a dependent child, or
-   they have been granted a temporary incapacity exemption (supported
    by a medical certificate) from the activity test

PhA is not payable for FHA customers who are aged 60 years or more and
have been in receipt of an income support payment for at least nine
months, unless they also meet the criteria above

The Pharmaceutical Allowance and Energy Supplement payments incorrectly
received before 1 July 2017 will not be raised as a debt to the customer
and should be waived if a debt shell is generated

Remote Area Allowance (RAA)

Rent Assistance (RA)

Telephone Allowance (TAL)

Note: Energy Supplement, PhA and RA are added to the rate of FHA before
the income test is applied.

A Health Care Card (HCC) is automatically issued to the customer when
FHA is granted.

Customers with children in their care may also claim family assistance.

Taxable payment

FHA is a taxable payment. Customers can request tax deductions be made
from their FHA payments.

Customers claiming or receiving family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments must include FHA payments in their income estimate
used for those payments.

Advance payments

FHA customers can apply for an advance payment. Advance payments:

-   are not an additional payment
-   are a lump sum payment of the customer's future FHA entitlement
-   cannot be paid in instalments, unlike other advance payments
-   is repaid through fortnightly deductions from the customer's FHA
    payments

Eligibility for an advance payment and the amount of the advance payment
are assessed as for other non-pension customers.

Customers can apply for an advance payment by calling the Farmer
Assistance hotline on 132 316.

Hardship advance

When FHA is granted or restored, a hardship advance can be paid if the
customer is in severe financial hardship. This is an advance of the
customer's first FHA payment.

Upon the customer's request, eligibility for a Hardship Advance is
assessed as for social security allowances.

Urgent payments

FHA customers in financial hardship can ask to receive part of their FHA
entitlement before the day it would normally be due to be paid.

Upon the customer's request, eligibility for an urgent payment is
assessed as for social security allowances.

Reporting requirements

FHA customers are required to report 6 weekly by default. Customers are
still obliged to notify within 14 days of changes in their circumstances
that can affect their FHA payments.

If the customer or their partner receives variable income from ongoing
employment, they are required to report 2 weekly.

Customers can report on their Entitlement Period End Date (EPED):

-   [] using their Centrelink online account
-   [] using phone self service
-   by calling the Farmer Assistance hotline

To record employment income, see Recording and correcting employment
income details.

The Resources page has examples of FHA rate calculations.

Contents

Advance payments of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Income Statements and Income and Asset Statements for Farm Household
Allowance (FHA)

Related links

Deeming provisions

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Employment income nil rate period

Making a decision about a Hardship Advance

Reporting overview

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
