-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains general information regarding debt processing for
Farm Household Allowance (FHA) including the creation, investigation,
calculation and raising of a debt.

FHA debts

FHA debts can occur for a number of reasons, such as:

-   in circumstances when advice is received late and for a period
    already paid to the customer
-   income from employment, investments or other sources has not been
    used when calculating the rate of payment
-   changes in care of dependent children
-   change in amount of rent paid or incorrect amount of Rent Assistance
    paid to the customer
-   customer has not advised they have become partnered
-   loss of entitlement to FHA. For example, in prison, left the
    country, assets over the limit
-   fraud, including the FHA relief payment
-   administrative or systems error
-   farm enterprise business income reconciliation related processes

The Social Services Plan (SSP) determines the daily rate of payment for
a given time period. If customer circumstances change and this changes
their entitlement, a new SSP is created to reflect the change. Current
and superseded SSPs are stored in the customer record which means there
can be a different rate displayed for the same time period in several
SSPs. Each new decision (SSP) overrides the previous one and creates a
new SSP. Every time a new SSP is created, the customer's payment rate is
reassessed from the start date of payment.

If the reassessment results in a changed rate for any period, the system
may generate an arrears payment, stop payment and/or create an
undetermined debt shell.

Note: any changes resulting from a reassessment do not take effect until
the SSP is approved.

Undetermined debt shells

Where a potential overpayment has been identified, the approved Social
Services Plan (SSP) will trigger the creation of an undetermined debt
activity within the Debt Management Information System (DMIS). As these
triggers are run at specific times during the day, there may be a delay
between the approval of the SSP and the creation of the undetermined
debt. The potential overpayment does not become a debt until it has been
investigated and determined.

Investigating a debt

All undetermined debt activities created for FHA will have a
corresponding Social Services Plan (SSP) that triggered the payment
adjustment. To investigate a potential overpayment, the SSP that created
the debt may have to be compared with the previous SSP.

When investigating a debt, review data held on both the Customer First
native and legacy screens. Due to the complexity of FHA eligibility
criteria, additional screens relating to, but not limited to; income,
assets, overseas departures or other details may have to be
investigated.

The investigation will uncover the action that created the debt and
determines whether the debt is recoverable under the Social Security Act
1991. Before raising a debt, there must be evidence to substantiate a
debt actually exists. Staff must examine the customer record and all
available evidence, determine if an overpayment has occurred, and
whether a recoverable debt exists under the relevant legislation.

There are 3 possible outcomes of the investigation:

-   The debt is raised for recovery
-   The debt is Waived if there is reason that meets the waiver
    provisions
-   The debt is Finalised No Debt (FND) if not a legitimate debt or is
    not legally recoverable

Debt offsetting from unpaid arrears

When investigating a debt for FHA issues on the customer's record may be
identified. When this occurs the information may need to be corrected
and a reassessment of the customer's entitlement is then undertaken.

An offset may occur when a debt shell is created for a customer and a
subsequent reassessment results in an arrears payment being generated.

In this situation the arrears would be offset against the overpayments,
and any remaining amount (if any) is then issued to the customer as a
correct arrears payment.

An offset can only occur when the components and dates of the debt shell
match the components and dates of the proposed arrears payment.

Debt offsetting makes adjustments in the Debt Management Information
System (DMIS) to:

-   correct the amount of the debt shell
-   amend the amount of arrears up or down
-   finalise the debt shell if the arrears and debt shell are the same
    amount, for the matching components and timeframe

It is important to manually check the outcomes of this process.

Finalising No Debt

Finalise No Debt (FND) should only be done once the change process has
been run on a record (reassessment of Social Services Plan (SSP)). Each
time this process is run, it will reassess the customer's record from
the original start date of the current SSP chain. The reassessment will
pick up any errors (underpayments/overpayments) for the customer from
their entitlement start date.

Once the reassessment of the SSP is complete any changes will be applied
overnight in the debt shell. In some cases it may take until the next
payment is released before it is applied.

Once all changes have been applied the existing debt shell will also
update.

Once the SSP has been reassessed, investigate the debt shell by
following the current procedure to make sure the undetermined debt is
correct and can be determined.

FHA Relief Payment

The FHA relief payment may be recovered if determined it was received
fraudulently.

Coronavirus Supplement (CVS) debts

Eligibility for the CVS is based on payability for the eligible
supplement income support payment (ISP) including any eligible add-on
payments, during the customers ISP entitlement period.

CVS debts occur when the customer:

-   has a change in circumstances other than a benefit transfer
    backdated, and
-   the person was no longer in receipt of a qualifying ISP

Where a customer transfers from a CVS eligible ISP to a CVS non-eligible
ISP, any excess CVS paid is not recoverable.

When investigating a CVS debt:

-   raise the corresponding ISP debt before raising the CVS debt
-   do not raise a CVS debt with the ISP debt. Do not amalgamate FHA CVS
    debt shells
-   if the corresponding ISP debt is Finalised No Debt, finalise the
    corresponding CVS debt for the same period as Finalised No Debt

The Resources page contains the Farm Household Allowance Debt worksheet
and links to the Farm Household Allowance (FHA) Level 2 helpdesk.

Related links

Change of circumstances for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Calculating Centrelink entitlements and gathering information when
investigating debts

Raising and attribution of Service Update debts

Debt investigation

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Debt identification

Finalised 'no debt' (FND) or 'zeroing' debts that are not legally
recoverable

Investigating administrative or computer error debts for Social Security
payments

Notification provisions (CLK)

Social Service Plans (SSP)

Raising social security debts due to self-employment or business income

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Debt Raising support for customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
