
Farm Financial Assessment (FFA) supplement and voucher 002-02070020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how the Farm Financial Assessment (FFA)
supplement can be claimed to cover the cost of preparing the FFA (up to
$1,500), and how the supplement voucher is processed.

Eligibility

Once a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) has been granted,
the customer is assigned a Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO). The FHCO
will generate an FFA request advising the customer they need to complete
the FFA with a financial assessor by the due date. To receive FHA,
customers must comply with the request to provide the completed FFA
within the required time frame. From 27 March 2020, the FFA request and
due date are determined by the FHCO based on the customer’s
circumstances, and is not limited to the previous 28 day time frame.

The FFA request letter includes:

-   information about how to complete the FFA
-   the FFA due date
-   FFA supplement voucher (A2554m) for up to $1,500 to meet the cost of
    completing the FFA, and
-   a one-time access code (OTAC) for the financial assessor to access
    the FFA via the farm information portal on the Services Australia
    website

The voucher is used to claim up to $1,500 (GST inclusive) to cover the
cost of preparing the FFA. If it has been lost, a new voucher can be
issued to the customer. See the Resources page.

The FFA Supplement is only payable where the FFA has been completed by a
financial assessor. Customers should make sure that their chosen service
provider meets the requirements to complete the FFA. The FFA supplement
of $1500 cannot be used for FFAs not completed by a financial assessor.
Customers should take their FFA request letter and the voucher to the
appointment with their financial assessor. Some Rural Financial
Counsellors (RFC) may meet the requirements as an assessor and provide
this service free of charge.

Note: before 11 June 2020, the person completing the FFA was called a
prescribed adviser. Prescribed advisers are required to give evidence of
their qualification and membership to a professional institution.

Maximum amount and payment

The maximum amount of FFA supplement payable is $1,500 for each FFA. If
a single FFA is completed for members of a couple, only one supplement
of $1,500 is payable. In certain circumstances when a new FFA is
required, a Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) may authorise the payment
of a second FFA supplement.

The assessment fee is set by the financial assessor. Costs above $1,500
are not covered by the supplement. Customers are advised to obtain a
quote from the financial assessor before booking an appointment.

The FFA supplement can be paid to the FHA customer claiming the
supplement or to the financial assessor. The claimant must advise who is
to be paid. If the customer elects to be paid directly, they must have
already paid the financial assessor who conducted the assessment and
give evidence of the payment.

How to claim

Once the assessment has been completed, the Farm Household Allowance
Voucher for payment of Farm Financial Assessment Supplement (A2554m) is
to be completed by the customer and the financial assessor:

-   the customer completes Part A
-   the financial assessor completes Part B to D

The financial assessor will provide an invoice to the customer for the
cost of preparing the FFA. If the customer has not paid for the FFA, the
invoice needs to be made out to Services Australia, Centrelink.

The invoice must be submitted with the completed voucher.

If the service was provided before 11 June 2020, the following evidence
must also be provided:

-   the prescribed adviser’s relevant financial qualifications and,
    current membership of a professional institution whose members
    normally provide financial advice. Most professional institutions
    require membership renewals to be undertaken on an annual basis. The
    financial assessor must provide a current membership certificate
    with each voucher submitted

All documents can be sent to Services Australia, using [] Upload
documents online, by post or in person.

Once the voucher, invoice and supporting evidence are accepted, payment
is made to the customer or financial assessor or prescribed adviser.

Time limit

For the supplement to be paid, the voucher must be submitted within 2
months of the date of the invoice.

The Resources page contains a link to information on the Services
Australia website, a link to the voucher, links to forms used when
processing the voucher with a guide on how to complete the forms,
contact details, email templates and delegations.

Related links

Farm Financial Assessments (FFA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
