
Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-17040300

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to stream and process a new claim for FHA
lodged online and via the Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694)
form.

Cumulative period of payment

The time limit of FHA has been extended to 4 years (1,460 days) in each
specified 10 year period. The first specified 10 year period is from 1
July 2014 to 30 June 2024. The second specified 10 year period will
commence on 1 July 2024.

This means a customer who has received their full 4 years (1,460 days)
of FHA before 30 June 2024 will be able to reclaim FHA from 1 July 2024.
Customers who are current on payment even if they have received less
than 1,460 days on 1 July 2024 will have their FHA reset to zero for the
second specified 10 year period.

Streaming FHA claims

When a customer applies for FHA, their claim is streamed to make an
early decision about whether the claim can be granted, rejected or
referred to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO). Making these decisions
early in the process leads to better outcomes for customers and better
manages their expectations, including when a decision is made that they
are not eligible.

Note: a new claim includes where a customer has previously applied for
FHA but withdrew their claim before it was accepted or rejected.

At streaming, a Service Officer reviews the customer's personal
circumstances, claim and associated documents to ensure all appropriate
action relevant to progressing the claim is taken at the earliest
possible opportunity.

When initially streaming the claim, contact is needed when there are:

-   complex issues
-   incomplete forms
-   extra information needed
-   vulnerable or at risk customers who require support to manage the
    claim process

In all instances of customer contact:

-   Should be verbal first. Make 2 genuine attempts to contact before
    sending a written request for information. If the customer is
    subscribed for Electronic Messaging (EM), send a desktop message
    before calling
-   Check the customer's preferred time of contact in the FHA new claim,
    or on FHA Customer Summary (FCS) screen in Process Direct
    Note: where a Service Officer is required to contact a customer,
    however is unable during customers preferred times, contact should
    still be attempted
-   Update the customer's file by recording all successful and
    unsuccessful contact attempts (verbal and written requests for
    information) and what was discussed/agreed
-   Offer a referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

Claims that can be finalised at streaming are to be processed to
finalisation immediately.

Combined partner claim

Farmers and their partners can submit a combined partner online claim.
To do this both customers must:

-   be linked as a couple with Centrelink prior to starting their claim
-   have permitted to enquire on both records
-   have at least 1 bank account recorded in joint names
-   be registered for online services
-   be subscribed to Electronic Messaging

The combined partner claim will be offered at the Review and Confirm
stage of the claim. The customer or partner can submit, withdraw or
cancel a combined partner claim.

The claim will be on hold up to 3 days until the partner actions the
partner review task. A notification will be sent to their phone and
myGov inbox.

Farmers and their partners who are unable or unsuitable to lodge an
online claim can submit a combined partner paper claim. The combined
claim will be offered at question 3 on the claim form.

Customers should first be assessed to see if they meet farmer
eligibility criteria. If eligible, both members of the couple should be
granted FHA as farmers. Otherwise, one member of the couple can be
granted as a farmer and the other as the partner of a farmer.

Claim assessment in Process Direct

FHA claims are processed in Process Direct by completing an FHA claim
Social Application (SOA) to record the information needed to assess the
claim. When the SOA is assessed in Process Direct, a Social Service Plan
(SSP) will display. The SSP will determine FHA entitlement, generate FHA
payments and finalise.

When a combined partner claim is submitted:

-   online, one SOA will be used to record the information needed to
    assess the claim for each member of the couple. A SSP will be
    created on each customer record in Process Direct
-   via paper Claim for Farm Household Allowance (SU694) form, a SOA is
    generated for the primary claimant. A SOA shell must be created for
    the partner via the SOA shell application in Process Direct

The FHA claim SOA:

-   is used to check and record claim progress
-   contains information provided by the customer
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   uploads claim data into an FHA claim activity
-   includes staff tasks that must be completed before the claim can be
    finalised

When finalising the SOA in Process Direct, an SSP is generated. This
must be checked to ensure the determination of the customer's FHA
entitlement and entitlement dates are correct. The SOA and linked SSP
must be finailsed to either grant or reject FHA payments. See Resources
for the ESSentials roles required for FHA new claim processing and
Quality Management in Process Direct.

Desktop Electronic Messaging Capability (DEMC)

When customer contact is needed, staff must use the DEMC to generate a
pre-call SMS to improve the chances of a successful call. The message
prepares the customer for a call from Services Australia about their
claim.

These messages can be viewed using the Communication History tab in
Customer First. For more information, see Centrelink letters online and
Electronic Messaging.

Start date

FHA is subject to the same provisions as JobSeeker Payment (JSP):

-   If the claim is lodged within 14 days after the cessation date of
    another benefit or pension, the transfer date will be the start date
    for FHA. If the claim is not lodged within 14 days after the
    cessation date, the start date will be the customer's date of claim
    for FHA
-   If the claim is lodged within 14 days of the date of the partner's
    claim, the claim can be backdated to that date if the customer is
    eligible. Separate backdating provisions apply for incapacitated
    customers
-   FHA claimants may be subject to an Income Maintenance Period, Newly
    Arrived Residence Waiting Period, Seasonal Work Preclusion Period
    and Compensation Preclusion Period
-   FHA claimants are not subject to the Ordinary Waiting Period or
    Liquid Asset Waiting Period

Where the customer is transferring to FHA from another payment,
cancellation of the income support payment must be completed prior to
commencement of claim in Process Direct.

Eligible customers receive payments or concession cards from the date
they submit a claim for Farm Household Allowance. Early claim provisions
do not apply to FHA.

Customers in severe financial hardship may be eligible for a Hardship
Advance when FHA is granted.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Mutual obligations

When an FHA claim has been granted and a Farm Household Case Officer
(FHCO) allocated, the customer will be asked to supply a Farm Financial
Assessment (FFA). The FHCO will request the FFA and is responsible for
determining the due date, tracking its progress, accepting the completed
FFA and for FFAs submitted up to 10 June 2020 checking prescribed
adviser credentials. From FFAs submitted on or after 11 June 2020, the
FHCO will confirm the financial assessor meets the criteria to conduct
the FFA when the FFA supplement voucher is submitted.

To be eligible for FHA, customers must indicate on their claim they are
willing to undertake compulsory activities. If granted FHA, the customer
will need to enter into a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA). The FIA
is negotiated with the FHCO and lists the activities the customer agrees
to undertake.

If the customer does not meet their mutual obligations, FHA payments may
be stopped or not granted.

Referral to the Rural Financial Counselling Service (RFCS)

At the time of having their FHA claim assessed, customers must be
offered a referral to the RFCS. The RFCS provides free, independent and
confidential assistance to farming families. They provide a range of
services and information to support farming families to better
understand their financial situation and plan for the future. An RFC is
authorised to sight, certify and copy original documents and complete
linkage as part of the Identity Confirmation process. See Identity
Confirmation for further detail.

From 11 June 2020 an RFC may meet the criteria as a financial assessor
and be able to complete the FFA. If the RFC completes the FFA, the
customer will not be charged for this service.

A customer does not need to be in receipt of FHA to access the RFCS.

The Resources page includes a link to the Department of Agriculture,
Water and the Environment website for information about the RFCS.

Legislative changes affecting claim assessment

11 June 2020

Tthe Farm Household Support Amendment (Relief Measures) Act (No.2) 2019
provides the following changes that affect an FHA claim:

-   a single asset test that combines farm and non-farm assets with an
    asset threshold of $5.5 million
-   changes to the FFA that remove the prescribed adviser requirements.
    The change allows a person with appropriate qualifications or
    expertise (financial assessor) to complete the FFA. An RFC may meet
    the criteria of a financial assessor

16 December 2019

The Farm Household Support Amendment (Relief Measures) Act (no.1) 2019
covers three changes that came into effect on 16 December 2019:

FHA Relief Payment

Farm business losses, replacing the off-farm income offset and the
maximum offset amount increased to $100,000

Changes to the eligibility period from 4 years to 4 years in every
specified 10 year period. The 4 year eligibility period does not need to
be continuous: if FHA payments stop, the count of days towards their 4
years of assistance will stop

-   the first 10 year period is from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2024, and
-   the second 10 year period will commence on 1 July 2024

For more information on the Act, see the Resources page for a link to
the Parliament Website status update of the Act.

1 July 2019

The Farm Household Support (Forced Disposal of Livestock) Minister’s
Rules 2019 (the Rules) amends the Social Security Act 1991 in order to
exclude amounts received from a forced disposal of livestock from being
assessed as income for the purposes of FHA. Specific conditions
stipulate that all or some of the amount derived from a forced disposal
of livestock is deposited, or is intended to be deposited, into a Farm
Management Deposit account (FMD).

For more information, see Assessing assets for FFHA and Assessing income
for FHA.

For information, including FAQs, see Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Related links

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Eligibility and payability for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing assets for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Progress of claim - Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Contact in relation to an intended claim (CLK)

Upload documents service

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Identity Confirmation

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Rate and payment of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Technical Peer Support (TPS) In Smart Centres

Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
