
Death of a Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer or partner 002-02030010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the action to be taken upon the notification of
the death of a Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customer or their partner
and the bereavement assistance that may be payable.

Overview

Bereavement payments are a temporary continuation of a deceased person's
payment. The bereavement payment is intended to ensure the surviving
partner receives at least the amount of income support that would have
been paid to the couple during the bereavement payment period, had the
person not died.

When a person contacts after the death of a person or child, the primary
outcome is for appropriate bereavement assistance and services.

Eligibility

FHA customers may be entitled to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) if
their partner dies and:

At the time of their partner's death:

-   the person had been in receipt of FHA and was a long-term social
    security recipient (including receiving FHA), and

Immediately before the partner died they were:

-   receiving a social security pension
-   receiving a Service Pension
-   receiving a Veteran Payment
-   receiving an Income Support Supplement, or
-   a long term social security recipient (including receiving FHA), and

The person's new single rate is less than the combined rate the couple
were receiving prior to the death, and

Services Australia receives advice of the death in time to adjust the
customer's payments before the end of the bereavement period. The
customer's estate will be entitled to any unpaid FHA up until the day
before the death of the customer

See Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) for more
information.

Note: from 11 June 2020, all customers eligible for payment of FHA at
greater than zero dollars ($0.00) will be paid at the maximum rate. This
will need to be considered when reviewing entitlement to LBP.

Impact on cumulative eligibility

FHA is payable for a cumulative period of 4 years (1,460 days). The
amount of bereavement payment is not affected by the time remaining on
the deceased partner's payment 'clock', including when they had less
than 14 weeks FHA eligibility remaining on payment.

If the person receiving the bereavement payment reaches the cumulative
period of FHA during the bereavement period, this does not affect the
amount of bereavement payment that is payable.

A referral to the Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) specialist team
should be made if the surviving partner is receiving a DVA payment, for
them to assess LBP entitlement.

Services Australia is notified of a death

The death must be confirmed before any action is taken. If multiple
notifications are received in relation to the death of the same person,
Service Officers must not create a new activity. Instead, check the
record and annotate the original DOC to state details are correct and
who provided the information.

An LBP is calculated automatically but paid manually, via the approval
of a Social Application and Social Service Plan (SSP). The SSP is not
automatically approved. Transfer Bereavement activities to the FHA
Processing Team (region code: 'FHH').

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the last period is known, then it must be
recorded prior to stimulating the payment. If employment income details
are not known, the payment must still be stimulated.

After the payment is stimulated, the customer must be taken off
reporting before recording the death action.

Partner of a farmer period of grace

If a customer is paid FHA as the partner of a farmer, and their partner
(the farmer) dies, a period of grace applies. In these cases the
customer will continue to be paid FHA for 14 weeks following the death
of the farmer.

Unless the partner meets the eligibility criteria, at the end of the
grace period FHA will cancel, as the customer is no longer eligible as
the partner of a famer.

Returned payments

To reissue a payment returned from a financial institution on the
deceased person's record, see Replacing payment made to a deceased
customer where payment was returned from financial institution.

Reconciliation of payments

Upon the death of an FHA customer (paid as either a farmer or as the
partner of a farmer), reconciliation of farm business income will occur
once the customer's (and their partner's) income tax returns have been
lodged.

Related links

28 day rule for bereavement

Death of a single pensioner

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Eligibility and payability of Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Initial contact after someone has died

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
