-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to help customers provide a reasonable
estimate of their business income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA).
The estimate is for calculating FHA payments during the financial year.
After the end of the financial year, actual business income is
reconciled with the estimate.

For FHA claims

When claiming FHA, customers must provide an estimate of their business
income for the current financial year. The customer's estimate must be
considered reasonable for their claim to be finalised and used to
calculate their entitlement to FHA.

When the estimate:

-   differs substantially from the income shown on the latest financial
    statements, the customer is asked to provide a projected profit and
    loss statement with an explanation for the variation. For example,
    reduced livestock numbers due to drought or reduced fruit volumes
    due to storms
-   is a loss, and a loss is also shown on the latest financial
    statements provided with the claim, the estimate can be considered
    reasonable regardless of a significant difference between the loss
    amounts
-   is an increase from a loss to a profit due to better conditions or a
    decline in expenses, it can be considered reasonable, with the
    customers explanation, regardless of a significant difference
    between the amounts
-   is consistent with the income shown on the latest financial
    statements provided with the claim, then the estimate can be
    considered reasonable

The amount of assessable income from the business is based on the
current year estimate provided by the customer. Business income is
converted to a daily amount and applied over the financial year.

Separate estimates are required for all farm and non-farm businesses.
Record income from paid work, financial investments, shares and other
unrelated income sources separately. These are subject to reporting or
the notification rules.

Estimating farm business income

Customers determine the estimate by considering the known business
income for the financial year to date, plus an estimate of the expected
business income and expenditure for the rest of the financial year.

Total business income = all sources of directly related business income
less allowable business deductions.

If a farmer has more than one business, or a single enterprise with
entities, which are:

-   not necessarily related (such as a farm and a petrol station),
    profits from one cannot be offset by losses from the other
-   directly related (for example, the related farm business cannot
    operate without the farm enterprise), profits from one can be offset
    by losses from the other

Separate estimates are required for all farm businesses (including
related business income) and non-farm businesses

The customer's estimate must include:

the value of trading stock on hand, noting that if the value at the end
of the tax year is:

-   greater than at the start of that tax year, the customer's profit
    from business must include the difference in these values
-   less than at the start of that tax year, the customer's profit from
    business must be reduced by the difference in these values

re-credited business deductions

Partnered customers must advise the estimated business income for each
person. The sum of the amounts advised for each member of the couple
cannot be greater than the total estimated farm business income.

Refer all estimates for farmers who have a trust or company to a Complex
Assessment Officer (CAO) before updating an estimate. This ensures
estimates are accurate and coded within the trust or company records.
See Identifying and making suitable referrals to the Complex Assessment
Officer (CAO).
Note: non-controllers of a trust and/or company cannot estimate entity
business income. They will be assessed on distribution income, see
Assessing and recording distribution income.

Concessions and losses not allowable

The following are not allowable for FHA business income estimates:

-   losses from non-farm businesses.
    Note: if a farmer advises of these losses, they must be recorded and
    will be automatically assessed as zero
-   investments in Farm Management Deposits
-   income averaging
-   provisions to defer tax
-   capital expenditure deductions
-   superannuation contributions for the sole trader/ partner
-   obsolescence
-   borrowing costs
-   donations to charities
-   small business entity depreciation expenses. See Business deductions
-   prior year losses

Updating farm business income estimates

Customers can revise their estimate at any time during the financial
year by calling the Farmer Assistance hotline on 132 316, in person, or
by lodging a document online [].

An estimate must be updated within 14 days of the customer becoming
aware of a change in their circumstances.

Proactive conversations to be held at every contact. See Proactive
conversations. Prompt customers to discuss their estimate for all farm
and non-farm business when they advise a change in circumstances. This
includes receiving money from the sale of crops or livestock.
There are special rules for adjusting the farm business income estimate
from a forced disposal of livestock. See Assessing income for Farm
Household Allowance (FHA).

Customers can request a review of their business income estimates. The
review will determine if the decision made on the information provided
at the time the estimate was lodged was correct. The customer will need
to reapply for FHA if the customer cancelled due to the correct new
estimate.

New financial year

In June each year, FHA customers must revise their business income
estimate for the new financial year. If the customer advises their new
financial year estimate is the same as currently assessed, update the
estimate from 1 July of the new financial year.

Refer all FHA estimate updates relating to customers who have a trust or
company to a Complex Assessment Officer (CAO) before updating the Farm
Business Income (FBI). A profit and loss for the current financial year
is required, however, a profit and loss statement (SU580) is not to be
issued.

If a new estimate is not provided by the end of the current financial
year, the customer's current estimate will be rolled over for the new
financial year. If their rate of FHA is calculated using an incorrect
estimate they may be overpaid and will have to repay any overpayment.
Advise customers they can revise their estimate at any time during the
financial year. Discuss their estimate when they advise a change in
circumstances.

The Resources page contains a link for referrals to the Centrelink
Payments Support Team (CPST).

Related links

Assessing income for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Business deductions

Business income reconciliation for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Claiming Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Offsetting profit and losses between businesses

Streaming and processing a new claim for Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

Upload documents service

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
