
Activity supplement and voucher for Farm Household Allowance (FHA) 002-02070050

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains eligibility for the activity supplement for FHA.
It includes payment of vouchers, claiming and processing. The purpose of
the activity supplement is to fund, to a maximum amount, costs of
approved activities in a Financial Improvement Agreement (FIA).

Eligibility

FHA customers may be eligible for the activity supplement for activities
agreed in their FIA they have already undertaken, or they intend to
undertake. This ensures the supplement is used to help them improve
their capacity for financial self-reliance while fulfilling their
requirements for FHA.

Customers are eligible for the supplement if:

-   the activity is being undertaken for the purposes of the activity
    test
-   FHA is payable when the activity supplement is approved for the
    activity
-   the activity is in their FIA and is one of the activity types listed
    below
-   any professional advice or training is provided by an appropriately
    qualified person who is registered with an Australian Business
    Number (ABN)
-   a claim for payment (or re-imbursement) of the approved activity is
    made within a 2 month period of the date on the invoice or
    statement. This is provided they have not already used the maximum
    amount

Note: multiple TAFE's are requesting Farm Household Case Officers (FHCO)
sign an Authority to Invoice form. This form is not applicable to Farm
Household Allowance (FHA) customers who want to use the Activity
Supplement for TAFE courses. If the TAFE will not invoice Services
Australia without the authority form, then customers are required to pay
for the course and lodge a voucher to request reimbursement for the paid
invoice.

Farm Household Case Officers (FHCO) have the discretion to determine if
it is appropriate to authorise payment of the activity supplement for
activities, which will extend beyond a customer's 4 year period of
eligibility for FHA.

Customers remain eligible to access the Activity Supplement even when an
exemption from the activity test has been coded.

Payment of vouchers

Activity supplement vouchers can be paid, if at the time the Farm
Household Case Officers (FHCO) approved the use of the activity
supplement:

-   FHA was payable to the customer, and
-   all other conditions are met

When a subsequent determination results in a retrospective decision
(that is, a cancellation), the intention of the policy should still be
applied and the voucher paid. FHA was payable when the FHCO approved use
of the activity supplement, regardless of the later decision to cancel
the payment from an earlier date.

Maximum amount and payment

From 11 June 2020

The activity supplement increased to $10,000 with a life-time cap. There
is no longer an 'additional activity supplement' and no need for the
customer to undertake 'high value' activities to access any part of the
activity supplement.

The activity supplement does not have to be used all at once. It can be
used for multiple activities over the period the customer is in receipt
of FHA but the total cannot exceed the maximum $10,000 payable. The
activity supplement can be used for approved reasonable travel and
accommodation costs associated with undertaking the activity as agreed
in the customer's FIA.

Customers who were in receipt of FHA, as at 11 June 2020 will have their
total activity supplement increased to $10,000 from 11 June 2020. The
activity supplement available to these customers will be the difference
between $10,000 and what the customer has already used. (For example, if
the customer has used $2,800 of activity supplement when the threshold
is increased to $10,000 the customer would have $7,200 available
immediately). The increased activity supplement amount cannot be used to
pay for activities that commenced before 11 June 2020. Customers who
have activities agreed in their FIA before and started the activity on
or after 11 June 2020 can access the increased amount of activity
supplement.

Note: the maximum amount of $10,000 is not reset if there is a break in
FHA payments for any reason. For example, if the customer reapplies for
FHA in the second 10 year period commencing 1 July 2024, they will have
access to their remaining available balance only.

Before 11 June 2020

The activity supplement was up to $3,000 that could be used over the
cumulative 4 years of FHA payment. Customers that commenced their third
year of receiving FHA were entitled to claim a further $1,000 of
additional activity supplement to help cover the cost of high value
activities in their third and fourth year of receiving FHA. The maximum
amount was not reset if there was a break in FHA payments.

Each member of a couple could access up to $4,000 but could not split or
share it with their partner.

If the cost of the activity exceeded the available balance of the
activity supplement, the customer could choose to pay for the unfunded
portion.

Customers could choose to get the activity supplement directly or have
it paid to the provider.

How to claim

Customers must submit a completed Farm Household Allowance Voucher for
Activity Supplement (A2555) to Services Australia. The voucher is issued
to the customer once it is determined they have an approved eligible
activity in their agreed FIA.

Part A of the voucher is completed by the customer. Part B is completed
by the service provider.

If the customer chooses to be paid the supplement directly, they must
also provide evidence they have paid the service provider for the
activity.

For professional advice or training activities, the customer must give
evidence it was provided by an appropriately qualified person. For
example, someone with relevant financial qualifications provided the
financial advice.

Where a provider has provided advice and submitted a form signed with a
different surname listed on the relevant support qualification, staff
are able to use discretion to accept the information provided.

Time limit

The customer must submit the voucher for the activity supplement within
2 months of the date on the invoice for the activity from the service
provider.

If the customer provides additional documentation for a previously
rejected voucher, the voucher and invoice can be reassessed.

If a customer provides a new receipt or invoice:

-   and a new voucher, treat as a new claim
-   with a previously provided voucher, treat as new information and
    reassess the original decision

Approved activity types for activity supplement

For the activity supplement to be payable, the activity must be in one
of the following types:

legal or other advice directly related to ensuring the long-term
viability of the farm enterprise, including advice about:

-   business structures/relationships and business plans
-   monitoring and reviewing business performance
-   managing risk
-   succession planning
-   natural resource management
-   preparing for drought and natural disasters
-   diversifying the farm enterprise
-   adding value to products produced by the farm enterprise
-   using vertical integration in the production of products
-   alternative options for using land
-   financial matters relating to the farm enterprise (other than a Farm
    Financial Assessment)

training or study related to any of the above matters, including
training in skills within the 'Farm Business Management Skill Set'

advice, training or study to assist in transition into an alternative
career or retirement

counselling services - for a person who has exhausted funding received
through the Better Access initiative Commonwealth Government mental
health program or to cover the gap payment for the Better Access
initiative

Activities not approved for activity supplement

The activity supplement cannot be used to cover the cost of activities
considered a part of normal farm operations (business as usual (BAU).
Expenses will not be eligible for costs incurred implementing any advice
or training or purchase of equipment (capital) to implement practices
learned in farm enterprise training or recommended by an agricultural
adviser.

When reviewing a request for access to the activity supplement the FHCO
must take into account the goals and objectives of the customer as well
as the current farm business. Where an activity may be considered BAU
for one customer, it may not be considered BAU for another, based on
their circumstances and industry.

FHCOs are required to record details supporting their determination to
approve payment of the activity supplement within the FHCO approval Fast
Note on the customer record. Where there is insufficient detail within
the Fast Note to support payment of the activity supplement, the voucher
may be rejected.

Examples - Activity Supplement not payable:

-   Capital Equipment. Purchase of equipment such as computer equipment,
    piping for irrigation or other farm based assets
-   Legal Advice: the preparation of Wills, Power of Attorney, farm
    contracts (including sale contracts) and loan advice. However funds
    to cover advice about succession planning identified as part of the
    FIA is payable
-   Financial Advice. The use of Activity Supplement funds for financial
    advice must be assessed on a case by case basis, but does not cover
    completion of tax returns, Business Activity statements (BAS) and
    other BAU activities a business would normally be required to
    complete

Future activities

The FHCO may approve payment of the activity supplement for a customer
who will undertake an activity in the future, if FHA is payable when the
activity supplement is approved, and it is reasonable to assume:

-   the activity will be undertaken in accordance with the financial
    improvement agreement, and
-   the activity will comply with all prescribed conditions relating to
    the activity and the activity supplement, and
-   if the activity is advice or training this is to be provided by an
    appropriately qualified person

The activity supplement remains payable after payments of FHA stop if,
the use of the activity supplement has been approved before the customer
cancels even if the activity has not actually commenced.

Example: a TAFE course is approved for the activity supplement while the
customer is being paid FHA and following this, FHA is cancelled before
the course commences. Payment of the Activity Supplement to pay for the
TAFE course can still proceed.

Travel and accommodation costs

From 11 June 2020, the activity supplement can be used for reasonable
travel and accommodation costs associated with undertaking an approved
activity as agreed in the customer's FIA. Travel and accommodation costs
can be paid for approved activities with no cost, provided they are
listed in the customer's FIA. Where the amount paid to the provider for
travel costs can be identified as a component of the total amount to be
paid, it should be recorded when processing the Activity Supplement
Voucher.

If a customer is receiving free advice, before travel and accommodation
is paid, complete Part B of the activity supplement voucher with
evidence of qualifications. If customers are claiming the activity
supplement for travel and accommodation, clearly tell them they cannot
also claim a business deduction (tax deduction) for it.

If an activity for advice or training is determined not to be payable,
after the customer has completed the activity, any associated travel and
accommodation costs for that activity cannot be paid from the activity
supplement. For example, if the provider was not appropriately
qualified, payment of the activity would not be made. Travel and
accommodation costs would need to be personally funded by the customer.

Reasonable travel and accommodation costs

Negotiated estimates of reasonable costs for travel and accommodation
are assessed by Farm Household Case Officers (FHCOs). FHCOs can use the
following methods to pre-determine 'reasonable' travel and accommodation
costs:

-   the actual amount on the receipt provided for the cost of fuel
-   estimated fuel costs using rome2rio
-   average price of accommodation at the location of the activity

If the final costs for travel and accommodation are different from the
original negotiated amount. The FHCO can authorise the costs if the
customer provides an invoice or receipts. If an invoice or receipt is
not provided, evidence of the travel and accommodation costs must be
requested. If the customer cannot provide evidence the FHCO must
authorise the final travel cost based on the rome2rio estimate. The FHCO
must clearly DOC if this method is used. Customer may wish to check with
the ATO or accountant if payment of these costs from the activity
supplement will affect their tax deductions.

The amount of travel and accommodation costs the FHCO has authorised
must be included in the FHCO approval Fast Note.

Registered Training Organisations (RTO)

To claim the activity supplement for training activities it is
recommended Farm Household Case Officers (FHCO) and customers try to
find appropriate activities provided by RTOs.

If this is not possible, the FHCO must submit a request to the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.

The Resources page contains links to help with finding RTOs and the
template for non-RTO considerations.

Additional documents are not needed for an RTO provider.

Non-Registered Training Organisations (RTO)

The consideration of non-RTO requests accounts for training that is not
delivered through RTOs but is suitable for improving the situation of
FHA customers according to their FIA. It also accounts for the isolation
of some customers, which inhibits them from being able to reasonably
access RTOs.

Non-RTOs are to be used as a last resort to avoid inappropriate training
providers who may negatively influence the FHA customer or their
business.

If a non-RTO must be used, complete the non-RTO consideration template.
Each request is assessed on a case by case basis even if the provider
has been previously approved. A lead time of 6-8 weeks is required from
the submission to allow enough time to obtain an approval from the
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.

If a customer is completing a free course, the course must meet the
activity supplement criteria. This means if the course is through a
non-RTO, an approved non-RTO request is required as the course needs to
meet eligibility requirements for travel and accommodation.

Supporting documents for non-RTO requests

Mandatory documents required for all non-RTO requests are:

-   non-RTO request form
-   copy of Professional Indemnity Insurance
-   copy of trainer's qualifications

Additional documents required

The provider must supply a copy of their Public Liability Insurance
certificate if the course is being delivered in person (face to face).
Attach the certificate to the non-RTO request.

The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry have advised if
any of the required insurance documentation is missing from the
application for the non-RTO, the customer may have the claim rejected.

Professional indemnity insurance

Professional indemnity insurance covers the content of what the provider
teaches. If they teach something that is incorrect and causes the
recipient significant damages or loss of money, the provider needs to be
covered for this with professional indemnity insurance.

Every non-RTO must have professional indemnity insurance, even if the
course is held online.

Public Liability insurance

Public liability insurance is designed for professionals who interact
with customers or members of the public. It protects against claims of
personal injury or property damage a third party suffers (or claims to
have suffered) because of the business activities.

GovTeams (FHCO resource only)

FHCO's must check GovTeams for the supporting documents. Where current
documents are listed for the provider on GovTeams only the non-RTO
consideration template is required to be escalated for a delegate
decision. Where a document has expired or new supporting document is
required FHCO's will follow their normal escalation process to obtain
the required documents.

Appropriate qualifications for providing advice

For the Activity Supplement to be payable, advice must be provided by a
qualified person who:

-   has a tertiary qualification relevant to the field in which the
    advice is provided
-   is a current member or is an employee of a current member of a
    professional institution whose members normally provide advice in
    the field relevant to the advice being provided.
    Note: proof of membership must cover the period the advice was
    provided
-   has no involvement in the farm business
-   be registered for an Australian Business Number (ABN)

Examples:

-   Financial advice would be obtained from a person with relevant
    qualifications in the area in which the financial advice is being
    provided, for example, financial planning, retirement planning,
    taxation, accounting, debt management, business, commerce, law,
    economics
-   Non-financial advice would be obtained from a person with relevant
    qualifications in the area in which the advice is being provided,
    for example, agronomy, legal, resource management, business
    planning, succession planning, production, irrigation, animal
    husbandry is provided

Before approving the activity and before authorising the payment of the
Activity Supplement:

-   obtain evidence the person providing the advice meets these
    criteria, and
-   ensure documentary evidence has been submitted with the Activity
    Supplement Voucher

If not, the Activity Supplement is not payable.

Acceptable evidence of qualifications:

It is the responsibility of the customer to supply the required
documents to support their claim for the Activity Supplement. Customers
should be encouraged to supply evidence of qualifications with every
claim. If this information is not available, it may be appropriate for
Smart Centre processing staff to use the Moneysmart website to confirm
Service Providers qualifications.

Proof of professional membership is acceptable as evidence of
qualifications and membership for the following organisations only:

-   Institute of Public Accountants (IPA)
-   Certified Public Accounts (CPA)
-   Chartered Accountants (CA)
-   Australian Practising Certificate (Lawyers/Solicitors)
-   State based practising certificate or memberships
    (Lawyers/Solicitors)

This has been agreed to, due to the strict guidelines around obtaining
membership with these organisations.

In limited circumstances, where all other avenues have been exhausted,
the use of current professional membership of an organisation can be
used as sufficient evidence of the person’s qualifications if the
following are met:

-   the organisation requires a relevant tertiary qualification to be a
    member, and
-   the organisation requires the degree/qualification held to be
    relevant to the organisations skill sets and the organisation does
    not accept any tertiary education to become a member, or
-   requires members without relevant degrees to undertake specific
    further education relevant to the organisations skill set

The Resources page contains contact details, links to forms used when
processing the voucher with a guide on how to complete the forms, link
to the Q062 FHA voucher request for information letter, links to help
customers choose service providers and listed RTOs and Financial
Delegations.

Related links

Financial Improvement Agreements (FIA)

Farm Household Case Officer (FHCO) cases

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) clock

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
