-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when and how to deliver immediate payments to
customers via an EBT card if an urgent payment is approved. The
preferred way to pay customers is into their account by the New Payments
Platform (NPP), Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) or Direct Credit.

Preferred method

Having funds deposited directly into a nominated account is more secure
and safer for customers. It is the expected way to pay customers (rather
than EBTs which should only be a one off, not a regular way to receive
payment).

NPP enables immediate delivery of payments to customers. Customers will
also have the flexibility to access the funds as they need, rather than
withdrawing the full amount at an ATM in one transaction.

The Resources page has a list of financial institutions that accept NPP
payments.

EBT cards

EBT cards:

-   are only to be issued to customers to meet their immediate needs
-   are only payable in multiples of $20 or $50. To ensure the customer
    can withdraw the full amount from an ATM, do not pay amounts such as
    $10 or $30, and
-   allow immediate access to cash via the ATM network. If card is lost,
    any funds withdrawn by a third party are not recoverable.

Early payment

Most social security pensions and benefits can be paid early when the
customer is in severe financial hardship due to exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances. An urgent payment can also be made if the
customer is in financial hardship due to Centrelink delay or needs help
with the expenses related to a funeral.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and one-off payments of a significant amount
are an example of payments that cannot be paid as an urgent payment.
Other payment types may be ineligible for an urgent payment.

To determine if the customer is eligible for an urgent payment, see:

-   Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
    circumstances
-   Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral
-   Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay
-   Urgent payments due to holiday processing
-   Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

If the customer has been assessed and is entitled to an immediate
payment, the preferred method of payment is by direct credit, NPP or
RTGS paid directly into the customer's account. This enables the full
entitlement amount to be delivered directly to the customer.

In limited circumstances an EBT card can be issued to give the customer
access to cash to meet their immediate needs. For urgent payments due to
exceptional, unforeseen or extraordinary circumstances, EBT cards can
only have a maximum of $200 loaded onto the card. Amounts over $200
should only be paid for situations such as an urgent payment due to
Centrelink delay.

Urgent payment requests

Customers can request an urgent payment using the following channels:

-   Smart Centre telephony services
-   service centre
-   [] Centrelink online account, or
-   [] the IVR service. The IVR and Centrelink online account can only
    be used to request payments due to exceptional and unforeseen
    circumstances

Urgent payments via self service channels are issued by NPP or RTGS or
Direct Credit.

Priority of payment methods

When issuing an urgent or immediate payment to a customer, consider the
hierarchy of payment methods and the best way to issue the payment to
the customer.

Give preference to paying the customer via their bank account by direct
credit, the NPP or RTGS.

Only consider an EBT card when the customer's situation is extreme and
there is no other payment option.

Urgent payments of Farm Household Allowance (FHA) and Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) can only be issued via direct credit or RTGS.

Situations for EBT

See examples below of when to consider an EBT card.

NPP or RTGS are unavailable and payment by direct credit may make the
customer's hardship worse or will be too late to meet their immediate
need. Only then should the below payments be considered

Crisis Payment (CrP) and the anticipated payment/hardship advance to
help customers meet their immediate needs if:

-   the customer has been a victim of family and domestic violence, or
    the victim remains in the family home while the family member
    responsible has left home
-   released from prison or psychiatric care
-   forced from their home due to extreme circumstances such as a house
    fire

AGDRP or NZ DRP if the customer is eligible

When granting CrP and the anticipated release payment/hardship advance,
consider issuing just one payment via EBT and any others via NPP, RTGS
or direct credit. The EBT should only be issued to meet the customer’s
immediate needs

The customer is in the process of getting a bank account. See Payment
destination for what the customer needs to do. EBT cards must not be
used ongoing in place of a bank account

A fee may be charged to get the RTGS payment. Services Australia no
longer has access to this information. The customer may need to confirm
this with their financial institution

The customer's bank account is overdrawn. Note: customers should still
be able to access at least 90% of their income support payment when sent
to an overdrawn account. See Protection of customer payments for more
information

For payments other than CrP and disaster assistance. If the customer has
not had a regular payment into the account, do not use NPP or RTGS. For
example, when reissuing a returned payment or if the customer advised
new account details. Use NPP and RTGS only when Services Australia has
already issued a regular payment to the account

Note: all EBT cards have to be issued to a recipient in person and they
must complete Proof of Record Ownership (PORO).

Role of the Service Officer

Service Officer(s) will:

-   assess the customer's eligibility including investigating
    alternative methods of payment and offering other assistance when
    appropriate
-   verify customer circumstances if urgent payment is due to expenses
    associated with a funeral, and
-   determine the amount and method of payment

Approved by Smart Centre

If a customer has a Managed Service Plan (MSP) in place, Services
Officers must follow the servicing arrangements in the MSP. Any decision
to grant an immediate payment must be made in consultation with the
customer’s One Main Contact or Personalised Services officer. If the
customer is restricted from attending a service centre, staff must
consider other payment methods (such as direct credit, NPP, RTGS or
payment nominee) for any urgent payment.

When an EBT card is approved by the Smart Centre, the customer will be
advised to collect the card by close of business on the same day from
their nearest service centre. The customer needs to give the appropriate
authentication and verification.

A customer cannot apply for an EBT card when claiming an urgent payment
using the IVR service or Centrelink online account. A Service Officer
can only approve payment by EBT card.

To reduce customer contacts/visits to offices, staff must consider if
the alternative methods of delivery such as direct credit, NPP and RTGS
are more appropriate.

Issuing an EBT card

An EBT card must not be issued to the customer before the card is
activated.

A card is activated once the following details have been recorded in the
host payment system:

-   issue amount
-   payment method
-   EBT card number
-   EBT issued date

Check the EBT Card Summary (EBSM) and Payment Summary (PS) screens to
make sure these details are present before issuing the card to the
customer.

The PIN must be issued with the EBT card. PINs for EBT cards are
revealed by scratching away the latex covering on the PIN slip. Service
Officers must not reveal the PINs (must not scratch away the covering).
Before giving the EBT card and PIN to the customer, the Service Officer
must make sure the EBT card has been activated and the customer has:

-   signed a Record of Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card issue
    (SS292) to acknowledge receipt of the EBT card and PIN, and
-   been issued with a How to use your Electronic Benefits Transfer
    card (13240) factsheet. The value of the EBT card must be recorded
    on the factsheet

The Resources page includes links to the SS292 form and factsheet.

Identifying EBT Card payments on the PS Screen

When a payment is granted, it will generally be delivered in one or two
business days depending on the payment type.

For customers granted an immediate payment, staff can reissue some or
all of the payment via the New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS), depending on the customer’s financial
institution’s capabilities, or via an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
card.

Both the original and immediate payments will display on the Payment
Summary (PS) screen for staff and on the View Payments History for
customers via Centrelink Online Accounts. These payments will display by
most recent delivery date.

The original payment will show the full Gross amount, with the Net
amount reduced by the immediate payment amount delivered via EBT Card.

The immediate payment will display under the original payment, and can
be identified by ‘EBT Card’ under the ‘Type’ column.

Important information for customers

Customers must be advised:

-   the EBT card is to meet their immediate needs. Any other funds will
    be sent to their payment destination
-   make 1 withdrawal immediately for the whole amount on the EBT card
-   if an ATM advises a transaction fee will be charged to withdraw
    money, answer 'Yes'. The fee will not be charged to the customer and
    the amount available will not reduce
-   bend the card in half and place it in the ATM bin after completing
    the withdrawal
-   EBT cards are for one-off use. The customer must get a bank account
    for any ongoing and future payments

Authentication

Make sure the customer record is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
before assessing or issuing, an immediate payment. See Authenticating a
Centrelink customer for a detailed process.

If the customer contacts in person, it is preferable the customer also
gives identity documents including 1 photo identity document for a
manual-visual comparison. If this is not available and the Service
Officer is in doubt they are speaking with the customer, they must ask
more authentication questions. Authentication questions must not be
limited to details a customer's friends and relatives are aware of such
as the customer's date of birth or how many children are in the family.
The questions must be searching, but must not be so personal as to be
intrusive. If appropriate, it is important to explain to the customer
why they are being ask these questions.

If the Service Officer is in doubt they are speaking to the customer,
information must not be released and the immediate payment application
must be verbally denied.

The Resources page has more on the use of EBT cards and EBT reason
codes, a list of banks that accept NPP, and links to forms, factsheets,
mySupport and contact details for the fraud team.

Related links

Replacing an Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card at a customer's
request

About payment delivery

Immediate payments

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method the New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Weekly payments

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) card with a residual balance

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
