
National Redress Scheme overview 003-18050700

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the National Redress Scheme for
people who have experienced institutional child sexual abuse.

On this Page:

About the National Redress Scheme

The National Redress Scheme was established in response to the
recommendations provided by the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.

The scheme is an Australian government program that provides support to
people who were sexually abused as children while in the care of an
institution. It is one way the government is working to acknowledge and
help people who experienced institutional child sexual abuse.

The scheme will run for 10 years until 30 June 2028 and is available for
people who have experienced child sexual abuse in institutional
settings, including where the institution:

-   employed children,
-   delivered activities for children,
-   or delivered state functions in the Australian Capital Territory and
    the Northern Territory before self-government

Services Australia undertakes service delivery of the scheme and has
developed ICT solutions.

A dedicated phone information service has been established and
applications can be lodged [] online, by post or in person with Services
Australia.

People who can apply to the scheme

A person can apply to the National Redress Scheme if:

they experienced sexual abuse when they were a child (under 18 years of
age), and

-   the abuse happened before 1 July 2018, and
-   an institution was responsible for bringing them into contact with
    the person who abused them, and

they were born before 30 June 2010, and

they are an Australian citizen or permanent resident at the time of
application

Overview of redress outcomes

The National Redress Scheme can help with access to 3 things:

-   counselling,
-   a lump sum redress payment, and
-   a direct personal response from an institution (for example, an
    apology)

If an offer of redress is made, a person can accept any or all of these
3 things.

Redress is not compensation – it is about acknowledging the harm done
and supporting the applicants to move forward positively in the way that
is best for them.

Redress payments are non-taxable and protected from Commonwealth debt
recovery processes:

-   payments are exempt from the Social Security income test, but
-   any ongoing income generated by the lump sum and any asset produced
    from the lump sum are assessable under the social security income
    and assets tests

States and territories that have joined the scheme

All state and territory governments, as well as the Commonwealth have
joined the Scheme. Legislation is in place in all states and territories
to enable non-government institutions to join the Scheme.

Many other non-government institutions have joined or are committed to
joining the Scheme. See the National Redress Scheme website for all
institutions that have joined the Scheme.

For non-government institutions, the process of joining the Scheme
includes several steps. This means that there may be a delay between the
time that an institution announces it will join the Scheme, and the time
that applications relating to those institutions can be processed. The
Scheme is working very closely with institutions to help this process
happen as quickly as possible.

Roles in administering the scheme

The Department of Social Services (DSS) is responsible for legislation
and policy relating to the scheme, selection of the Independent Decision
Makers (IDM) and all decisions relating to applications to the scheme.

Services Australia is responsible for undertaking service delivery for
the scheme.

The primary roles in the service delivery, administration and decision
making processes are:

Service Delivery staff in Centrelink service centres – provide general
information on the scheme and assistance with Identity Confirmation and
document lodgement

Redress Contact Team (RCT) - the primary telephony contact point for
applicants during the application process. The RCT supports applicants
in the application process, by:

-   answering simple questions relating to applications, and
-   referring applicants to their case coordinator for further
    assistance

Redress Case Coordinators - validate applications and collate
information, (including information from institutions) to forward to an
Independent Decision Maker (IDM). Case Coordinators notify applicants of
the final outcome when it is returned from the IDM

Independent Decision Maker (IDM) - appointed by DSS. IDMs:

-   Consider all information and make a final decision about the
    application
-   Refers the decision back to the Case Coordinator
-   Note: the Case Coordinator notifies the applicant, processes the
    outcome, including letters and payments

How an applicant can apply for redress

An applicant can apply for Redress:

-   [] online, via myGov, or
-   using the Application for Redress form

See the Resources page for a link to the National Redress Scheme
website, where applicants can access the Application for Redress.

Assistance completing the form can be provided by Redress Support
Services and/or appointed nominees.

A Case Coordinator will acknowledge receipt of an Application of
Redress, and advise the applicant of the next steps in the process. The
application is assessed and once a determination is reached the
applicant and responsible institutions are notified of the outcome.

Six month acceptance period

Applicants have a 6 month period to accept the offer of redress from the
date of the offer (an extension can be requested to the acceptance
period in exceptional circumstances).

If the applicant does not accept the offer within 6 months, the offer of
redress is deemed to be declined. The applicant cannot apply to the
scheme again unless discretionary circumstances apply.

Review of decisions

Applicants can request an internal review of the original decision
within 6 months from the date of the letter. An internal review is a
review conducted by an Independent Decision Maker (IDM):

-   An IDM cannot review their own decision, another IDM will conduct a
    review based on the information already provided
-   No additional information will be considered as part of the review
-   The review of the original decision can result in the outcome being
    affirmed or varied

After a review decision has been made, the applicant cannot request
another review. It is up to the applicant to accept or decline the
review decision, noting there are no further options for review.

Nominee arrangements for the National Redress Scheme

The National Redress Scheme has a separate nominee process to other
Services Australia programs as it is administered under separate
legislation.

See Nominees for the National Redress Scheme.

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for applicants and nominees

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity processes for applicants
and their nominees are not the same as for customers of Services
Australia. See:

-   Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for the National
    Redress Scheme
-   National Redress Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative
    Identity processes in service centres
-   Case Coordinator processes for assessing and validating Identity
    Confirmation for the National Redress Scheme

The Resources page contains links to National Redress Scheme contact
information, the National Redress Scheme website (which includes links
to the Application for Redress and Redress Nominee Form), information
and support service websites and the National Redress Scheme page on the
Services Australia Intranet.

Contents

Service centre enquiries

National Redress Scheme enquiries and document lodgement at service
centres

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for the National Redress
Scheme

National Redress Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity
processes in service centres

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Case Coordinator processes

Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity for the National Redress
Scheme

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Validating National Redress Scheme applications and supporting documents

Related links

Social worker role in the National Redress Scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
