
Urgent payments due to holiday processing 003-10010060

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure outlines urgent payment processing during national public
holiday periods. An urgent payment may be made to a customer if their
regular payment is delayed due to the timing of a national public
holiday.

Holiday processing

These arrangements take into account and balance the needs of customers
and staff.

Operational messages are issued before each national public holiday to
give details for that holiday. For example, a change to delegation
levels, any changes to processing times.

The Holiday processing intranet page tells staff about payment and
reporting arrangements during holiday periods.

Special arrangements are put in place for national public holiday
periods such as Easter, Christmas, Anzac Day and Australia Day. These
minimise inconvenience to customers who would be prevented from
reporting or would have their payment delayed due to their payday
falling on a public holiday.

Customers paid via the Newstart System (NSS)

These customers will have their regular payment delivered after their
usual payday (on the first working day after the public holiday) if
they:

-   report on the day before the public holiday or
-   are late lodgers

Payment delivery for NSS payments is the next working day if processed
before 6 pm local time.

For example:

Australia Day Public Holiday is on a Monday and the customer reports on
the preceding Friday.

Regular payment would be delivered on Monday. As Monday is a public
holiday, the customer will not receive payment until Tuesday.

Customers paid via all other systems

These customers will have their regular payment delivered after their
usual payday if they:

-   report on either of the 2 days before the public holiday,
-   are late lodgers

Payment delivery for systems other than NSS is 2 working days.

For example:

Australia Day Public Holiday is on a Monday and the customer reports on
the preceding Thursday.

Regular payment would be delivered on Monday. As Monday is a public
holiday, the customer will not receive payment until Tuesday.

Customers in severe financial hardship

To avoid placing income support payment customers in severe financial
hardship due to a national public holiday, consider paying an urgent
payment of the lesser of:

-   the amount requested
-   a maximum of $1,000

Consider deductions when determining the amount of the urgent payment.

Urgent payments would normally only be approved when the customer is in
severe hardship due to:

-   exceptional and unforeseen circumstances, or
-   payment delay due to Centrelink error or delay

Due to the national public holiday periods delaying regular payments,
especially for late lodgers, the customer will be eligible for an urgent
payment.

During periods of holiday processing, customers who have directly
contributed to the delay in their payment will be eligible for an urgent
payment due to the extra financial hardship that may be caused due to
the national public holidays.

Urgent payments will be subject to Income Management.

Urgent payment decision

Normally, the decision to approve or deny an urgent payment is made by a
Service Officer at the APS4 level or above, Service Delivery Partner
Service Officers or specific Smart Centre staff. These are staff fully
trained in urgent payment processing. This applies to Smart Centre
Telephony, service centre and processing team staff.

During periods of holiday processing only, when a request is made for an
urgent payment due to departmental delay, this decision can be made at
the APS3 level. This is to ensure the customer is not left in further
financial hardship due to the public holidays.

Customers cannot use self service channels to request urgent payments
due to Centrelink delay or holiday processing. A Service Officer must
assess these requests.

Eligible payments

To be eligible for an urgent payment, the customer must be receiving an
eligible Centrelink payment.

If they are receiving an ineligible payment, they cannot get an urgent
payment and their request should be denied.

Customers on weekly payments are not eligible for an urgent payment.

Assessing urgent payment requests

See Urgent payment requests for:

-   delegation for decision making
-   payment methods
-   customers on weekly payments
-   customers with a history of requesting urgent payments
-   customer aggression or counterproductive behaviour

The Resources page contains links to forms and EBT factsheet, Holiday
processing and mySupport intranet pages, and external websites.

Related links

About payment delivery

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Immediate methods of payment

Immediate payments

Payment and reporting arrangements over national public holiday periods

Payment delivery strip times

Urgent payment requests

Weekly payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
