
National Emergency Call Centre Surge Capability (NECCSC) 003-01090040

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the National Emergency Call Centre Surge
Capability (NECCSC), purpose of NECCSC testing and the role of the Smart
Centre Service Officers.

On this Page:

NECCSC overview

In 2009, the Council of Australian Government (COAG) agreed that the
Australian Government would establish a National Emergency Call Centre
Surge Capability (NECCSC).

The NECCSC is a virtual call centre which may be activated during
specific emergency or disaster events.

Effective call centre surge capability arrangements contribute to public
safety by enabling affected agencies and departments to draw on
Australian Government call centre resources to meet demand for
information about an emergency or disaster event, in turn assisting
response and recovery efforts.

The NECCSC provides a short-term surge service, but it is not a
replacement for the partner agency’s standard business continuity and
demand management plans.

Services Australia leads the NECCSC and has the ability to utilise both
staff and telephony infrastructure from within Services Australia and
the Australian Taxation Office.

Once activated, Smart Centre Service Officers take calls on behalf of
the NECCSC Partner. Service Officers may also use NECC portal to record
or provide information to callers as requested by the NECCSC partners.

NECCSC Partners:

-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT Chief Ministers, Treasury and
    Economic Development
-   New South Wales - New South Wales Police Force
-   Queensland - Smart Services Queensland
-   Western Australia - Western Australian Police Force
-   Northern Territory - Department of the Chief Minister
-   Victoria - Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning
    (DELWP)
-   South Australia - South Australia Fire and Emergency Services
    Commission (SAFECOM)
-   Tasmania - Department of Premier and Cabinet
-   Department of Health and Aged Care
-   Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment
-   Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)
-   Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB)
-   Department of Industry, Science Energy and Resources

NECCSC activations

For all details on current and closed NECCSC activations, see National
Emergency Call Centre Surge Capability (NECCSC) activations.

NECC portal

The NECC portal lets Smart Centre Service Officers collect and record
information from callers during the NECCSC activation. For full details,
see National Emergency Call Centre (NECC) portal.

NECCSC testing arrangements

To ensure the NECCSC is operational within a short frame, twice a year,
Services Australia does separate tests with each NECCSC Partner.

The first test, held between April and June, is to make sure the NECCSC
Partners phone line can route to a Service Australia phone line.
Following successful routing, the NECCSC Partner places calls to their
own phone line, which Smart Centre Service Officers answer.

The second test, held between August and October is more complex. It
exercises the agency's response to an activation through a mock
emergency scenario. This includes:

-   the development scripts for Service Officers
-   transfer of phones lines
-   use of the NECC portal, and
-   Service Officers taking mock calls from the NECCSC partner agency

Service Officers

At short notice, Services Australia may ask Smart Centre Service
Officers to take NECCSC calls, due to a NECCSC activation. Depending on
the nature of the call and/or emergency, the activation may require a
Service Officer:

-   take calls on behalf of either a State/Territory government agency
    or an Australian Government agency
-   record information provided by callers into the NECC portal or the
    NECCSC Partner's database, and/or
-   provide information to callers

A selection of Service Officers will assist during the twice a year
testing of NECCSC activations, with all NECCSC partners. This involves
giving information using scripts and collecting and recording
information from callers in the NECC portal.

A Service Officer should not:

-   provide counselling to callers
-   make personal judgements about the situation and/or Government
    response
-   endorse the opinions of callers
-   answer media enquiries or provide information to the media

Contents

National Emergency Call Centre (NECC) portal

National Emergency Call Centre Surge Capability (NECCSC) activations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
