-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the processes for customers who are unable to
take action to receive child support due to fear of family and domestic
violence or other circumstances that require a social worker assessment.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Exemption assessment

Customers unable to take action to apply for and/or get child support
due to fear of family and domestic violence or other circumstances (such
as cultural or other complex circumstances), must be referred to a
social worker. The social worker can assess their eligibility for an
exemption. The assessment can be done jointly with an Indigenous Service
Officer (ISO) or Multicultural Service Officer (MSO), if appropriate.

Social workers have 21 days to complete this assessment. The Service
Officer should code a temporary exemption (MXR), at the point of first
contact pending this decision.

Make sure the customer understands the purpose of child support before considering an exemption

Social workers must make sure customers understand that:

-   child support is for the financial benefit of the child and the
    parent caring for the child
-   child support improves the financial resources for children not
    living with both parents and can be received until the child turns
    18 years old
-   children are entitled to receive support from both parents
-   child support does not have to involve contact between the parents
-   Child Support can act as a mediator and collect on behalf of a
    parent

Customers experiencing difficulty collecting child support

For customers with a private collect child support case, consider the
benefits of opting in to Child Support Collection.

For customers who have already elected for Child Support to collect on
their behalf and who are not getting any child support, or getting less
than their child support assessed amount, discuss the disbursement
method with the customer before considering an exemption.

Partial exemptions for private collect child support

A partial exemption may be granted where:

the customer is unable to collect their full entitlement but it is not
appropriate for them to transfer the responsibility of collection to
Child Support, or

there is a retrospective increase to their private collect child support
assessment and they:

-   are unable to collect the arrears from the payer, and
-   provide a letter from a legal practitioner advising they cannot help
    the customer as it would not be cost effective to do so

the customer does not have a current child support case and is being
voluntarily paid by the other parent (cash or non-cash) but they fear
that taking action to seek child support will cause the other parent to
react violently

A partial exemption enables the customer to collect whatever they can
privately (or to be re-reconciled on the amount they actually received).
Their rate of FTB Part A is based on the amount of child support they
actually receive rather than the amount of the child support assessment.

Partial exemptions are not available for customers with a Child Support
collect case.

Verify grounds for exemption

The social worker should fully explore with the customer avenues for
verifying the grounds for an exemption such as advice or verification
provided by:

-   health professionals
-   community agencies
-   legal practitioners
-   police
-   relatives
-   friends

Exemptions may be backdated

If the circumstances existed previously, exemptions may be backdated.

Backdating an exemption may be appropriate for instalment customers or
lump sum customers who are collecting child support privately or
customers who do not have an existing child support case.

Grounds for backdating an exemption are established through an
assessment of whether the circumstances existed before the date of claim
for the entire backdated period.

Special circumstances do not need to be established to backdate an
exemption to 1 July of the previous financial year. However, in order to
backdate any further, special circumstances for backdating a maintenance
action exemption must first be established.

Backdating an exemption for a customer who was not previously meeting
the MAT may result in arrears of FTB.

See Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers.

In cases where arrears generate and the customer has an existing debt,
consider whether a temporary exclusion from debt recovery is required
where exceptional or unforeseen circumstances exist.

See:

-   Debt Offsetting during Family Assistance reassessment,
    reconciliation and claim processing
-   Temporary write off of Centrelink debts

Customer has an active child support case

Customers, who have an active child support case and are granted a full
MAT exemption will need to have that case ended by Child Support. If the
case is not ended, the exemption is of no benefit to the customer, as
the Maintenance Income Test will continue to affect their FTB. Child
Support will also continue to send letters to the other parent. If the
case is Child Support collect, Child Support will continue to pursue
unpaid child support. This may place the customer at risk of further
violence or harm.

Social workers must:

-   discuss ending the case with the customers, and
-   warm transfer the customer to Child Support via the Parent Support
    Team

If this is not possible, social workers must email the Parent Support
Team using the ‘Maintenance Exemption Notification to Child Support
Program’ template. See Resources page for the template.

Note: make sure all contact details for the customer are correct in
Customer First.

As the customer has been granted a full exemption, the discharge of
arrears has no impact on their Family Tax Benefit entitlements. Ending a
child support case is only possible for a specified date that occurs
after the date the election is made.

Shared or divided care in family and domestic violence cases

If the care of the child/ren is shared or divided between the parties to
a child support case a parent can elect to end the child support
assessments for:

-   any child/ren for whom they are assessed to receive child support
    from the other parent
-   any child/ren for whom they have 65% care (or more) even if their
    child support entitlement is $0
-   all children of the case if the assessed annual rate of child
    support for both parties is $0 AND the parent has an exemption due
    to family and domestic violence

Where the annual rate of child support payable is greater than $0 for
either party, the carer entitled to receive child support (receiving
parent) is only able to end the child support assessment for the
child/ren in their care.

This could result in the receiving parent becoming the paying parent for
the children in the other parent’s care. If ending the case might create
further family and domestic violence or may result in the receiving
parent becoming the paying parent, a partial exemption may be considered
but only if the child support case is private collect.

Note: if an FTB customer is or would be the paying parent, they are
considered as having taken reasonable maintenance action for a child by
having the children in their care taken into account in the child
support case. Conversely, where a domestic violence exemption has been
granted for the receiving parent and the alleged perpetrator’s care of
the FTB child/ren increases, or their Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI)
increases and they subsequently become a potential receiving parent, the
alleged perpetrator may then apply for child support and they are
entitled to do so. The Level 2 Policy Helpdesk can help if policy advice
is needed. See the Resources page for a link.

Social workers must tell customers that a Service Officer from Child
Support will need to speak to the customer before ending their case.
Child Support can only end the case from a day after the customer speaks
to a Service Officer and makes the election to end the assessment.

Exception

In some cases, 2 carers may be entitled to child support for the same
child. For example, a grandparent and a parent. In these cases, a joint
election to end the case is required from both carers. In the event that
a joint election cannot be obtained from both carers and there is family
violence involved, it may be appropriate to discuss a partial exemption
for the parent carer as an alternative option to ending the case.

There is no Maintenance Action Test requirement in respect of a
non-parent carer and an exemption is therefore not required for them.
The Level 2 Policy Helpdesk can help if policy advice is needed. See the
Resources page for a link.

Backdating exemptions when a customer has an active child support case

If the customer has an active child support case and is granted a full
exemption, the customer can elect to end their child support case. If
the customer does not elect to end their child support case, the
exemption will not have any effect.

The start date of the exemption has no impact on the date the child
support case is ended. The earliest date Child Support can end the case
is from the day after they speak to the customer.

Example: social worker has an appointment with the customer 22/09/20 and
backdates a full exemption to 01/07/19 due to violence. The customer is
unable to speak to Child Support to end their case on 22/09/20. The
social worker sends through a referral to Child Support to contact the
customer to discuss ending their case. Child Support successfully
contact the customer on 01/10/20 and the customer confirms they want to
end their case. Child Support end the case from the date of contact with
the customer, which was 01/10/20.

As part of the election to end, the customer may choose to discharge any
child support arrears owing. This has no impact on the MIT.

Review of exemptions

Customers who are granted an exemption from taking maintenance action
because of fear of family and domestic violence, may have the exemption
reviewed at the discretion of a social worker. A future review will:

-   re-establish the customer's circumstances at that time, and
-   determine if the exemption from taking child support action due to
    fear of family and domestic violence is still appropriate

If a social worker deems a future review is appropriate, the Service
Officer must manually record the review. This is done using the Review
Registration (RVR) screen, at the time the exemption is coded.

The Resources page has a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk, a list of
maintenance codes assessed by social workers and the child support email
template.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Family and domestic violence

Exemptions from seeking child support for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
customers

Backdating a Maintenance Action Test (MAT) exemption to take action to
receive child support prior to 1 July of the previous financial year

Effect on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) where the customer elects to suspend
or end a child support assessment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
