-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document contains the role Services Australia social workers take
with Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) clients, including Social
Work Information System (SWIS) recording. It also has the process for
social worker Subject Matter Experts (SME) who create non-Centrelink
customer records.

Social work role with DVA clients

Under the Standardised Service Offer between DVA and Services Australia,
front of house Service Officers refer DVA clients to a social worker if
they identify an imminent risk of suicide or self-harm.

Social workers:

provide immediate crisis intervention

advise DVA clients that social workers may ask for personal information
about their circumstances. This is so the social worker can record
interactions and provide the most suitable support

liaise with and provide referrals to appropriate support services and
third parties. These include Open Arms - Veterans and Families
Counselling

can still make a referral if a DVA client declines to provide
information. They can do this to prevent or lessen the threat to life,
health or welfare of a person

are expected to:

-   recognise a veteran
-   have a broad understanding of the impact of the defence service
-   manage presenting issues, and
-   have a clear understanding of appropriate referral pathways

are not expected to case manage DVA clients

Release of information

Where it is necessary to prevent or lessen the threat to life, health or
welfare of a person, a social worker (APS6 and above) may disclose
information about a DVA client to police or other relevant authorities.

Under the Standardised Service Offer, if a DVA client presents to
Services Australia, they receive a service as a non-Centrelink customer
(even if they are also a Centrelink customer). This means the release of
information is actioned under different legislation, including the
Privacy Act 1988.

Information gathering

A social worker will ask a DVA client for:

-   their personal details, such as name, address, date of birth and
    Customer Reference Number (CRN) (if they have one)
-   their permission to use a Services Australia system to search for
    their personal information, using the details provided by the
    client. A Services Australia system includes Process Direct and
    Customer First

Note: social workers must not get personal information about the DVA
client from a Services Australia system if they do not give their
consent.

Documenting DVA referrals in SWIS

Social workers must only record DVA client details in SWIS Case Notes.
Do not record on any other system, for example Process Direct or
Customer First.

Social workers record DVA client referrals in SWIS, even if the DVA
client identifies as a non-Centrelink customer.

Note: social workers must check the National Survey box in SWIS for
non-identified data collection.

Social Workers record this referral:

as a customer referral if the DVA client:

-   has a Customer Reference Number (CRN) and provides consent for the
    referral to be recorded
-   has a CRN, does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded,
    but the social worker deems the customer to be at imminent risk of
    harm
-   gives consent to use their personal information to search for their
    record or provides permission to create a customer record for
    purposes of documenting the interaction

as an anonymous customer, if the DVA client:

-   does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded and is not
    at imminent risk of harm
-   does not have a CRN and does not want a record created

The Resources page contains links the Release of Information for
non-Centrelink customers form, contact details, Intranet links and links
to external websites.

Related links

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm 003-06010040

Delivering face-to-face services for the Department of Veterans' Affairs
(DVA) 101-17092600

Social Work Information System (SWIS) 003-12130000

Recording referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)
003-12130010

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
