
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) – May 2002 Karachi attack 003-19091305

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed unless special
circumstances apply.

This document has event-specific information about the Australian Victim
of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) for the May 2002 Karachi attack.
AVTOP is a one off payment of up to $75,000. The purpose of AVTOP is to
provide financial assistance to Australians who have been harmed as a
direct result of the May 2002 Karachi attack, or who are a close family
member of a person who has died as a direct result the May 2002 Karachi
attack.

Declared overseas terrorist act

The terrorist act that occurred outside the Sheraton Hotel in Karachi,
Pakistan, at approximately 8 am on 8 May 2002.

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

Primary victims for the May 2002 Karachi attack have until 11 October
2021 to lodge a claim.

The claiming period for primary victims for the May 2002 Karachi attack
closed at midnight 11 October 2021 unless special circumstances apply.

Secondary victim

Ordinarily secondary victims have 12 months from the death of the close
family member to claim. However, as this event occurred a number of
years ago, close family members of deceased victims have 12 months from
the date the declaration is signed by the Prime Minister to claim. That
is, claims can be lodged until 12 October 2020. Note: declaration for
this event was signed on 11 October 2019. However, 12 months from this
date (11 October 2020) falls on a Sunday. Claiming period for Secondary
Victims has been updated to Monday 12 October 2020.

The death of the close family member must be a direct result of, and
have occurred within 2 years of, the declared terrorist act.

For the May 2002 Karachi attack the close family member must have died
on or before 7 May 2004.

The claiming period for secondary victims for the May 2002 Karachi
attack closed at midnight 12 October 2020 unless special circumstances
apply.

Eligibility for AVTOP

A person is eligible for AVTOP if:

-   the person was an Australian resident, or held a qualifying
    residence exemption, on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   the person must have been in the location of, and harmed as a direct
    result of, the terrorist act (primary victim), or be a close family
    member of a person who died as a direct result of a terrorist act
    (secondary victim), and
-   the person must not have been involved in the commission of the
    terrorist act, and must not have had family members involved in the
    commission of the terrorist act

There is no age limit.

Claims will be assessed on a case by case basis.

Maximum amount payable

Where a customer is harmed (primary victim) and a close family member
dies as a direct result of the same terrorist act (secondary victim),
the maximum payment any 1 person can receive is $150,000. For example:

-   where a customer is harmed and also loses a close family member,
    they may qualify for up to $75,000 for their injuries and up to
    $75,000 for the deceased close family member
-   if the deceased has multiple close family members, then the $75,000
    that is payable in respect of the deceased may be shared among the
    eligible family members who submit a claim

Where a claim is lodged for 2 close family members who have died as a
direct result of the same declared terrorist act, the maximum payment 1
person can receive is $75,000, as a secondary victim of any one
terrorist act, regardless of how many close family members have died as
a direct result of the event.

Proof of identity requirements

A customer will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents. See Confirming a customer’s identity and Identity
Confirmation.

For the purposes of claiming AVTOP a customer over the age of 16 will
need to provide 1 document from each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

For the purpose of claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the customer may
need to provide identity documents on behalf of the child. These
documents include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

A period of up to 28 days can apply for the provision of proof of
identity documentation, with an extension granted in exceptional
circumstances.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment,
customers may call the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Hotline.
The operating hours for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas
Hotline can vary, refer to the Services Australia website for current
details. The Resources page contains a link.

Customers may also download a claim form from the Services Australia
website and post the completed claim form and supporting documentation.
Note: paper claim forms previously advised customers they can lodge
their claim form via their Centrelink online account. This option is no
longer available.

Keywords

Once a claim has been uploaded into Customer First, the claim will need
to be indexed and have the keywords added.

Claims that are to be rejected will also need to be indexed with the
relevant keywords. The Resources page contains a table of keywords for
indexing a claim and rejecting an unsuccessful claim.

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel Advice

Where possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable for the May 2002
Karachi attack for the period 6 months prior to the terrorist act. The
Resources page contains travel advices that have been received. For
information on how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see
Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP).

Withdrawal of claim

If a customer wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Social worker referrals

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

For information on the role of social workers for AVTOP and how to refer
AVTOP customers to a social worker, see:

-   Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
    Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)
-   Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
    Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

The Resources page has links to Operational Messaging, claim forms,
contact details for Emergency Management Helpdesk and Teams, travel
advices and a map of the affected areas.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
