-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure to assess whether a SpB claimant
meets the residence requirements to qualify for payment. The assessment
includes determining whether the customer is residentially qualified to
lodge a legal claim for payment and whether they need to serve the Newly
Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP).

SpB residence requirements

To satisfy residence requirements for SpB, the customer must meet all of
the following requirements:

-   be an Australian resident or a holder of certain temporary visas
    that qualify customers for some payments
-   generally must be in Australia at the time the claim is lodged
-   remain an Australian resident or a holder of certain temporary visas
    that qualify customers for some payments throughout the period of
    payment, and
-   satisfy a 2 year (104 week) or 4 year (208 week) NARWP

The length of the NARWP changed from 1 January 2019 and is determined by
the grant date of the customer's first qualifying residence visa or
specified visa subclass that allows eligibility for SpB.

The customer will have a 2 year (104 week) NARWP if:

-   their first qualifying residence visa was granted (or visa
    application date for subclass 309 or 820) before 1 January 2019, or
-   they hold or have held a visa subclass 115, 117, 835 or 837

Otherwise, the customer needs to serve a 4 year (208 week) NARWP

Customers claiming SpB who are new Australian residents are required to
have been in Australia as an Australian resident or the holder of a
specified visa subclass that qualifies them for SpB for the duration of
the NARWP before SpB is payable. Alternatively, they may have an
exemption from the NARWP in certain circumstances.

Generally anyone claiming SpB must:

-   be an Australian resident and present in Australia for the duration
    of the NARWP, or
-   be the holder of a visa subclass 309 or 820, and must be present in
    Australia for the duration of the NARWP after the visa application
    date

SpB claimed on behalf on an Australian citizen child

Where SpB is claimed on behalf of an Australian citizen child whose
custodial parent does not satisfy residence requirements for payment
(for example, a non-permanent resident of Australia), the child is
exempt from the NARWP on the basis that they are an Australian citizen.
The custodial parent does not need to meet the residence requirement for
SpB themselves.

Exemption from the NARWP

A person who has suffered a substantial change in circumstances for
reasons beyond their control after the NARWP commenced, may be exempt
from the NARWP.

Some customers who are the holder of a specified visa subclass that
qualifies them for SpB, may be entitled to an exemption from the NARWP
based upon their visa.

If a claim is rejecting due to the NARWP and the customer lived on
Norfolk Island before 1 July 2016, see Requesting and coding additional
residence data for Norfolk Island claims.

Serving the NARWP

Customers who have recently arrived to live in Australia and are
claiming Special Benefit are required to have been an Australian
resident and physically in Australia for the required duration of the
NARWP, either in 1 period, or in a number of periods before Special
Benefit is payable.

Temporary absences from Australia in the waiting period do not restart
the NARWP but the days that a customer is overseas do not count towards
meeting the NARWP requirements. For example, a customer claiming Special
Benefit may have a 2 or 4 year NARWP. If they leave Australia
temporarily for 3 weeks the NARWP period does not recommence, but the
absence extends the NARWP end date by 3 weeks.

The requirement to have been in Australia for a period or periods
totalling the duration of the NARWP, allows for broken periods of
residence in Australia to count if the person continued to be an
Australian resident. For example, a customer who has returned to live in
Australia after several years living overseas may have previously lived
in Australia as an Australian resident. The period of former Australian
residence would count towards any current NARWP requirements.

Generally it is not a requirement that the period of residence needed
for the NARWP occurred immediately before claiming. However if a person
is claiming an exemption from the NARWP under the substantial change in
circumstances provisions, this change must have occurred since the start
of the current period of Australian residence.

Note: the NARWP only needs to be served once for the applicable payment.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the Immigration Datalink will automatically
record a customer's visa and movement information from 1 September 1994,
and grants of Australian citizenship where available.

Where the datalink is unsuccessful, the residence information will need
to be manually recorded. Data from the Immigration Datalink takes
precedence over any conflicting information given by the customer. Once
the Department of Home Affairs record is matched with a customer's
record, ongoing updates to movement information and visa changes will be
automatically recorded.

The decision about whether a customer is or was residing in Australia
needs to be manually assessed and recorded by the Service Officer. This
information is not given by the datalink.

The Resources page contains staff contact details for Centrelink
International Services (CIS).

Related links

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Residence and Portability screens

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

Proof of Australian citizenship

Recording legal residence status

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Coding the CRES, ARD and RSS screens

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Requesting and coding additional residence data for Norfolk Island
claims

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
