
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - South Australia - before 18 January 2022 003-20090704

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details specific to the South Australia Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment.

Different eligibility criteria applies depending on a customer’s period
of self-isolation, quarantine or caring. Confirm the period the customer
is claiming before assessing their claim.

For claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, claims will
not be accepted from 29 July 2022.

Claims periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

All claims received for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring
that start from (on or after) 18 January 2022, for:

-   eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   phone claims, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted
    Customer Claims
-   processing, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
    Process Direct

Claims for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start on
or before 17 January 2022, continue following this procedure.

Assessing and coding claims

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring from 5 July to 9
September 2020, to determine the correct state or territory procedure to
follow, see Some claims will be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment.

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring from 10 September
2020, to be eligible for the South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment, the customer must reside in South Australia. Staff must select
the correct South Australian

workflow.

For all other eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

To code claims, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in
Customer First.

Payment period

The payment period for the South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment is any date that occurs from 10 September 2020.

There are different payment rates and eligibility criteria, depending on
the period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring the customer is
claiming.

Some claims will be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

From 5 July to 9 September 2020, the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment allowed South Australian residents to claim a payment for a
period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring if they worked in
Victoria.

If a South Australian resident lodges a claim for a period that:

ends before 10 September 2020 (and they were working in Victoria at the
time) - they must apply for the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts on or after 10 September 2020 (regardless of where they were
working) but no later than 17 January 2022 - they must apply for the
South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts before 10 September 2020 and ends on or after 10 September 2020
(regardless of where they were working) - Services Australia will assess
the claim under the South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. If
the customer is:

-   eligible, their claim is processed as South Australia Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment
-   not eligible, their claim is assessed to see if they are eligible
    under the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (noting they must
    have been working in Victoria at the time of the self-isolation,
    quarantining or caring period as part of eligibility requirements)

See the scenarios about eligibility for either South Australia or
Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

For help, contact the Technical Peer Support.

Claiming period

A customer’s period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring must start
on or before 30 June 2022.

They have until 28 July 2022 to claim. No claims will be accepted from
29 July 2022.

Customers who receive a state related COVID-19 payment are not eligible

Customers are not eligible for a South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment if they have received or applied to receive on any day of the
same period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring claimed:

-   South Australia Paid Pandemic Leave Scheme. Note: this payment is no
    longer available to claim. However, staff must confirm a customer
    did not receive this payment for any past periods of self-isolation,
    quarantine or caring they are claiming
-   South Australian Government’s $300 Coronavirus (COVID-19) Test
    Isolation Payment

Test Isolation Payment

If a customer does not meet the eligibility criteria for the Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment, and they have been advised to self-isolate or
quarantine while they await COVID-19 test results, tell them to test
their eligibility for the South Australian Government’s $300 Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Test Isolation Payment.

Services Australia does not assess claims for this payment. Customers
should contact the South Australian Government.

Lodging claims

There are different claiming options depending on the period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring a customer is claiming. See Lodging
claims.

Required authority for 'informed to self-isolate or quarantine'

The required authority for customers who reside in South Australia is a
'health official'.

A 'health official' is either of the following:

-   SA Health, or
-   a person who is employed by a state or regional department of health

Workflow titles

On 9 December 2021, Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment policy changed.

Before assessing a claim and selecting a workflow, check the period the
customer is claiming.

If a customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring that starts from (on or after) 9 December 2021, select:

SA Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - AU Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

SA Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - Non-AU Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

If the customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine
or caring that starts before 9 December 2021, (that is, up to and
including 8 December 2021), select:

South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Australian Resident if
the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

South Australia Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Non-Australian Resident
if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website, claim
forms, visa subclass numbers, event specific keywords and scenarios.

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
