
MH17 Family Support Package 003-19070100

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the purpose of the MH17 Family Support Package.

The claiming period closed at 11:59 pm 25 August 2022. Late claims may
be accepted in special circumstances. To discuss special circumstances,
customers should email the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade -
MH17.

On this Page:

Purpose

The MH17 Family Support Package:

-   provides financial help for travel and accommodation to the family
    members of Australian victims who died as a result of the downing of
    Malaysia Airlines flight MH17 in Ukraine on 17 July 2014
-   is available to eligible family members who are observing or
    participating in the MH17 Dutch national prosecution hearing in the
    Netherlands. This prosecution aims to hold to account those
    responsible for downing the flight

For information on eligibility for the MH17 Family Support Package, see
Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims.

A recoverable payment

Debt raising and recovery of the payment may be attempted by Services
Australia where the payee was not eligible for the payment and an
overpayment has been identified. General debt raising and recovery
action for these payments will be:

-   authorised under the Public Governance, Performance and
    Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act), and
-   applied under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability
    Rule 2014

Waiver amounts owing to the Commonwealth (that is, non-recovery) is
provided for under the PGPA Act.

Section 11 of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule
2014 defines when the recovery of debts must be pursued. If an MH17
Family Support Payment is made and the customer was not entitled to that
payment, it becomes a debt due to the Commonwealth. It includes payments
received by an unauthorised third party and 'no-fault' debts from
incorrect payments issued as a result of a system or administrative
error.

Taxable payment

Financial help received for the MH17 Family Support Package are paid as
grants. Grants are assessable income for taxation purposes, unless
exempted by a taxation law.

Customers will need to seek independent professional advice on their
taxation obligations or contact the Australian Taxation Office.

Note: the MH17 Family Support Package was previously a tax-free
ex-gratia payment.

Receipt of other Centrelink payments

The MH17 Family Support Package does not affect a customer's entitlement
to receive payments administered under the Social Security Act 1991.

Customers need to update their income estimate for any Services
Australia payments being received.

Note: customers travelling to the Netherlands to attend the Dutch
national prosecution should be considered for a Restricted Portability
assessment. For more information, see Eligibility and coding MH17 Family
Support Package claims.

Contents

Initial contact and claiming the MH17 Family Support Package

Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims

Identity confirmation for the MH17 Family Support Package

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
