
Determining if notification of a debt to an assurer can be delayed while the assuree seeks refuge from family and domestic violence 003-12050030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child's safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document outlines the processes for when an assuree applies for
income support from Services Australia, claims that they are escaping a
situation of family and domestic violence and are fearful of the
assurer's reaction to them claiming payments.

On this Page:

Social worker assessment

The Services Australia social worker will discuss the situation with the
assuree before any contact with the assurer is made.

It is recognised that advising the assurer of an anticipated debt will
also mean that they will be made aware that the assuree plans to leave
the relationship/home. This may increase a customer’s level of risk in
certain family and domestic violence situations. The intention of this
procedure is to delay notification of a debt to the assurer(s) while the
assuree ensures their ongoing safety from family and domestic violence.

The social worker will assess the customer's current situation and level
of risk if the assurer is advised of their claim, seek third party
verification of the circumstances (where possible) and offer appropriate
support.

Time frame for delay of debt notification

The social worker can contact the Assurance of Support (AoS) National
team and arrange for the automated notification sent by Services
Australia to the assurer that a debt will be raised due to their assuree
claiming income support be suppressed. The intention is that this delay
in debt notification may create an opportunity for the assuree to leave
the family and domestic violence situation.

In most cases, an initial 3 month period is enough time for the assuree
to safely relocate so that they are not vulnerable or at risk of further
violence by. However, if the social worker determines that there is
continued risk to the assuree they may ask the AoS team to suppress
advices for up to, but no more than, a further 3 months.

Six months is the maximum period that the assurer goes without being
notified of their accruing AoS debt. It is important to remember the
assurer must be notified of this accruing debt, and notification delays
may also exacerbate risk which will be assessed by the social worker.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the agency's commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

Related links

Family and domestic violence

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
