
Where customers are unable to provide a residential address 003-06010080

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the procedure on processing address updates for
customers who are homeless. It also includes how staff can help
customers in organising an alternative contact address. Homelessness
does not affect a customer's entitlement to receive payment, with the
exception of customers applying for Rent Assistance. Services Australia
must have an address where a customer can receive mail.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency’s Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information about this
model and the agency’s commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

Homelessness definition

Services Australia defines ‘homelessness’ as someone:

without conventional accommodation (for example, sleeping rough,
squatting, living in a car), or

who lives in, or moves frequently between, temporary accommodation
arrangements:

-   for example, with friends or extended family, emergency
    accommodation, youth refuges

Services Australia defines ‘at risk of homelessness’ as someone who:

lives medium to long term in a boarding house, caravan park or hotel,
where accommodation is not covered by a lease

lives in accommodation which falls below the general community standards
which surround health and well-being:

-   such as access to personal amenities, security against threat,
    privacy and autonomy

is facing eviction

lives in accommodation not of an appropriate standard:

-   which may be detrimental to their physical and mental well-being,
    and/or
-   where they have no sense of belonging or connection
-   for example, Indigenous Australians living in crowded conditions
    and/or disconnected from their land, family/kin, spiritual and
    cultural beliefs and practices

Note: staff must consider the individual’s own perception about the
suitability of their accommodation when applying this definition.

For example:

Customers who advise of no fixed address but who choose to live in a
motor home, caravan or boat for the purposes of travel, are not
considered homeless

Customers may also live in a motor home, caravan or boat as a lifestyle
choice

Customers who have limited choices for their accommodation may live in a
motor home, caravan or boat and consider themselves homeless

See:

-   Assessing caravans, boats and park homes
-   Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

Alternate postal address for customers who are homeless

Service Officers can help a customer with organising an alternate postal
address by suggesting the following options:

A Post Office (PO) Box

Local Post Office. Australia Post provides a service whereby customers
can receive mail 'care of' their local post office

'Care of' a friend or relative. Customers can use an address where the
residents will be happy for them to have mail delivered and from which
they can collect mail on a regular basis

'Care of' a local service provider. Customers may have their mail
delivered to the address of local agencies such as youth services or
drug and alcohol services. Customers will need to make these
arrangements with the relevant agency

‘Care of' the correspondence nominee’s postal address - if the customer
has a correspondence nominee they can make arrangements with nominee to
collect the mail

-   Note: if the customer has an involuntary nominee arrangement, the
    nominee receives a copy of all correspondence sent to the customer.
    The customer’s copy of the letters can be supressed by updating the
    nominee arrangement details, see Nominee Organisation

'Care of' the social worker or service centre Manager. Such arrangements
depend on locally agreed procedures

If a customer is residing in a family and domestic violence refuge only
the postal address, (a PO Box) may be recorded on the customer’s record.
In these cases, the ‘home address’ should be coded as "no fixed address"
or "confidential". This will not impact the customers’ ability to
receive Rent Assistance as rent verification is not required for
customers residing in a refuge

Use the Rapid Addressing mode when updating address details. ’Care of’
information must be entered in double quotation marks or round brackets
in the Street address: field, and must be followed by the relevant
mailing address. See Rapid Addressing for more information.

A Homelessness Indicator should be coded for any customer who discloses
homelessness or where one of the alternate contact addresses listed
above is recorded.

If the customer has compulsory participation requirements and a
Homelessness Indicator is recorded, information about the risk of, or
ongoing or temporary homelessness will automatically display under the
title of Accommodation Arrangements on the Circumstances Impacting
Compliance screen.

The circumstance will display as 'Automatically created - yet to assess
impact' until a Service Officer is required to assess the impact of this
circumstance on compliance. This does not need to be actioned at the
time of recording the Homelessness Indicator.

This information will automatically update when changes are made to the
Homelessness Indicator.

Electronic Messaging (EM)

Electronic Messaging (EM) enables Services Australia to contact
customers by SMS or email about things that are important. If
appropriate, customers may receive messages instead of letters.

Types of messages include:

-   requests and reminders to attend appointments, provide up-to-date
    information and provide documents
-   notification of decisions and payments

myGov Inbox

[] The myGov Inbox allows customers to receive their mail as messages
online in an easy to use, integrated and secure environment. Customers
can receive messages online from participating member services including
Centrelink, Child Support, Medicare and the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO).

Self service terminals

[] Self service terminals (SSTs) are dedicated portals installed in most
Centrelink Service Centres and some Medicare Service Centres, Agents and
Access Points. The terminals have been provided to enable customers to
self manage their business online, without Service Officer help.

The Resources page has a link to the Payment and Service Finder, which
provides appropriate referral options.

Related links

Updating address details

Social Work Services

ABSTUDY unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Immediate payments

Indigenous homelessness

Homelessness Indicators

Payment and Service Finder

Rapid Addressing

Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging

myGov Inbox

Self service terminals

Assessing caravans, boats and park homes

Rent Assistance (RA) for travellers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
