-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines information for Services Australia social workers
conducting Unreasonable To Live At Home (UTLAH) independent status
assessments. In most cases, a UTLAH assessment conducted by a social
worker will be for a customer aged under 18 years.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

UTLAH assessment

A customer:

-   receiving or claiming ABSTUDY, Youth Allowance (YA), Disability
    Support Pension (DSP) or Special Benefit (SpB) may be considered
    independent under the UTLAH category, and/or
-   may be exempt from providing parental income for Tertiary Access
    Payment (TAP) if their circumstances meet UTLAH provisions

Criteria for UTLAH eligibility include that the young person is:

not receiving continuous financial or other support, directly or
indirectly, from their parent(s) or guardian(s)

not receiving payments in the nature of income support (other than a
social security benefit) on a continuous basis from a commonwealth,
state or territory government, and

unable to live at the home of either or both parents because:

-   of extreme family breakdown or other similar exceptional
    circumstances
-   living at home would cause a serious risk to the customer's physical
    or mental well-being due to family and domestic violence, child
    abuse, sexual abuse, neglect or other similar unreasonable
    circumstances, or
-   their parents are not able to provide a suitable home for the
    customer due to a lack of stable accommodation

A customer aged under 18 years must be referred to a Services Australia
social worker. They will make the decision about UTLAH eligibility.

Note: a new UTLAH assessment is not required if there is no change to
the young person's circumstances, and they were receiving a payment with
UTLAH independence status, in the 52 weeks before a new payment claim.

When conducting an UTLAH assessment the Services Australia social worker
will:

-   conduct a file assessment
-   interview the customer
-   In most cases interview one or both of the parents/guardians
-   interview or consider written information form a third party, and
-   record all details in a Social Work Information System (SWIS) report

The social worker will also:

-   assess potential risk of harm to the young person or others, such as
    siblings
-   assess the young person’s support needs and ability to live
    independently
-   refer the young person to appropriate internal and external support
    services

Social work role in UTLAH assessments for customers aged 18 years and over

-   Social workers are responsible for undertaking UTLAH assessments for
    customers under 18 years
-   Experienced Service Officers in the Over 18 UTLAH Assessment Team
    (O18) are responsible for assessments for customers aged 18 years
    and over

Some social workers provide support to the O18 team, through case
consultation.

A social worker may get approval to undertake a UTLAH assessment for a
young person aged 18 years or older if:

-   there are extenuating circumstances, and
-   the young person is experiencing severe vulnerability

For more information, refer to Resources, 18 years or older UTLAH
assessments - FAQs for social workers.

Note: unsupported young people 18 years and older, whose UTLAH
assessment is being undertaken by the O18 team, can still be referred to
a social worker for crisis support and/or short term social casework.
See Social work service referral

Parent in UTLAH assessments

For UTLAH, a parent is defined as one of the following:

-   a natural (biological) parent
-   a legally adoptive parent. Also see Traditional child rearing
    practices of Torres Strait Islander people
-   a relationship parent. See the Resources page for an explanation of
    'relationship parent'

Guardian in UTLAH assessments

A guardian is not considered a parent for the purposes of determining if
it is unreasonable to live at home with a young person's parent(s).

For a UTLAH assessment, establishing if a person is a guardian, or
suitable adult with substantial care of a young person, is only
relevant:

-   for determining if the customer is receiving continuous financial or
    other support from a parent, or another person who is acting as
    their guardian on a long‑term basis, or
-   if the young person is under 16 years, claiming Special Benefit and
    the social worker is considering if they are a 'dependent child' of
    a suitable adult, who they are substantially in the care of. In such
    cases FTB may be the most suitable option, see Assisting a customer
    aged under 16

Social workers should consider all of the factors listed below:

-   The duration of care - if the relationship between the young person
    and adult is long-standing
-   The kind of care - if the young person is given constant care and
    attention, emotional and material support, as would be expected of a
    child's parents. If the young person is nurtured and treated as a
    member of the family, including attention given to welfare and
    education
-   The degree of independence - if the young person has a high degree
    of independence and ability to manage their own affairs
-   The nature of the relationship - if the relationship between the
    young person and adult is close and intimate, like that between a
    parent and child. A parent-child like relationship is often, but not
    necessarily, linked with duration of care

Notes:

-   a young person living with a relative does not necessarily make the
    relative a guardian for continuous support, or suitable adult for
    Special Benefit purposes. This is even if the young person refers to
    them as their guardian
-   a person, who is not a parent, receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    for the young person is a cause for exploration, but does not
    necessarily indicate that the carer is a suitable adult who has
    substantial care of the young person

Situations where parents have separated

If a young person's parents are separated, circumstances about each of
the parents must be assessed. For more details, see the Process page.

Timeframe for interview and assessment

Social workers should conduct the interview with the young person within
5 working days of them notifying the agency of their change in
circumstances, whenever possible. If the young person is in need of
immediate social work support, or is under 16 years of age and applying
for Special Benefit, the social worker should make every effort to
conduct an interview within 24 hours.

The social worker should:

make every effort to complete a UTLAH assessment within 21 days of the
interview with the young person, and sooner if possible

manage an assessment as priority if:

-   it is for a young person whose circumstances meet the criteria for
    an urgent UTLAH appointment, or
-   the young person is under 16 years of age

Parental contact

Parental contact must be attempted in all cases unless:

-   the young person refuses permission
-   there are verified circumstances of family and domestic violence,
    neglect or abuse.This includes all elements of family and domestic
    violence, including homophobia and transphobia
-   contact with the parent presents a serious risk to the young person
    or others, such as siblings, or
-   it has been verified that there has been no parental contact and
    concern for 2 years or more

If the young person refuses to give permission for parent(s) to be
contacted, and serious risk circumstances cannot be verified, it may
mean UTLAH status cannot be granted.

In all cases, if a parent of a customer aged under 18 is not to be
contacted because of issues of risk, or the young person has refused
consent to contact, consultation with the Social Work Manager (EL2) must
occur. This consultation must be documented in the UTLAH report.

Note: for customers 18 years or over, consultation is with the Social
Work Support Managers (EL1) who support the Over 18 UTLAH Assessment
Team.

Consultation with the Social Work Manager is not needed if:

-   it has been identified that the young person does not meet base
    UTLAH eligibility. For example the customer advises they are still
    living at home with a parent
-   efforts to contact the parent have been made through the accepted
    processes, by phone and letter
-   the parent is deceased
-   there has been no contact for 2 years or more
-   the parents are living together and one of the parents has been
    contacted, and the other parent is satisfied their input has been
    represented
-   the young person is in State Care, or
-   the young person is 18 years of age or over and a Social Work
    Support Manager supporting the Over 18 UTLAH Assessment Team has
    been consulted

Consult with a Social Work Support Manager if uncertain.

Independent third party contact

Verification from an independent third party when assessing UTLAH
eligibility for a customer aged under 18 years is needed in order to
conduct a holistic assessment of the young person's circumstances.

Follow-up intervention

Some UTLAH assessments may identify a need for follow-up support of the
young person. The purpose of follow-up intervention is to make sure that
young people experiencing vulnerability have early access to supports
and services. The aim is to provide early, focused intervention with
strategies that are tailored to the young person's individual
development and life situation.

Follow-up support is usually provided by a social worker though
short-term social casework. However, if the young person declines a
referral for social casework, staff should consider a future UTLAH
wellbeing review.

All customers under 16 years are deemed to need follow up. This is
unless significant appropriate supports are already in place.

Social workers should also consider follow up for customers experiencing
other vulnerable circumstances. These include (but are not limited to)
young people with minimal existing supports and:

-   warning signs of risk of harm, including family and domestic
    violence or financial abuse
-   unstable or untreated mental health issues
-   misuse of substances
-   unstable or inappropriate accommodation
-   offender behaviours
-   unstable school attendance
-   pregnant, or
-   those who, with their families, have engaged in
    mediation/counselling

Under 16 years old

Staff must refer young people under 16 years who do not live with a
parent or guardian to a social worker. The social worker will:

-   assess their safety
-   help with deciding payment eligibility, and
-   offer support through social casework

Due to their age, young people under 16 years are particularly
vulnerable. State and Territory Welfare Authorities have responsibility
for providing care, protection and associated services to young people,
under school leaving age, who are assessed as being at risk and
homeless. The Commonwealth retains the discretion to provide income
support to a homeless person less than the minimum school leaving age in
exceptional circumstances.

If a young person has applied for an income support payment under UTLAH
provisions, a full assessment will occur, including:

-   the customer's current living situation, to make sure the young
    person is not at risk
-   contact with parents/guardians as appropriate, and
-   referral to the relevant State or Territory Welfare Authority, as
    appropriate

When a young person under 16 has applied for Special Benefit (SpB), the
social worker will also help decide:

-   the adequacy of any support being provided by way of state care, if
    the young person indicates the support they are receiving is
    insufficient
-   whether the young person is a dependent child of another adult who
    is providing ongoing care, who can apply for Family Tax Benefit
    (FTB)

Refer to Assisting a customer under 16. The social worker must make sure
the reasons for their recommendations are outlined in the UTLAH report.

Given the vulnerability of young people in this age group, regular
consultations should occur between social workers and their EL1 Social
Work Support Manager or EL2 Social Work Manager throughout the
assessment.

Unfavourable decision

A determination of whether a customer meets the eligibility criteria to
be granted UTLAH independent status is an appealable decision.

If a young person notifies the agency they are independent due to it
being unreasonable to live at home, a UTLAH eligibility decision should
always be made, including if the customer:

-   does not attend their social work UTLAH interview and the social
    worker cannot contact them. In these cases, the social worker will
    reject UTLAH due to insufficient information to determine if it is
    unreasonable for the young person to live at home
-   declines to continue participating in a UTLAH assessment. Since
    assessment of UTLAH independence status eligibility is not a claim,
    there is no claim to withdraw. The social worker should still make a
    UTLAH determination using any information already provided. Note: do
    not contact parents or third party if this has not yet occurred and
    the young person withdraws their consent
-   seems likely to be ineligible once the assessment has begun. The
    social worker should complete the UTLAH assessment, even if it
    becomes clear, after one or more interviews, that a young person
    will not meet eligibility criteria

When making an unfavourable decision, make 2 genuine attempts to contact
the customer before finalising the decision. Tell the customer:

-   about the decision
-   they can provide more details or evidence relevant to the decision
-   about their review and appeal rights, and record an application for
    a formal explanation of decision or review of the decision, if
    needed

If a young person queries or disagrees with a UTLAH independent status
decision explain their internal review options.

The Resources page has a link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk, a
relationship parent definition and 18 years or older UTLAH assessments -
FAQs for social workers.

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Assisting a customer aged under 16

Social work assessments and assistance for at risk young people

Recording unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments for customers
under 18 years of age - social work

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Social casework

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
