
Immediate payments 003-10000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the types of immediate payments. Services
Australia can deliver a range of immediate payments to help customers
with their expenses.

Immediate payments

An immediate payment is when a customer gets a part of their future
payment early. These payments include:

-   an urgent payment
-   a hardship advance
-   an advance payment

Identifying immediate payments on the PS Screen

When a payment is granted, it will generally be delivered in one or two
business days depending on the payment type.

For customers granted an immediate payment, staff can reissue some or
all of the payment via the New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time
Gross Settlement (RTGS), depending on the customer’s financial
institution’s capabilities, or via an Electronic Benefit Transfer (EBT)
card.

Both the original and immediate payments will display on the Payment
Summary (PS) screen for staff and on the View Payments History for
customers via Centrelink Online Accounts. These payments will display by
most recent delivery date.

The original payment will show the full Gross amount, with the Net
amount reduced by the immediate payment amount delivered via NPP, RTGS
or EBT Card.

The immediate payment will display under the original payment, and can
be identified by ‘NPP’, ‘RealTime’ or ‘EBT Card’ displaying under the
‘Type’ column.

Work items

Work item ZIAM_IMD_PAY Immediate Payment is created when a started
Immediate Payment activity has not been finalised. This could be due to:

-   the activity has a status of started and not being finalised, so
    payment is not issued; or
-   the activity has not been passed in QOL or has ‘gone offline’; or
-   a One Time Payment (OTP) being issued early, and
-   the system has failed to recover the amount paid from the original
    payment, resulting in the customer being overpaid

If the customer has been overpaid, a manual debt will need to be created
for this amount.

Urgent payment

An urgent payment is when a customer gets a part of their next payment
early. This payment is to help customers in severe financial hardship.

Different rules apply for:

-   Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
    circumstances
-   Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral
-   Urgent payments due to holiday processing
-   Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

Hardship advance

A hardship advance is an advance of part of the customer's first payment
of their pension or benefit. This will help customers in severe
financial hardship. The customer cannot be due an arrears payment.

Check the customer meets the relevant criteria. See making a decision
about a hardship advance or anticipated payment.

Advance payment

An advance payment is a lump sum payment of part of the customer's
future payment. The minimum and maximum amounts of this can vary.

Different rules apply for:

-   Advance payments for non-pension customers
-   Advance payments for pension customers
-   Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Contents

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Immediate methods of payment

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Related links

Advance payments for non-pension customers

Advance payments for pension customers

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Customer disagrees with an urgent payment decision

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Helping customers to build their financial capability

Urgent payments due to expenses associated with a funeral

Urgent payments due to holiday processing

Urgent payments due to Centrelink delay

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
