-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document explains the role Services Australia social workers have
in assessing care situations and how a Service Officer can refer a case
for assessment.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person's safety. Follow the agency's
Family and Domestic Violence Support Model when identifying and
responding to child safety concerns. See Risk identification and
management of threats to the safety or welfare of a child.

Social work role

A social worker can provide information to help a delegate in making a
decision about qualification for Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance
(CA). Information provided by a social worker can contribute to a
decision about qualification for CA/CP, but the delegate, not the social
worker, must make the decision about qualification. Service Officers
must determine basic payment eligibility prior to making a referral to
social work.

Information that a social worker can provide includes:

-   the care receiver's personal care or supervision needs in relation
    to their medical condition/s
-   the level of care or supervision actually being provided by the
    carer
-   if the carer has the physical and/or emotional capacity to manage
    the care receiver's care needs

When undertaking a carer assessment, it is likely the social worker will
need to contact multiple parties to gather sufficient information about
the care situation. This may include, the current carer, other parties
claiming to be caring, the care receiver and third party agencies or
family members

In making a recommendation about payment qualification, the social
worker should refer to:

-   Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16
    years or over,
-   Social Security Guide 1.1.C.310 Constant care (CP),
-   Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged
    16 years or over, and
-   1.1.C.10 Care & attention (CA) | Social Security Guide (dss.gov.au)

If the social worker is unclear on what information is needed to support
the Service Officer, the social worker is encouraged to contact the
referring Service Officer.

Social work Carer Assessments

Carer Assessments are referred using a range of referral categories
depending on the nature of the assessment needed. These assessments will
present either in the national WLM layer, the zone layer or to social
workers in the CSAT team.

Referrals undertaken by social workers in the Carer Specialist
Assessment Team (CSAT)

-   Carer Specialist assessments (CSAT’s) for child care receivers
-   Child Terminal Reviews
-   Carer Adjustment Payments

Referrals undertaken by social workers in service centres via Zone layer
WLM

-   Carers under the age of 18. A social work assessment must be
    completed before finalising a claim for CP and/or CA
-   Care receiver at risk

Referrals undertaken by all social workers via National Layer WLM

Carers 80 years of age or older

Multiple and complex needs (following Service Officer investigation)
could include:

-   Multiple carers
-   Capacity to care
-   Disputed care
-   Complex care situations requiring a professional assessment

Complex grief and bereavement, including if the care receiver has passed
away before the claim is finalised and the Service Officer identifies a
need for social work support

Social Work reports

Social Work reports are required for the following assessments:

-   CSAT assessments for child care receivers - Social workers generate
    a specialised report in Social Work Information System (SWIS) by
    selecting Carer Specialised Assessment as a social work intervention
    when creating the contact
-   Under 18 carers - Social workers complete the report template and
    upload to Document tools. See the Resources page.
-   Child Terminal Reviews - Social workers generate a general report in
    SWIS
-   Care Receiver at Risk – Social workers complete the report template
    and upload it to SWIS case notes on the care receivers record. See
    the Resources page
-   Adverse recommendations and other complex circumstances - A general
    report may be written in a Word document and uploaded to Document
    Tools on the customers’ record for any decisions to cancel or reject
    CP/CA. Additionally record these reports in SWIS using a general
    report. Any particularly sensitive information should be recorded in
    SWIS only

If a report is not needed, social workers must make sure that documents
on the customers’ record provide clear and sufficient information to
help the Service Officer in making a decision. If the information
provided by the social worker is not clear, the Service Officer must
contact the social worker to discuss in the first instance. If it is not
clear if a social work report is needed, consult a Social Work Support
Manager or a social worker in the CSAT team for guidance.

Note: the delegate should update the carer's record to include the
outcome/ recommendation of the social worker assessment

Social worker help in carer neglect tip-off reviews

A carer neglect tip-off is generated when a care receiver or third party
contacts to advise or agency staff identify that adequate care is not
being provided or allegations of abuse have been made. Many of these
situations involve complex family relationships including:

-   family violence
-   elder abuse, and/or
-   financial abuse

A referral to a social worker is required if the allegations made
indicate that the care receiver may be at risk.

Note: staff must remember that the information received via the tip-off
is an allegation only and they must not share the details of the tip-off
with either the carer and/or care receiver. If either the carer or the
care receiver asks about the purpose of the contact, tell them a review
is being conducted.

If the carer or care receiver raises entitlement issues during the
contact, the social worker will provide a recommendation regarding CA/CP
eligibility in the report template to assist the delegate in making a
determination.

The Resources page has templates for social work assessment for CP and
CA, an attachment outlining how to attach social work reports to a
customer's record, links to Family and domestic violence referral
services and more details for assessment of carer situations.

Related links

Qualifications for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver aged under 16

Qualifications for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) referrals for Carer Payment (CP)
(child)

Recording Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) Carer Payment child
referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Reviewing Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) following
reports of carer neglect

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
