-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child's safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document outlines the processes when a customer advises that they
and/or their family may experience family and domestic violence if they
ask their partner to lodge their outstanding income tax return/s. The
social worker can assess the customer's situation to consider deferral
of the Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP) for 6
months.

Definition of PIP

The Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP) is when
a customer's Family Tax Benefit (FTB) fortnightly instalments are ceased
(reduced to nil rate) because the customer or their partner has an
outstanding non-lodger debt for any financial year from 2000-01 onwards
when either person was in receipt of FTB.

FTB instalment payments will only be payable via a lump sum at the end
of year reconciliation when their outstanding tax returns have been
lodged. Customers are still entitled to non-cash ancillary benefits e.g.
Health Care Cards.

Deferring PIP

A deferral of PIP can be granted before or after PIP has been applied,
allowing FTB instalments to continue or recommence. The social worker
can:

-   assess the customer's situation in relation to family and domestic
    violence
-   recommend a deferral if they determine that the customer and/or
    family may experience family and domestic violence, if they request
    the partner to lodge their income tax return/s

If a couple have separated, the ex-partners non-lodgement of returns can
no longer affect the FTB payments of the customer. The customer can
reclaim FTB.

If a customer cannot lodge their tax return because of the actions of
their ex-partner, it is possible to grant a PIP deferral for a specified
period.

Where the customer (not the partner) is the non-lodger, then PIP will
still apply and may also be carried over into a new relationship. See
information below on blended families.

Social worker deferrals

Deferrals for family and domestic violence:

-   can only be determined by a social worker, and
-   will be for up to 6 months at a time from the time of assessment,
    backdating is not possible

Social worker deferrals do not prevent the PIP Sunset Clause being
applied to customers if they or their partner, have not lodged 3 or more
financial years' taxable income. A Families and Parenting Service
Support Officer will determine whether special circumstances apply which
will allow a deferral.

A permanent social worker PIP deferral can occur where the customer has
social worker deferrals (family and domestic violence) granted
continuously for 6 years (12 x 6 month deferrals with no breaks in
deferral), so long as:

-   they remain partnered and have less than 3 years outstanding income,
    or
-   the actions of an ex-partner is preventing the customer from lodging
    their tax returns

Social worker deferrals can include where the violence was threatened or
carried out against a child, or another member of the family who resides
in the household and the customer has been unable to lodge their tax
return.

Outstanding tax lodgements

Customers with outstanding tax lodgements can only reduce their risk of
FTB cancellation by:

-   submitting their (or their partners) outstanding tax lodgements
-   advising family assistance they are not required lodge
-   applying for an exemption from lodging with the Australian Tax
    Office (ATO) (that is, if they had no earnings)
-   separating from their non-lodging partner

In all cases customers should be advised to resolve tax return issues
with the ATO.

Blended families

PIP is applied to both members of the blended family but deferrals can
be applied to customers individually.

If one member of the couple has not lodged their income tax return, PIP
is applied to FTB for both customers.

Example: a non-lodger may separate from partner X and form a new blended
family with partner Y and their children. Partner X will no longer be
subject to this PIP, however the PIP will now apply to partner Y, even
if partner Y is a lodger/not required to lodge tax returns. For a
blended family, PIP will be applied to both partners, however deferrals
can be applied to the customer individually.

Under the special PIP rules for blended families, the combined FTB can
be redistributed between the partners. Partner Y can arrange to receive
up to 99% of the total amount of household FTB - leaving the non lodger
with only 1% that has the PIP applied to it. Partner Y can apply for a
deferral (social worker or otherwise). This effectively means the
blended family under a deferral can continue to receive 99% of their
combined FTB payment, however there will be no back payment on
reconciliation to the non lodger if/when they eventually lodge their tax
returns. This may exacerbate a family and domestic violence situation.
Therefore the impacts and risks of this redistribution option should be
carefully considered before this is taken up.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the agency's commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

The Resources page contains contact details for the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).

Related links

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
