
Commencing or returning to work Special Benefit (SpB) 003-08070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect of commencing or returning to work
when the customer or their partner is receiving SpB.

Notification requirements

When an SpB customer or their partner commences or returns to work,
either casual or full-time, they must advise Centrelink within 14 days.

Income test for SpB

An SpB customer who commences or returns to work is subject to a direct
deduction or ‘dollar for dollar’ income test. There is no income free
area.

The online estimator option can be used by a Service Officers to show a
customer how their payment will be affected by a change in income.

When a customer has the Allowance Income and Assets Tests applied to
their income, there is an amount of income which will reduce their
payment to nil. Any income above this amount is referred to as ‘excess
income’.

Any excess income from the partner of an SpB customer will reduce the
customer's payment by $1 for each $1 of excess income.

Any excess income of a partnered SpB customer will generally reduce
their partner's benefit by 60c in the dollar, in line with the allowance
income test. However, for a partner on PA, or SpB, the customer's excess
income will affect the partner's payment $1 for $1 because entitlement
to PA depends on the customer's qualification for SpB.

If the SpB customer has a pension partner, a joint income test applies.
Half of the combined income of the couple is applied using the Pensions
Income and Assets Tests and the other half is directly deducted from the
customer's rate of Special Benefit.

Working credits for SpB

SpB customers are not covered under the Working Credit initiative due to
the different income test that applies. SpB is cancelled if payment is
reduced to nil due to total ordinary income. If they have a partner
receiving Partner Allowance (PA), their partner does not have access to
the Working Credit provisions either, as qualification and payability of
PA depends on the customer's qualification and payability of SpB.

If the SpB customer's partner is receiving a payment with access to
Working Credit, the partner may use their working credits to offset
their employment income only. If their rate is reduced to nil due to
income and some of that income is employment income, they may stay on PA
for up to six fortnights and they may retain certain benefits.

Related links

Special Benefit (SpB) income and assets test

Working Credit

Recording and correcting employment income details

Online estimator options

Earnings and reporting workflow tool

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
