
Social work role in the National Redress Scheme 003-18061830

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document outlines the role of Services Australia's social workers
in supporting the National Redress Scheme (the Scheme) which is
administered by the Department of Social Services (DSS).

Social Work Services Offer for the Scheme

Social Work Services will provide support and assistance to all
individuals contacting about the Scheme when there is an acute crisis.

A referral for an acute crisis occurs when the individual presents:

-   at imminent risk of suicide, self-harm or risk to others, or
-   an immediate and significant risk to the health and wellbeing of
    themselves or another person

Individuals referred to Social Work Services include applicants,
nominees, carers, family members as well as survivors who are
considering applying to the Scheme.

Referrals are made for risk assessment and can include homicide risk,
family and domestic violence, and acute mental health crisis e.g.
psychosis, mania, dissociation.

Social workers’ role in the Scheme

Social workers:

-   provide immediate support and help to individuals contacting about
    the Scheme where there is an acute crisis
-   provide short-term crisis intervention
-   liaise with and provide referrals to appropriate support services
    and third parties including Redress Support Services. The Resources
    page contains a link to the National Redress Scheme website which
    lists these services

Social workers do not:

-   assess eligibility for the Scheme
-   provide advocacy or information about applications, or
-   help individuals complete applications

Note: refer individuals to the National Redress Scheme if they need
advice about eligibility or their application.

The Resources page contains links to the iWS Softphone Quick Reference
Guide and information about threats of suicide and/or to harm others. It
also contains a link to the National Redress Scheme, the Release of
Information form and useful contact information.

Related links

National Redress Scheme overview

Recording National Redress Scheme referrals in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Disclosing information to third parties

Customer aggression - Response

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
