
Claiming emergency payments 003-01030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how a person can claim Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
or the equivalent payments for New Zealand Non-Protected Special
Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP and NZ DRA).

A guide is now available to help staff when a customer contacts about
the progress of their AGDRP or NZ DRP claim. See the Training & Support
page for a link to Telephony contact guides (inbound and outbound) >
Progress of claim - inbound contact guide.

For the New South Wales Floods – July 2022, customers granted NZ DRP may
receive a letter telling them they are eligible for the AGDRP (Special
Supplement). The AGDRP (Special Supplement) has not been activated for
the New South Wales Floods - July 2022. See New South Wales Floods -
July 2022.

For the New South Wales Floods - February 2022, 3 new Local Government
Areas (LGAs), Lake Macquarie, Strathfield and Waverley, were declared on
27 June 2022. Any claims previously rejected for these LGAs - customers
must lodge a new claim. Customers do not need to request an explanation
of the initial decision and these claims must not be re-indexed.

If a customer is not eligible for:
- AGDRP or NZ DRP they may be eligible for DRA or NZ DRA
- DRA or NZ DRA they may be eligible for AGDRP or NZ DRP
A customer may also be eligible for both payment types if they meet the
eligibility criteria.
Discuss the customer’s circumstances to determine their payment options.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

Initial contact

Always check the available claiming channels for the current emergency
event.

Generally, customers can make a claim:

[]online (if the online channel is activated for the event)

over the phone through the Australian Government Emergency and disaster
assistance line. If a customer calls another phone queue, warm transfer
them to the above line. For extension numbers, see the current emergency
event

by lodging a claim form with supporting documents:

-   at a Services Australia service centre, recovery centre or access
    point
-   by fax
-   by post

Online claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

If the online channel is activated for the event, customers can claim:

-   []using their Centrelink online account through myGov (not yet
    available for nominees)
-   over the phone with a Service Officer using ACC, by calling the
    Australian Government Emergency and disaster assistance line

Online and ACC allow 'channel hopping'. This means:

-   the customer can start a claim online and have it continued by a
    Service Officer, or
-   a Service Officer can help the customer start a claim they can then
    complete online themselves

Customers can upload supporting documents or evidence using their
Centrelink online account. This includes identity documents.

Review customer record before running ACC

Before lodging a claim via ACC, Service Officers must complete all
pre-checks. This will make sure the customer is advised if:

-   they are likely to be ineligible (for example, not residentially
    qualified), or
-   additional information may be needed

This includes reviewing previous claims for the same event that have
been rejected or withdrawn to identify if the customer is changing their
circumstances. This will prompt a discussion about how or why their
circumstances changed.

Service Officers should also check if the customer has claimed and/or
been paid for a different event that is active at the same time.

Phone claims

If the online channel is not activated for the event, customers can call
the Australian Government Emergency and disaster assistance line to make
a claim.

Service Officers not trained in AGDRP/ NZ DRP or DRA/ NZ DRA are to warm
transfer the customer to the above line. For extension numbers, see the
current emergency event.

Claim forms

Claim forms are the least preferred option. They should only be issued
to customers in extremely limited circumstances. For example, no
internet or telephony services available due to the disaster event, lack
of interpreter to help with a verbal claim.

Note: claim forms are used by mobile servicing teams deployed to help
impacted LGAs.

If available for an event, claim forms are on the intranet (for staff to
download). The Resources page has links to forms.

For how to search for the claim form, see the current emergency event.

Social worker referrals - online claims and ACC

AGDRP and NZ DRP claims where an immediate family member is deceased or
missing

If a customer indicates in an online claim or ACC they have an immediate
family member who has died or is missing as a direct result of the
disaster event, the claim will be automatically allocated a keyword and
referred to a specialised team for review prior to referral to a Social
Worker.

Social work referrals for other AGDRP, NZ DRP, DRA and NZ DRA claims

If a customer indicates they would like to speak to a social worker
during an ACC or when calling to discuss the status of their claim, a
referral can be created in the claim (only if the claim has not yet been
finalised). See Table 4.

Customer contacts after submitting DRA online claim

Customers who are self-employed may contact to discuss their DRA or NZ
DRA claim after starting or submitting an online claim.

The online claim advises those customers to make contact after
submitting their claim to discuss what evidence would best suit their
income situations.

For example, customers who have seasonal income may be better suited to
provide a profit and loss statement over a longer period.

See Table 1.

Assessing and processing claims

For eligibility criteria and evidence that may be needed for claims,
see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

To process claims, check the current emergency event to see if claims
are processed in Process Direct or Customer First, then see the relevant
procedure below:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct
-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Processing DRA claims in Process Direct
-   Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Withdrawal of a claim

If a customer wants to withdraw their claim, they must do this before
the claim has been processed. See the Process page of Withdrawal of
claims.

Online claims

Customers cannot submit an online claim if they previously withdrew 2
claims for the same event and payment type.

Customers will see the following message:

-   'We can see you’ve already lodged and withdrawn <number of claims>
    claims for this payment.
    We’re here to help. If you want to claim a payment for this natural
    disaster please call us on 180 22 66.'

This is to:

-   improve customer experience where they may be having problems
    completing the online claim
-   form part of the agency’s fraud prevention measures
-   reduce the number of invalid claims in the workload

Note: there are no changes to assessing claims where customers withdrew
2 or more claims for the same event.

Staff receiving verbal claims will see a similar message during ACC if
the customer has exceeded their withdrawn claim limit.

Staff must complete all pre-ACC checks including:

-   reviewing previously withdrawn claims, and
-   asking the customer why they withdrew their claims

Using the Interpreter Connect service - for emergency events

-   Staff should call the Interpreter Connect service (on-demand
    telephone interpreting) when helping non-English speaking customers
    impacted by emergency events
-   The service is available 24 hours per day, 7 days a week for staff
    helping Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare customers
-   Indigenous interpreters are available

For more details, see Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter
(Interpreter Connect).

The Resources page has links to contact details, forms, the Services
Australia website and the Disaster Assist website.

Related links

Current emergency management events

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

Searching for a customer on the system

Adding a customer to the system

AGDRP and NZ DRP claims for an immediate family member who has died or
is missing

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Processing Disaster Recovery Claims (DRA) claims in Process Direct

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Evacuation and Recovery Centres during emergency events

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Immediate methods of payment

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
