
New claim for Crisis Payment for extreme circumstances family and domestic violence 003-07030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, conduct the risk and
referral process.

Before proceeding staff must read Operational Message – Progress of
Claim enquiries.

This document outlines how to help a customer to claim Crisis Payment
(CrP) in cases of 'extreme circumstances family and domestic violence',
and how to process the claim.

For eligibility criteria, refer to Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP).

Claiming options

CrP claims can be made via the following channels:

Online claim in Centrelink Online Services, by making the following
selections:

-   Make a Claim
-   Crisis Payments
-   Apply for Extreme Circumstances

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Note: from 1 August 2021, the paper Claim for Crisis Payment - Extreme
Circumstances Family and Domestic Violence form (SU510) is obsolete.

From 19 June 2021, evidence requirements for this claim changed. Some
evidence is now required before the claim can be lodged.

Social worker assessment

If a customer has claimed online and they meet all the basic eligibility
criteria, the system will usually refer the claim to a social worker for
an assessment.

The social worker should record a DOC to indicate they are undertaking
the assessment. Upon completion of the assessment, the social worker
will add a grant, reject or withdrawn Fast Note on the record and
finalise the referral.

The claim status then returns to In progress and allocates to a Service
Officer to code any required updates and finalise the claim as per the
social worker's instructions.

There are 2 scenarios when a customer who intends to claim or has
claimed CrP - EXV must be referred to a social worker before the claim
can be finalised by a Service Officer.

When a customer contacts Services Australia and it is identified that
they have experienced family and domestic violence:

The Service Officer must check the customer's basic eligibility by
running the Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for CrP - EXV with the
customer

If the ACC has successfully submitted, it will flow to a skill tagged
Service Officer.

If the customer is in distress and needs immediate social work
help/support, attempt to warm transfer the customer to a social worker
who will complete the CrP - EXV assessment. If a social worker is not
available, do not complete the Social Work Referral Guided Procedure for
the assessment as a skill tagged Service Officer will decide this if
required

If the ACC does not submit because the customer does not meet basic
eligibility, decide if social work support is needed, see Social work
service referral

Once the ACC has been submitted, the claim will allocate for processing.
The skill tagged Service Officer performing the processing will
determine whether:

-   there is social work referral pending on the customer's record
-   referral to a social worker is required (and complete this as
    needed), or
-   social worker assessment has already been completed for this event,
    so the claim can be finalised

When a customer has lodged a claim online, but the system determines
they may not meet the eligibility criteria, the claim will drop through
for checking and processing by a Service Officer:

During processing refer the claim to a social worker for assessment if
it is determined:

-   the customer meets the eligibility criteria (for example, there is
    contact on the record that indicates intent to claim provisions are
    met),
-   there is no referral pending on the customer's record
-   if the customer is not current on an income support payment (ISP)
    but there is a pending ISP claim

The referral must be created from the claim in Process Direct. This will
place the claim on hold

When a customer has lodged a paper claim (SU510) or ACC was run and
basic eligibility criteria seem to be met:

The Entitlements (ELD) screen will display a grant. Skill tagged Service
Officers must not finalise the claim at this point:

-   An assessment by a social worker is needed before the claim can be
    granted
-   If the outcome of the claim is rejecting NQP - Not receiving an ISP,
    and the customer has a pending ISP claim, a referral for Social Work
    assessment must be made
-   The referral to a social worker must be created from within the
    claim in Process Direct. This will place the claim on hold
-   If a Social Work assessment in progress Fast Note is on the record,
    place the claim on hold
-   The social worker will then perform an assessment, complete a grant,
    reject or withdrawn Fast Note and complete the referral. The claim
    will return to In progress for finalisation by a skill tagged
    Service Officer

Note: the customer may have complex circumstances or it may not be clear
if they are eligible. Use discretion and consider if a referral to a
social worker for CrP assessment is needed. A social work assessment may
determine if the customer meets the eligibility criteria.

For more information on the Social Worker role, see Social worker
assessment for Crisis Payment (CrP) Extreme Circumstances family and
domestic violence.

Social worker intervention

Intervention by a social worker will make sure appropriate and timely
follow up, which may involve counselling or other help.

Alleged or actual perpetrator

CrP may also be payable to an alleged or actual perpetrator of family
and domestic violence who

-   has left or been removed from the home following an instance of
    alleged family and domestic violence and
-   is legally prevented from returning to the home

It must be verified that the alleged or actual perpetrator of violence
actually lived with the victim in the home immediately before leaving or
being removed from the residence. There must also be evidence that the
alleged or actual perpetrator has been legally prevented from returning
(such as court order, restraining order).

Remaining in the home

A customer may choose to remain in the home after an incident of family
and domestic violence. For the customer to be eligible for a CrP - EXV,
the alleged or actual perpetrator of the incident must have:

-   left the home or been removed
-   been an immediate family member, and
-   been living in the home at the time of the incident

An immediate family member is considered to be a partner (or
ex-partner), parent/guardian, sibling, child, grandchild or grandparent.

Evidence of police involvement in the removal of the actual or alleged
perpetrator of violence from the family home must be obtained before
payment can be made. For example, an Apprehended Violence Order (AVO)
with an exclusion provision that prevents the abusive family member from
living in the family home.

However, the abusive family member may leave without police involvement
and verification of the family and domestic violence will need to be
sought from a third party. For example:

-   Doctors
-   Domestic violence services
-   Legal services
-   Crisis workers
-   Other household members
-   Community agencies

Third party verification should be obtained where possible.

Leaving the home

A customer who has experienced an incident of family and domestic
violence may have left their home because it is unreasonable or unsafe
for them to remain in their home. The customer must have established, or
intend to establish a new home.

Disclosed relationship

A claimant may say they are partnered as part of a claim for Crisis
Payment (CrP). Where the claimant is currently recorded as being single,
a retrospective assessment may need to occur after the CrP claim has
been assessed. See Member of a Couple and Separated under one roof
assessments. This is for instances where the claimant was in a
relationship for more than 14 days before lodging the claim, regardless
of the outcome of the CrP claim.

In these cases, the CrP claim can be assessed before a MoC assessment
being completed. If a CrP is granted it will be paid at the rate of the
income support payment the claimant is receiving on the day of the
crisis event.

Note: the presence of family and domestic violence may indicate the
customer is not a member of a couple. However, a formal MoC assessment
is required.

Separated under one roof

To be eligible for CrP, one of the customers will need to leave the
home. If both the customer and alleged or actual perpetrator of violence
remain in the same home, CrP is not payable.

For customers who are already separated under one roof before the family
and domestic violence situation occurs:

-   The customer who leaves the home may be eligible for CrP if they
    intend to establish a new home and the common criteria for CrP are
    met
-   The customer who remains in the home, an examination of the
    relationship will need to occur to establish if the customer and
    alleged or actual perpetrator can be considered a family member for
    CrP purposes

Alternative assistance

If a person who has claimed CrP is found to be ineligible, the Service
Officer or social worker should try to offer any other help or
specialist support that may be available.

Customers with a Managed Service Plan (MSP)

If a customer is identified as having a Managed Service Plan (MSP),
refer to Customer service delivered through a One Main Contact (OMC) as
part of managed Service Plan (MSP).

It is important to follow the correct servicing arrangements for MSPs as
per OB instructions when assessing CrP claims to make sure consistent
servicing.

Payment of CrP

Due to the urgent nature of CrP claims, the primary payment methods must
be:

-   New Payments Platform (NPP), or
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) if NPP is not available

Note: if the CrP claim requires backdating and/or retrospective coding,
manual coding is required.

Review and appeal process

A customer's request for an explanation of a CrP decision should be
given by the same business area as the Decision Maker (DM). For example,
if the DM was:

-   a social worker, the explanation should be given by a SME within the
    social worker network
-   part of Smart Centre or Front of House, the explanation of the
    decision should be provided by a SME within their respective
    networks

If the original claim was rejected by a social worker, it can be
reassessed by reindexing the claim if the customer:

-   could not be contacted (rejection code CNC)
-   has recontacted with new information relevant to the decision

The normal review and appeal process applies. See Initial contact about
a decision and the review of decision process.

If a SME is assigned a CrP request for explanation of a decision
activity with the DM identified as a social worker:

-   out the activity to Region Code (ROC) SW2
-   un-assign the activity reason Recategorised, select
    ZIAM_ROD_EXP_SWO_SME

All other requests for an explanation of a CrP decision should be
actioned using existing business processes. See SME explanations, ARO
referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

All applications for a formal review of a CrP decision will be done by
an Authorised Review Officer (ARO).

CrP claims can be re-indexed if needed after an explanation or formal
request for review of the decision. This is only if the original
decision has been set aside. See Cancelling claim activities and
re-indexing claims.

The References page has policy FAQs.

The Resources page has rejection codes and reasons and extra information
on the social work role, assessments of Crisis Payment (CrP) and
violence orders. It also has links to publications and forms, the Social
Work Services Branch and contact details.

Related links

Family and domestic violence

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Special circumstances - exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation
requirements

Making a decision about a Hardship Advance

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Social worker assessment for Crisis Payment (CrP) Extreme Circumstances
family and domestic violence

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
