
Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment 003-10020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The 'use of discretion' when applying this procedure should only be
under the appropriate guidance of a Team Leader or Manager.

This document outlines these immediate payments, when they can be
approved and how to process requests.

Hardship advance

First instalment

A hardship advance payment is an advance of part of the customer's first
instalment of their pension or benefit. It is paid at grant or straight
after restoring their payment. It is to help people in severe financial
hardship, including those released from prison or psychiatric
confinement.

The available amount is the amount after any deduction from the payment,
for example Centrepay, tax deductions.

Note: for customers in vulnerable circumstances, see Intent to claim and
vulnerable customers.

Eligible payments

Payments eligible for a hardship advance include all social security
benefits and social security pensions. This does not include the Home
Equity Access Scheme, Carer Allowance (CA), Double Orphan Pension (DOP),
Mobility Allowance (MOB) and Pensioner Education Supplement (PES).

If a claim is to be granted or a payment restored, and waiting for the
due date of the first instalment would cause the customer financial
hardship, it is possible to pay some entitlement in advance.

Determining eligibility

It is important to understand how arrears affect entitlement to the
hardship advance. The hardship advance should be considered as
unavailable when arrears are payable.

For customers released from prison or psychiatric confinement, a
hardship advance may be paid in addition to a crisis payment. These
payments cannot be paid without verification of the release at the time
of the claim, for example a prison or psychiatric release document.

Anticipated payment

Prisoners due to be released who qualify for Crisis Payment (CrP) are
also entitled to an anticipated payment of the first instalment of their
social security pension or benefit. This is also known as hardship
advance.

This is not at the Service Officer's discretion. It must be offered to
all customers. This applies to customers paid fortnightly.

Customers on weekly payments cannot be paid a hardship advance or urgent
payment in their first instalment period. This would require removing
them from weekly payments.

The available amount is the amount after any deduction from the payment,
for example Centrepay, tax deductions.

Before customers make an informed decision about whether to take the
payment and how much, tell them about:

-   recovery arrangements
-   the impact on their next payment, and
-   other service delivery options

The amount issued as an anticipated payment will be recovered from the
first regular payday.

ABSTUDY customers are not entitled to an anticipated payment.

Payment methods

Hardship advances and anticipated payments can be delivered by direct
credit (standard processing), or priority direct credit via the New
Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).

Only consider an EBT card when other payment options are not suitable or
will place the customer in further hardship. Agents and remote service
centres do not have access to EBT cards. As these sites are remote, the
method of payment is limited to direct credit, NPP or RTGS. Do not refer
a customer to these sites to collect a payment.

If a customer has a Managed Service Plan (MSP), this will determine the
payment method. Direct credit, NPP or RTGS are the only options if the
customer is prohibited from attending a service centre.

Identity confirmation

A person can complete the Identity Confirmation process at any time, not
only when making a claim.

Note: not all claims require Identity Confirmation. See Payments and
services that require Identity Confirmation.

The Identity Confirmation process requires completion of linkage and the
provision of identity documents. One original document from each of the
following categories is required:

-   Commencement of Identity (CoI)
-   Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
-   Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)

In most cases, a different identity document is required for each
identity category. For these documents only, it is acceptable to use one
document to verify 2 separate categories:

-   a Foreign Passport, which can be used as a Foreign Passport and a
    Visa, and
-   an ImmiCard, which can be used as a Visa and an ImmiCard

See Identity documents A to Z.

Authentication

Make sure the customer record is the correct one by asking
authentication questions to verify Proof of Record Ownership (PORO)
before assessing or issuing an urgent payment. See Authenticating a
Centrelink customer.

If the customer contacts in person, it is preferable the customer also
provides identity documents, including one with their photo for a
comparison.

If this is not available and the Service Officer is in doubt they are
speaking with the customer, they must ask further authentication
questions. These must not be limited to details a customer's friends and
relatives are aware of, such as the customer's date of birth or how many
children are in the family. The questions must be searching, but must
not be so personal as to be intrusive. If appropriate, explain to the
customer why they are being asked these questions.

If the Service Officer doubts they are speaking to the customer, do not
release information. Verbally deny the payment application.

The Resources page has links to prison servicing contact details, forms
and examples,

Related links

Immediate payments

New claim for Crisis Payment prior to the release of a customer in
prison or psychiatric confinement

New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or
psychiatric confinement

Payment destination

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Alternative assistance for customers applying for immediate payment

Immediate payment by payment method direct credit

Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP)

Immediate payment by payment method Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)

Immediate payment by payment method Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT)
card

Urgent payment requests for income management

Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly payments

Helping customers to build their financial capability

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
