
New claim for Crisis Payment Other Extreme Circumstances 003-07030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Before proceeding staff must read Operational Message – Progress of
Claim enquiries.

This document explains how to help a customer claim Crisis Payment (CrP)
in Other Extreme Circumstances (EXO) and how to process the claim.

Claiming options

CrP-EXO can be claimed:

online via myGov by accessing Centrelink services and selecting:

-   Make a Claim
-   Crisis Payments
-   Apply for Extreme Circumstances

by running Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

Note: from 1 August 2021, the paper Claim for Crisis Payment - Other
Extreme Circumstances form (SU718) is obsolete.

Eligibility for CrP-EXO

To qualify for CrP-EXO a person must:

-   meet the general qualification criteria of CrP
-   make a claim within 7 days after the customer decides that they
    cannot return to their home as a result of the extreme circumstance
-   have left home as a result of the extreme circumstance and it is
    unreasonable to return
-   have established, or intends to establish, a new home
-   have been in Australia when the extreme circumstance occurred
-   have not been paid more than 4 payments in any 12 month period
-   has not received qualified for AGDRP, DRA or other local, state or
    Commonwealth disaster relief payment for the same extreme
    circumstance
-   not have brought the extreme circumstance on themselves to be paid
    CrP

Evidence requirements

From 19 June 2021, evidence requirements for this claim were changed.
Some evidence is now needed before the claim can be lodged.

Customers need to provide evidence of:

severe financial hardship where bank balances are updated in the claim

the extreme circumstance that led to the need for a new home and may
include (but not limited to):

-   a full report from fire, police or doctors; or
-   a report number from fire, police or doctors

Contact with third parties is needed to confirm the customer’s evidence
and the establishment of a new home.

Other help and payments

If a person who has claimed CrP-EXO is not eligible, offer any other
help or specialist service that may be available to them.

The customer may request and be paid a hardship advance (new claimants)
or an urgent payment.

Note: ABSTUDY customers are not entitled to a hardship advance payment.

One claim per circumstance

Only one CrP-EXO can be paid for the same circumstance.

For example, if a customer is paid CrP-EXO under the Social Security Act
1991, then becomes an ABSTUDY customer, they cannot claim another
CrP-EXO under ABSTUDY policy for the same circumstances.

CrP-EXO claims must be assessed using Process Direct.

Social worker assessment not needed

Social workers do not assess claims for 'Crisis Payment Other Extreme
Circumstances'.

Some customers may need extra support depending on their circumstances.
If the customer would like a referral, see Social work service referral.

Customers with a Managed Service Plan (MSP)

If a customer has an MSP in place, refer to Customer service delivered
through a One Main Contact (OMC) as part of MSP. Service Officers need
to follow the correct process when assessing CrP-EXO claims to make sure
consistent servicing for these customers.

Payment of CrP-EXO

Due to the urgent nature of CrP-EXO claims, New Payments Platform (NPP)
or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) are the primary payment methods.

The Resources page has rejection codes and reasons, FAQs and a link to
the Social Work Services Branch page.

Related links

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances domestic and
family violence

Making a decision about a hardship advance or anticipated payment

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
