
New claim for Crisis Payment for humanitarian entrants newly arrived in Australia 003-07030050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to identify if a customer's claim for Crisis
Payment (CrP), as a humanitarian entrant who has newly arrived in
Australia, is payable and provides the action required to process the
CrP claim.

Qualification criteria for CrP

To be eligible for CrP a customer must meet all the qualification
criteria for humanitarian entrants, this includes being in severe
financial hardship.

Newly arrived humanitarian entrants who arrive in Australia on a
qualifying humanitarian visa for Crisis Payment should be offered this
CrP in addition to their income support payment.

Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)

Customers who have recently arrived as a humanitarian entrant may have
their HSP provider contact on their behalf upon their arrival in
Australia.

Hardship advance and possible recovery

Humanitarian entrants who qualify for CrP during the new claim process,
are also entitled to a hardship advance of the first instalment of their
social security payment. This should be offered to all customers when
their social security payment is processed.

Customers must be informed of recovery arrangements, the impact on their
next payment and other service delivery options before making an
informed decision about whether to take the advance. This early payment
will be recovered from the first ordinary instalment of their social
security payment.

Alternative assistance

If a customer claiming CrP is found to be ineligible, the assessing
Service Officer (SO) should endeavour to offer alternative assistance or
refer the customer to specialist service, which may be available to
them.

The Resources page has a list of publications in other languages
available to customers and community organisations.

Related links

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Customer compensation and act of grace payments

Making a decision about a Hardship Advance

Australia's Refugee and Humanitarian Program

Interpreters

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
