
Queensland Storms and Floods (November 2021) 003-21120840

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the help available for the Queensland Storms and
Floods (November 2021).

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

All claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected
from 29 April 2022. When speaking with customers, use the term
ineligible instead of rejected. See Rejecting claims.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details, see Operational Blueprint - Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Emergency payments

On 10 December 2021, the Australian Government has made a determination
under the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster has occurred.
Additional Local Government Areas (LGAs) were declared on 25 January
2022.

See LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

Payments activated for this event:

-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was previously known as
    Ex-gratia DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For the Queensland Storms and Floods (November 2021), major disaster
means:

the severe storms, heavy rainfall and associated flooding that started
on 10 November 2021 and ended on 3 December 2021 in Queensland affecting
the local government areas of:

-   Balonne
-   Banana
-   Barcaldine
-   Barcoo
-   Blackall-Tambo
-   Boulia
-   Bundaberg
-   Central Highlands
-   Diamantina
-   Flinders
-   Goondiwindi
-   Lockyer Valley
-   Longreach
-   Maranoa
-   Scenic Rim
-   South Burnett
-   Southern Downs
-   Toowoomba
-   Western Downs

Start date of the event: 10 November 2021

End date of the event: 3 December 2021

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA claims

To record and code claims, see:

-   Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

Local Government Areas (LGAs) for DRA and NZ DRA

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets the LGA criteria.

LGAs declared on 10 December 2021:

-   Banana
-   Barcaldine
-   Barcoo
-   Blackall-Tambo
-   Boulia
-   Bundaberg
-   Central Highlands
-   Diamantina
-   Goondiwindi
-   Lockyer Valley
-   Longreach
-   Maranoa
-   Murweh
-   Scenic Rim
-   South Burnett
-   Southern Downs
-   Toowoomba
-   Western Downs

LGAs declared on 23 December 2021:

-   Balonne
-   Flinders

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas. Use these to confirm
if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA.

Do not use Office Locator.

Customer’s LGA is South Burnett or Bundaberg

Discuss the date the loss occurred, if a customer claims DRA or NZ DRA
for the LGAs:

-   South Burnett
-   Bundaberg

Note: when discussing the date of impact, do not give any dates or date
ranges.

If the loss of income occurred on or after 7 January 2022, assess the
customers claim for the Queensland Floods January 2022 event.

If the loss of income occurred between 10 November and 3 December 2021,
assess the customers claim for the Queensland Storms and Floods (Nov 21)
event.

Note: there may be instances where the customer’s income has been
impacted by both events; therefore, the customer may be eligible for
both events. If this occurs:

-   Take their claim for the Queensland Floods – January 2022 event by
    completing the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim template
-   Complete the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim template for the Queensland
    Storms and Floods (Nov 21) event
-   Contact Technical Peer Support to have them escalate to Level 2
    Emergency Helpdesk via Payment Query SharePoint
-   The Level 2 Helpdesk will review claim and provide instructions in
    how to assess and complete the claim
-   Do not complete either claim until instructions are provided by
    Level 2 Emergency Helpdesk

If a claim for one of the events has already been completed and the
customer is already receiving DRA follow the above and escalate the
second claim for the remaining Queensland Flood event.

The customer cannot be paid DRA for the same period for the 2 different
events but if they were impacted by both events an adjustment to the
payments may be needed.

Get as much information as possible from the customer on how they were
impacted by the 2 different flood events.

The Level 2 Emergency Helpdesk will provide guidance on how to proceed.

NZ DRA tax participation

A customer must have participated in the Australian taxation system for
at least one year in the past 3 financial years:

-   2020-21
-   2019-20
-   2018-19

If they have not, they must do so before 23 December 2022.

Customers can only claim after this time if special circumstances apply.

Claiming period

Customers must lodge claims by 22 June 2022.

The claiming period is now closed, unless special circumstances apply.

How to claim

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

If a customer calls another agency phone number:

staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments, see
Claiming emergency payments for important steps to follow before
transferring the customer

warm transfer the customer to:

-   internal transfer number - 171534
-   full number 02 8440 2538. Do not give this number to customers. Use
    only if unable to use the internal transfer number

Claim forms are on the intranet for staff.

Rejecting claims

Formal approval has been given to reject  claims that are ineligible and
do not meet eligibility criteria. This includes claims for:

-   declared localities
-   non-declared localities

Before finalising an ineligible claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim
Fast Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure
the customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected.

All DRA and NZ DRA claims must have 2 genuine attempts to contact the
customer before rejecting the claim. Record the outcome of each contact
attempt in a DOC.

Note: when talking to customers, do not use the term rejection. Use the
term ineligible.
For example, ‘After assessing your claim we have found it does not meet
the conditions of the payment and therefore your claim outcome is
ineligible.’

See Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First.

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

Transfer the customer to the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue if
they want to apply for ACCS.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are the
National Recovery and Resilience Agency policy documents for each
payment. Documents include details for this event and customer
scenarios.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) rate
    thresholds
-   links to maps of affected areas
-   links to forms, scenarios and the Services Australia website

Related links

Emergency events

Claiming emergency payments

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA claims

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Emergency payment claims lodged outside the time limit

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

DRA and NZ DRA

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Grants and ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
