
COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program December 2020 (Round 1) 003-20120223

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 1 November 2021, enquiries relating to the COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program are to be referred directly to Austrade. This includes
requests for late lodgement, updates on claims that are yet to be
finalised and complaints in relation to claim decisions and grant
outcomes. Applicants can contact Austrade via phone on 1300 729 401 or
email at consumertravelsupport@austrade.gov.au.

This document explains the eligibility criteria and payment rates for
the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program (TSP) December 2020. This
is also known as COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 1.

Purpose

To provide a one-off grant payment in the 2020-21 financial year to help
travel agents and tour arrangement service providers affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic who qualify for the JobKeeper scheme so they can
continue to:

-   trade
-   meet their legal obligations to process refunds and credits to
    Australian consumers

The grant payment is to support travel agents and tour arrangement
service providers who, due to COVID-19, are experiencing:

-   a reduction in income, and
-   an increase in consumer refunds as a result of a reduction in
    international travel

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2 commenced on 2 May
2021.

How to claim

Applicants can claim online, on behalf of a business that is a travel
agent or tour arrangement service provider. Applicants cannot submit a
claim over the phone. There is no paper claim form.

Applicants can only claim if they are an ‘eligible associate’ of the
business on the Australian Business Register (ABR).

Applicants must read the grant guidelines before submitting a claim.

Applicants:

can access the grant guidelines from the GrantConnect website

-   can only view the full grant guidelines document by selecting Go
    Documents from the COVID-19 Consumer TSP page. The grant opportunity
    ID is GO4562
-   who are not already registered users with GrantConnect will need to
    set up a new registration to access the guidelines. The Services
    Australia website also has a link to the GrantConnect website

To claim, applicants must, in Provider Digital Access (PRODA):

-   log onto their personal account or register a personal account in
    their name
-   register the business (if this has not been done before)
-   link the business to Business Hub as a Service Provider (if this has
    not been done before)
-   access the Business Hub

Once the applicant is in Business Hub, they will need to select ‘Apply
for Service’ from the landing page. The applicant can then start a claim
for the COVID-19 Consumer TSP December 2020 using Business Hub.

If the applicant has problems:

-   creating a PRODA account, they can call the PRODA helpdesk
-   with loading the business’ online claim in Business Hub, see the
    Business Hub help table

See the Resources page for links that applicants can access from the
Services Australia website for:

-   PRODA
-   user guides, including ‘How to register your Organisation for
    Business Hub

Applicants can also search ‘PRODA’ and ‘Business Hub’ using the Services
Australia website search function.

The Resources page has screen shots of the applicant’s view of the
online claim.

During the online claim process:

Applicants can make a self-declaration in relation to a business’ annual
GST turnover amount if the business

-   is not registered for GST, and
-   had a turnover of less than $75,000 in the 2019 calendar year

All applicants, regardless of the business’ annual GST turnover, will

-   be asked to confirm their business is either a travel agent or tour
    arrangement service provider, and
-   need to provide other supporting evidence to support this, see
    Eligibility requirements

When an applicant completes the Review and Hold step of their claim, the
travel agent or tour arrangement service provider’s Australian Business
Number (ABN) will be automatically sent to the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).

The ATO will then issue the business with a COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program certificate of tax information (ATO certificate).

The certificate is sent by:

-   priority postage service to the registered address that is listed
    for the business’ ABN - this may be the address of the business’ tax
    agent, or
-   electronically for sole traders who have linked their myGov account
    to their ATO business record

Applicants cannot submit a claim until they have this certificate. When
they get it, they must:

-   log back into Business Hub
-   go to the document upload step in their claim
-   upload their certificate and any supporting documents

The claim will then be allocated to processing staff to review and
finalise.

Claiming period

-   Opens 14 December 2020
-   Closes midnight (AEDT) 13 March 2021 or until allocated funding is
    exhausted

If allocated funding is exhausted:

-   staff will be advised, including what to tell applicants who call to
    enquire
-   Operational Blueprint will be updated
-   the Business Hub and Services Australia website will be updated

Contact the Technical Peer Support if a claim is received after 13 March
2021. The Technical Peer Support must escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk/TPS using the Payment Query Template.

Eligibility requirements

There are eligibility requirements for:

-   an applicant - the person who is making a claim on behalf of a
    business
-   a business - the travel agent or tour arrangement service

Eligibility requirements cannot be waived under any circumstances.

Applicant requirements

‘Eligible associate’ of the business on the Australian Business Register
(ABR). See the Resources page for a link to the ABR.

-   Only 1 applicant can claim per Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   Only 1 claim will be accepted and determined for each active ABN,
    and
-   Only the first eligible applicant will be considered

Business requirements

A travel agent or tour arrangement service provider (inbound or
outbound)

Operating as a travel agent or tour arrangement service provider
(inbound or outbound) before the announcement of the closure of
international borders by the Prime Minister of Australia on 19 March
2020

Lodged its 2018-19 financial year tax return

Had an annual Goods and Services Tax (GST) turnover starting from
$50,000 to a maximum of $20 million in the relevant period:

-   2019 calendar year for businesses that lodged monthly or quarterly
    BAS
-   2018-19 financial year for businesses that lodge annual BAS

Received a JobKeeper payment for a JobKeeper fortnight ending in October
2020 under the Coronavirus Economic Response Package (Payments and
Benefits) Rules 2020. That is, JobKeeper fortnight 14 (28 September 2020
to 11 October 2020) and/or JobKeeper fortnight 15 (12 October 2020 to 25
October 2020)

Have a registered and active Australian Business Number (ABN)

For businesses with a turnover of more than $75,000 they must:

-   Be registered for the purposes of Goods and Services Tax (GST)
-   Have lodged all required Business Activity Statements (BAS) for the
    2019 calendar year, and
-   Make a claim as the reporting member on behalf of the GST reporting
    group (if applicable). Exceptional circumstances may apply to these
    applicants only (see below)
    Note: if a business is a member of a GST reporting group, to be
    eligible for this grant payment, they must be the reporting member
    that lodges BAS on behalf of all group members. All other members of
    the GST reporting group that do not lodge BAS are not eligible for
    this grant payment

Have an account with an Australian financial institution that is located
in Australian territorial boundaries

Provide evidence supporting they are a travel agent or tour arrangement
service provider by holding active incorporation or registration in
Australia with at least 1 of the following entities as at 30 November
2020. This evidence should be submitted with the applicant’s online
claim:

-   Australian Federation of Travel Agents (AFTA)
-   Australian Tourism Export Council (ATEC)
-   Council of Australian Tour Operators (CATO)
-   International Air Transport Association (IATA)
-   Any other applicable tourism peak industry body

If membership with one of the above entities is not held provide the
Australian and New Zealand Standard Industrial Classification (ANZSIC)
code 7220 or Business Industry Code (BIC) 72200 ‘Travel Agency and Tour
Arrangement Services’ as submitted in the business’ 2018-19 tax return.
Note: if applicable, this should be included in the ATO certificate
submitted with the applicant’s online claim

All claims for businesses with a GST turnover amount of over $20 million
in the 2019 calendar year (or for annual BAS reporters, in the 2018-19
Financial Year) will be escalated to Austrade as an Exceptional
Circumstance Review.

Austrade will decide if the amount on the ATO certificate of tax
information is based on Total Transaction Value (TTV). If so, they will
reassess each business on a case-by-case basis to decide:

-   eligibility
-   the GST turnover amount to be used to calculate grant entitlement,
    and
-   the grant amount

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements - applicants

If an applicant has not set up a Provider Digital Access (PRODA)
account, they will need to provide 3 documents to verify their identity
online. The documents that can be provided are:

-   Medicare card
-   Drivers Licence
-   Immicard
-   Passport
-   Birth Certificate
-   Citizenship Certificate
-   Visa
-   Certificate of Registration by Descent

To allow information to be automatically checked online with the issuer
or official record holder, the applicant will need to enter the details
for each of the 3 documents such as the:

-   state the document was issued
-   number recorded on the document

If the applicant’s name differs from the documents they provide, they
will also need to provide a Change of Name document such as a:

-   Marriage Certificate
-   Change of Name Certificate

Payment rates

There is a scaled payment approach based on the business’ annual Goods
and Services Tax (GST) turnover in the 2019 calendar year:

-   A one off taxable payment of $1,500 for a minimum annual turnover of
    $50,000 up to $99,999, with
-   An additional $2,500 per every $1 to $100,000 increase in annual
    turnover, starting from an annual turnover amount of $100,000
-   The maximum payment is $100,000 for businesses with a turnover of up
    to $20 million

All claims for businesses with a GST turnover amount of over $20 million
in the 2019 calendar year (or for annual BAS reporters, in the 2018-19
Financial Year) will be escalated to Austrade as an Exceptional
Circumstance Review.

Austrade will decide if the amount on the ATO certificate of tax
information is based on Total Transaction Value (TTV). If so, they will
reassess each business on a case-by-case basis to decide:

-   eligibility
-   the GST turnover amount to be used to calculate grant entitlement,
    and
-   the grant amount

When processing a claim:

the system will calculate the business’ payment rate once the
‘calculate’ button is selected

for businesses that:

-   need to lodge Business Activity Statements (BAS), the business’
    turnover amount is as per the ATO certificate to the applicant from
    the Australian Taxation Office. Code this amount when processing a
    claim to make sure the correct payment is made
-   do not need to lodge BAS, the business’ 2019 calendar year GST
    turnover amount is as per the applicant’s self-declaration in the
    online claim process. Staff do not need to code this amount when
    processing a claim

The Resources page has a table with all payment amounts as per business
turnover.

Taxable payment

Do not ask the applicant for their Tax File Number (TFN).

As this grant payment is taxable, applicants are encouraged to seek
independent professional advice about their taxation obligations or seek
help from the Australian Taxation Office.

There will be no GST consequences from the payment. This means it will
not affect how much GST the business has to pay.

If this payment will be included in an applicant’s individual tax return
(for example, they may be a sole trader) and they or their partner:

-   receive Family Tax Benefit and/or Child Care Subsidy - they will
    need to include this payment in their family income estimate as
    taxable income
-   have a child support assessment - this payment will form part of
    their adjusted taxable income

[]The easiest way for customers to view and update a family income
estimate is online. They can use their Centrelink online account through
myGov or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app.

Payment methods

Payments will be made:

-   by direct credit only
-   into the business’ bank account as nominated by the applicant
-   into an Australian bank account

This payment must not be delivered via the New Payments Platform (NPP)
or Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).

Payments will be made as a lump sum only.

Exceptional circumstances

Escalate the claim to the Technical Peer Support if:

the reporting member of a Goods and Services Tax (GST) reporting group
did not receive a JobKeeper payment for a JobKeeper fortnight ending in
October 2020 under the Coronavirus Economic Response Package (Payments
and Benefits) Rules 2020

-   that is, JobKeeper fortnight 14 (28 September 2020 to 11
    October 2020) and/or JobKeeper fortnight 15 (12 October 2020 to 25
    October 2020)

a business had a GST turnover amount of over $20 million in the 2019
calendar year (or for annual BAS reporters, in the 2018-19 Financial
Year)

-   claims already rejected because of this reason will automatically be
    forwarded to Austrade, businesses do not need to apply for a formal
    review
-   staff managing reviews where an applicant has requested a review
    because of this reason, see the Process page to forward these claims
    to Emergency Management Programme

The Technical Peer Support must escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk using the Payment Query Template. Include the

-   business’ name and Australian Business Number (ABN)
-   applicant’s name and contact details

These claims must be forwarded to Emergency Management Programme.

Accessing the Claim Assessment Summary once claim decision finalised

Find the business record in Process Direct using the Customer Reference
Number (CRN) or Organisation Summary option on home page.

-   Navigate to claim
-   Select Assessment icon
-   Highlight the text before and after the comments section for the ATO
    verification screen
-   Copy and paste that into a Word document. (Hint: right mouse click
    and use Paste-A option. It will paste the content in the same format
    as it was written)

Review and appeal process

If an applicant does not understand or does not agree with the original
decision:

-   The decision is discussed and the applicant is given the chance to
    provide new information to have the decision reassessed
-   If they do not understand the decision after a discussion and any
    reassessment, they can request an explanation to be provided by a
    Subject Matter Expert (SME)
-   If they do not agree with the decision, they can apply for a formal
    review by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)
-   If they are not satisfied with the ARO outcome, they can request a
    review by the Emergency Management Programme (EMP). They must lodge
    the request within 29 days of the ARO decision date. EMP will not
    contact the applicant to discuss the review or tell them the
    outcome. Only a letter will be issued upon completion

Applicants also have access to an ‘exceptional circumstances’ review
process:

-   If they feel they have circumstances that warrant one (or more) of
    the eligibility criteria to be waived
-   If their business had a GST turnover amount of over $20 million in
    the 2019 calendar year (or for annual BAS reporters, in the 2018-19
    Financial Year)
-   These reviews are considered against any precedents set by Austrade.
    If none apply, EMP will refer the review to Austrade for a decision.
    The Process page has more details

An applicant or third party can send documents to support their
application for a formal review to State communication. The documents
will be manually uploaded to the business’ Customer First record that
has the decision letter.

Note: if the claim has not been submitted by the applicant (it is still
on hold), the documents must be uploaded by their online application in
Business Hub and the claim submitted. This forms part of the claim
decision, not a review process.

Complaints

A complaint is made if:

-   a person expresses dissatisfaction in relation to a product or
    service, and
-   a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected or
    legally required

A customer can complain about a service, process or decision of the
agency over the phone, in writing, in person or by myGov.

If a complaint is being made, staff can transfer the call to Technical
Peer Support line.

The Technical Peer Support staff member will try to resolve the
complaint at this point of contact.

If the Technical Peer Support staff member cannot resolve the complaint,
then the complaint can be escalated to Level 1 Complaints and Feedback
using the Customer Feedback Tool. This will be made on the business' CRN
(the second CRN) that has the decision letter.

The Customer Feedback Tool is to be created as per the coding below.

-   Service Brand: Centrelink
-   Service Type: Business and Employers
-   Service Detail: Transport and Freight Services
-   Business Reference Section: Zone/Branch OU code of 61050779, then
    select the line presented that matches RSP NEW INIATIVES AND
    EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Selecting the business reference field will make sure these complaints
can be easily identified and associated with this payment.

The complaint can be escalated to Level 2 Complaints, if it:

-   cannot be resolved by Level 1 Complaints and Feedback, or
-   meets 1 of the 8 escalation reasons

For more details, see:

-   Requesting access to the Customer Feedback tool 104-03010010
-   Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback
    Tool 104-03070000

FAQs

For a list of common questions applicants may ask staff over the phone,
and answers to these questions, see the Resources page.

The Resources page has payment amounts, Business Hub help, FAQs and
links to contact details, templates and Services Australia, GrantConnect
and ABR websites.

Related links

Assessing and coding COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program – December
2020 claims

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2

Provider Digital Access (PRODA)

Business Hub

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
