
COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Northern Territory 003-21081928

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the eligibility, payment rates and claiming
options for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Northern Territory.

There are different activations and relevant periods for November 2021.
Staff must check claim details carefully before selecting a workflow.

The claiming period for all relevant periods has ended. Staff will only
assess online claims lodged before a claiming period ended or phone
claims where special circumstances apply.

For staff not trained in processing claims, complete a cold
(unannounced) transfer to 'COVID-19 Disaster Payment' in Services
Australia Workspace.

If a customer calls about the status of their claim, see Status of
claim - customer calls to enquire for what to tell the customer.

All Northern Territory online claims that do not meet eligibility
requirements can be rejected, except when the customer has a pending
Income Support Payment.

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

See COVID-19 Disaster Payment for:

-   Purpose of the payment
-   Identity requirements
-   Non-Australian residents and eligible visas
-   Claiming options
-   Payment methods
-   Taxable information
-   No Tax File Number (TFN) requirements
-   Exempt income for income tests
-   Income Support Payment customers

See Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims for how to assess:

-   Phone claims
-   Online claims

See Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims for how to record and code
claims, including:

-   Running the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow
-   Escalation of claims by Technical Peer Support
-   Quality on Line (QOL)

To receive a payment

To receive a payment a customer must:

-   be unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual
    income because of a state public health order for restricted
    movement, and
-   meet the general eligibility criteria

General eligibility

For online claims for this payment, do not contact customers to confirm
online claim details unless advised to do so by the Level 2 Helpdesk.

Do not follow this procedure for any other event.

A customer qualifies if they meet all of the following on the same day
for at least 1 day in the relevant period:

an Australian resident (through legal permanent residence and residing
in Australia) or a holder of a visa class permitted to work in Australia
(to check these see Resources for visa subclasses), and in Australia at
the time of their claim

be at least 17 years old

either:

-   lives or works in a relevant area subject to a state public health
    order for restricted movement (lockdown) that is a deemed a COVID-19
    hotspot by the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer
-   were present in a COVID-19 hotspot at the time the restricted
    movement (lockdown) was declared, and are now subject to a second
    public health order that restricts their movement in the state or
    territory they are currently in, or

would have worked on or after the first day of a state public health
order for restricted movement 'lockdown'

not received the COVID-19 Disaster Payment for the same relevant period,
or part thereof

has not received or will not receive an income support payment
(including a zero rate) for any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment
relevant period they are claiming for
Note: if a customer chooses to cancel an income support payment to
receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment, this should be for a date before
the relevant period starts. 'Zero rate' does not include customers with
a pending, assessed (ASS) or suspended (SUS) status. See Income support
payment customers

has not received or will not receive any of the following payments, for
any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment relevant period they are
claiming for:

-   state pandemic payment
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   state small business payment
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL),
    Note: staff must consider the period a payment was paid for not the
    date the customer received a payment

not receiving pandemic-related paid leave entitlements, or will use them
up during the same relevant period, and

for any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment relevant period they are
claiming for, their employer has not received or will not receive the
Retaining Domestic Airline Capability (RDAC) payment on their behalf.
Note: staff must consider the period the payment was paid for, not the
date the employer received the payment on the customer’s behalf

To receive a payment, customers must also be unable to attend work and
therefore unable to earn their usual income due to a state public health
order for restricted movement.

There is no liquid assets criteria for this event.

A customer who is in gaol or imprisoned is not eligible for the COVID-19
Disaster Payment.

If a customer’s employer has not allowed them to attend work and earn
their usual income, as they are not vaccinated against COVID-19, the
customer may be eligible if they meet all eligibility criteria.

Self-employed customers can have the same work and home address.

Customers involved in a trust or company

Customers who only derive their income from a trust or company
(distributions/dividends) are not eligible:

-   a customer must be working and due to the lockdown be unable to work
    and therefore unable to earn an income
-   distributions/dividends will not count as employment as the lockdown
    is not affecting their income

Company directors

A customer who is a company director, even when they draw a wage from
the business, cannot receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment if the
business has received a state small business payment.

The customer may be eligible to receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment
if:

-   the business has not received a state small business payment,
-   the customer draws a wage from the business, and
-   all other eligibility criteria is met

For help assessing eligibility:

-   see the scenarios
-   contact Technical Peer Support

Unable to work and earn usual income

To receive a payment, customers must be ‘unable to attend work and
therefore unable to earn their usual income due to a state public health
order for restricted movement’.

This means the customer cannot earn their usual amount of income from
any employer (existing or new).

That is, if a customer has lost income from an employer, but is able to
regain the same lost income from a new employer, they

-   can attend work and earn their usual income, and
-   are not eligible to receive a payment

Reasons a person may be unable to attend work and earn their usual
income

A person may be unable to attend work and earn their usual income for a
number of reasons related to the restricted movement conditions. This
includes where customers:

-   are not permitted or unable to work from home
-   cannot attend work due to caring responsibilities
-   are not vaccinated against COVID-19
-   have an exemption from wearing a mask, however, cannot work because
    of a state public health order mandating mask wearing (this must be
    because of a state public health order and not because of a
    condition an employer has placed on a person’s employment)

Unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual income
means the customer, in the relevant period, must have lost at least:

-   8 hours of work, or
-   1 full day of work

A full day of work does not need to be at least 8 hours.

For example: a customer normally works a 3 hour shift during the
relevant period and cannot attend that shift because of the restricted
movement (lockdown). The customer meets the 'unable to attend work and
therefore unable to earn their usual income' criteria as they have lost
1 full day of work in the relevant period.

If a customer does not lose 1 full day of work, they must lose at least
8 hours of work in the relevant period.

For example:

-   A customer normally works 1 x 10 hour shift during the relevant
    period. They work 5 hours of that shift. The customer does not meet
    the 'unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn their usual
    income' criteria as they have not lost at least 8 hours of work or 1
    full day of work in the relevant period
-   A customer normally works 2 x 10 hours shifts during the relevant
    period. They work 5 hours each day of those 2 shifts. The customer
    does meet the 'unable to attend work and therefore unable to earn
    their usual income' criteria as they have lost 10 hours of work in
    the relevant period

The payment rate the customer receives is based on hours of work lost
during the relevant period, not hours the customer would have worked if
the restricted movement (lockdown) did not occur.

Relevant period - 16-22 November 2021 activation and onwards

Katherine

-   Relevant period 1: 16-22 November 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 2: 23-29 November 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 3: 30 November to 4 December 2021 inclusive

Robinson River and homelands

-   Relevant period 1: 16-22 November 2021 inclusive
-   Relevant period 2: 23-24 November 2021 inclusive

Relevant areas - 16-22 November 2021 activation and onwards

-   Katherine
-   Robinson River and homelands

Staff must check a customer lives, works or was present in a relevant
area by using the Geospatial tool.

To be eligible to receive a payment, an address must be in the blue
shaded area for the customer to be eligible.

Relevant period - 5-7 November 2021 activation

Katherine (including Tindal)

-   Relevant period 1: 5-7 November 2021 inclusive

Relevant areas - 5-7 November 2021 activation

-   Katherine (including Tindal)

Staff must check a customer lives, works or was present in a relevant
area by using the Geospatial tool.

To be eligible to receive a payment, an address must be in the blue
shaded area for the customer to be eligible.

Relevant period - August 2021 activation (closed)

Greater Darwin

-   Relevant period 1: 18-19 August 2021 inclusive

Katherine

-   Relevant period 1: 18-20 August 2021 inclusive

There are different claiming periods for each relevant period. See
Timeframes for claiming.

Relevant areas - August 2021 activation (closed)

-   Greater Darwin
-   Katherine

Staff must check a customer lives, works or was present in a relevant
area by using the Geospatial tool.

To be eligible to receive a payment for:

-   Greater Darwin an address must be in the blue shaded area for the
    customer to be eligible
-   Katherine an address must be in the blue shaded area for the
    customer to be eligible

Present in

For the purposes of the COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Northern Territory,
the eligibility criteria covers whether a customer lives, works or has
been present in (visited) a relevant area.

The area must be:

-   declared a COVID-19 hotspot, and
-   under period of restricted movement (lockdown)

A second public health order:

-   is a state or territory public health order that restricts a
    person's movement, due to them being in a COVID-19 hotspot that was
    also under a restricted movement order/lockdown at the time they
    were there, even if they are now in another location
-   includes stay at home orders, self-quarantine or mandatory
    (supervised) quarantine
-   can differ depending on the home state or territory

The address the customer was present in within the COVID-19 hotspot area
will be checked using the Geospatial tool to make sure the relevant area
was 'declared a COVID-19 hotspot' and is under a period of restricted
movement (lockdown).

Leave entitlements

To get the COVID-19 Disaster Payment, customers must not be receiving
pandemic related paid leave entitlements or will exhaust those
entitlements during the same relevant period.

Customers do not need to take:

accrued leave entitlements such as:

-   annual leave
-   long service leave
-   unpaid leave

leave they are not entitled to access if they have been stood down
without pay by their employer under the Fair Work Act, for example:

-   paid sick leave
-   carer’s leave
-   compassionate leave

However, if a customer is receiving any of the above leave types,
including pandemic related leave entitlements, during the entire
relevant period, they:

-   have not lost income, and
-   are not eligible to receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment

For unpaid leave, while the customer may have lost income, they would
not meet the ‘would have worked’ criteria. That is, if a person is on
unpaid leave, they would not have worked even if the restricted movement
(lockdown) did not occur.

If these leave entitlements do not cover the entire relevant period the
customer meets this eligibility requirement.

For example, if a customer has leave entitlements, including pandemic
related leave entitlements, that cover 3 days of the relevant period,
they meet this eligibility requirement. Note: the customer must meet all
eligibility requirements for at least 1 day in the remaining period.

Payment amount

If the customer is eligible, the payment amount is:

-   $450 if they have lost at least 8 hours and less than 20 hours of
    work or a full day of work in the relevant period
-   $750 if they have lost 20 hours or more of work in the relevant
    period

The payment cannot be paid pro rata. The customer must be paid the full
amount of $450 or $750.

Maximum number of payments

Do not process more than 1 payment of COVID-19 Disaster Payment in 1
day, see Payment methods.

Customers cannot receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment for:

-   the same relevant period, or part thereof
-   relevant periods that overlap

Timeframes for claiming - 16-22 November 2021 activation and onwards

Katherine

For the relevant period from:

16-22 November 2021 (relevant period 1) the claiming period:

-   starts 23 November 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 13 December 2021

As the Northern Territory has reached 70% vaccination of its population
who are aged 16 years and older, customers claiming for relevant period
2 (and any new relevant periods announced) will need to lodge a new
claim for each new relevant period. Customers who previously lodged a
full claim can use the abridged claim process for relevant period 2 and
onwards, if their circumstances have not changed.

23-29 November 2021 (relevant period 2) the claiming period:

-   starts 30 November 2021
-   ends 11:59pm 20 December 2021

30 November to 4 December 2021 (relevant period 3) the claiming period:

-   starts 7 December 2021
-   ends 11:59pm 27 December 2021

Robinson River and homelands

For the relevant period from:

16-22 November 2021 (relevant period 1) the claiming period:

-   starts 23 November 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 13 December 2021

As the Northern Territory has reached 70% vaccination of its population
who are aged 16 years and older, customers claiming for relevant period
2 (and any new relevant periods announced) will need to lodge a new
claim for each new relevant period. Customers who previously lodged a
full claim can use the abridged claim process for relevant period 2 and
onwards, if their circumstances have not changed.

23-24 November 2021 (relevant period 2) the claiming period:

-   starts 30 November 2021
-   ends 11:59pm 20 December 2021

Timeframes for claiming - 5-7 November 2021 activation

For the relevant period from:

5-7 November 2021 (relevant period 1) the claiming period:

-   starts 12 November 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 2 December 2021

Timeframes for claiming - August 2021 activation (closed)

Greater Darwin

For the relevant period from:

18-19 August 2021 (relevant period 1) the claiming period:

-   starts 25 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 14 September 2021

Katherine

For the relevant period from:

18-20 August 2021 (relevant period 1) the claiming period:

-   starts 25 August 2021
-   ends 11:59 pm 14 September 2021

The Resources page has links to the Geospatial tool, scenarios, visa
subclass numbers, contact details, the Services Australia website and
Templates.

Related links

Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment and change of
circumstances

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - rejecting claims

Income support payment customers - COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Northern
Territory

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
