
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Queensland - before 18 January 2022 003-20092301

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details specific to the Queensland Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment.

Different eligibility criteria applies depending on a customer’s period
of self-isolation, quarantine or caring. Confirm the period the customer
is claiming before assessing their claim.

For claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, claims will
not be accepted from 29 July 2022.

Claims periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

All claims received for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring
that start from (on or after) 18 January 2022, for:

-   eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   phone claims, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted
    Customer Claims
-   processing, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
    Process Direct

Claims for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start on
or before 17 January 2022, continue following this procedure.

Assessing and coding claims

To be eligible for the Queensland Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, a
customer must reside in Queensland. Staff must select the correct
Queensland workflow.

For all other eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

To code claims, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in
Customer First.

Payment period

The payment period for the payment is any date that occurs from 7
October 2020.

There are different payment rates and eligibility criteria, depending on
the period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring the customer is
claiming.

Claiming period

A customer’s period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring must start
on or before 30 June 2022.

They have until 28 July 2022 to claim. No claims will be accepted from
29 July 2022.

Customers who receive a state related COVID-19 payment are not eligible

Customers are not eligible to receive a Queensland Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment if they have received or applied to receive the
Queensland Hardship Payment, on any day of the same period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring claimed.

Note: this payment is no longer available to claim. However, staff must
confirm a customer did not receive this payment for any past periods of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring they are claiming.

Lodging claims

There are different claiming options depending on the period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring a customer is claiming. See Lodging
claims.

Required authority for 'informed to self-isolate or quarantine'

The required authority is ‘health official’.

A ‘health official’ being:

-   Queensland Health, or
-   a person who is employed by a state or regional department of health

Workflow titles

On 9 December 2021, Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment policy changed.

Before assessing a claim and selecting a workflow, check the period the
customer is claiming.

If a customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring that starts between 9 December 2021 and 17 January 2022
(inclusive), select:

QLD Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - AU Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

QLD Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - Non-AU Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

If the customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine
or caring that starts before 9 December 2021, (that is, up to and
including 8 December 2021), select:

Queensland Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Australian Resident if the
customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

Queensland Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Non-Australian Resident if
the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website, claim
forms, visa subclass numbers, event specific keywords and scenarios.

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
