
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - New South Wales - before 18 January 2022 003-20090709

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains details specific to the New South Wales Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment.

Different eligibility criteria applies depending on a customer’s period
of self-isolation, quarantine or caring. Confirm the period the customer
is claiming before assessing their claim.

For claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, claims will
not be accepted from 29 July 2022.

Claims periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

All claims received for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring
that start from (on or after) 18 January 2022, for:

-   eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   phone claims, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted
    Customer Claims
-   processing, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
    Process Direct

Claims for periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring that start on
or before 17 January 2022, continue following this procedure.

Assessing and coding claims

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring from 5 July to 16
September 2020, to determine the correct state or territory procedure to
follow, see Some claims will be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment.

For periods of self-isolation, quarantine or caring from 17 September
2020, to be eligible for the New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment, the customer must reside in New South Wales. Staff must select
the correct New South Wales

workflow.

For all other eligibility criteria, see Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

To code claims, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in
Customer First.

Payment period

The payment period for the New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment is any date that occurs from 17 September 2020.

There are different payment rates and eligibility criteria, depending on
the period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring the customer is
claiming.

Some claims will be assessed under Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

From 5 July to 16 September 2020, the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment allowed New South Wales (NSW) residents to claim a payment for a
period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring if they worked in
Victoria.

If a NSW resident lodges a claim for a period that:

ends before 17 September 2020 (and they were working in Victoria at the
time) - they must apply for the Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts on or after 17 September 2020 (regardless of where they were
working) but no later than 17 January 2022 - they must apply for the New
South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

starts before 17 September 2020 and ends on or after 17 September 2020
(regardless of where they were working) - Services Australia will assess
the claim under the New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. If
the customer is:

-   eligible, their claim is processed as New South Wales Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment
-   not eligible, their claim is assessed to see if they are eligible
    under the Victorian Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (noting they
    must have been working in Victoria at the time of the
    self-isolation, quarantining or caring period as part of eligibility
    requirements)

See the scenarios about eligibility for either New South Wales or
Victoria Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

For help, contact the Technical Peer Support.

Claiming period

A customer’s period of self-isolation, quarantine or caring must start
on or before 30 June 2022.

They have until 28 July 2022 to claim. No claims will be accepted from
29 July 2022.

Customers who receive a state related COVID-19 payment are not eligible

Customers are not eligible for a New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment if they have received or applied to receive the NSW $320 Test
and Isolate support payment, on any day of the same period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring claimed. Note: applications for
this payment closed 31 January 2022.

Test Isolation Payment

Customers are no longer able to apply for the New South Wales
Government’s $320 Coronavirus (COVID-19) Test Isolation Payment as
applications for this payment closed on 31 January 2022.

Services Australia does not assess claims for this payment. Customers
should contact the New South Wales Government.

Lodging claims

There are different claiming options depending on the period of
self-isolation, quarantine or caring a customer is claiming. See Lodging
claims.

Required authority for 'informed to self-isolate or quarantine'

For ‘informed to self-isolate or quarantine the required authority is a
'health official'. This means either:

-   NSW Health,
-   a person who is employed by a state or regional department of
    health, or
-   NSW Department of Education
-   Note: NSW Department of Education, that is, any New South Wales
    school:
    - is acting as a contact tracer on behalf of NSW Health
    - must have contacted the customer directly by email or letter (and
    the letter or email must include the name of the child (as a close
    contact) or the name of the parent or guardian of the child who is
    an identified close contact)

Workflow titles

On 9 December 2021, Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment policy changed.

Before assessing a claim and selecting a workflow, check the period the
customer is claiming.

If a customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine or
caring that starts between 9 December 2021 and 17 January 2022
(inclusive), select:

NSW Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - AU Resident if the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

NSW Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment (09 December 2021 to 17 January
2022) - Non-AU Resident if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

If the customer is claiming for a period of self-isolation, quarantine
or caring that starts before 9 December 2021, (that is, up to and
including 8 December 2021), select:

New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Australian Resident if
the customer is:

-   an Australian resident
-   a permanent visa holder
-   a protected special category visa (SCV) holder

New South Wales Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Non-Australian Resident
if the customer is:

-   a non-Australian resident
-   the holder of a temporary visa that has a work right

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has links to the Services Australia website, claim
forms, visa subclass numbers, event specific keywords and scenarios.

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
