
New claim for Crisis Payment - National Health Emergency 003-20032726

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to identify if a customer is qualified to
receive Crisis Payment (CrP) for the coronavirus (COVID-19) National
Health Emergency (NHE).

Eligibility for CrP

For common eligibility criteria, definition of severe financial hardship
and rate of payment, see Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP).

Determination of CrP-NHE

Service Officers should determine eligibility for CrP-NHE by assessing:

-   answers given in the claim
-   evidence of a COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test or
    result uploaded by the customer (negative or positive result)
-   evidence the customer has reported the positive rapid antigen test
    (RAT) result to the appropriate health registry in their state or
    territory and the date of the test was on or after 13 January 2022
-   evidence of bank balance as proof of financial hardship (only needed
    if the customer updated bank balance details in their claim)

Determine if the customer:

-   was required by the Commonwealth, a state/territory government or a
    health professional to quarantine/self-isolate, or
-   needs to care for an immediate family member, or member of their
    household, who was required to quarantine/self-isolate
-   had a COVID-19 PCR test or has returned a positive RAT
-   has previously been paid CrP-NHE for the same event
-   is in financial hardship (customers do not need to provide proof of
    financial hardship if the bank balance details were not updated in
    their claim)
-   has claimed CrP-NHE within 14 days after the start of the quarantine
    or isolation period. The 14 day claim period may be met by
    contacting Services Australia about a claim in that period and
    making a claim within 14 days after the contact day
-   for test dates on or between 1 July 2022 and 19 July 2022 refer to
    special deemed claim provisions apply

Note:

People who have had a COVID-19 PCR test must quarantine/self-isolate
while they wait for their results, even if they live in an area without
any active cases and even if the PCR result is negative. This
requirement entitles the person to CrP-NHE if all other eligibility
criteria are met after having a PCR test. Customers undergoing a RAT are
only eligible to CrP-NHE if the test is positive, as the result is
instantaneous, and confirms the requirement to self-isolate.

Some people may need to quarantine/isolate more than once after multiple
COVID-19 PCR tests (negative or positive), or positive RAT (even if they
were only recently in quarantine/self-isolation).

A person may qualify for a CrP-NHE while in quarantine/self-isolating at
home, in a motel/hotel, or any other appropriate place.

A health professional is a doctor, hospital staff or pathology services.

An immediate family member is a partner, child, parent, sibling,
grandchild or grandparent of the person.

The period of quarantine or self-isolation can vary depending on the
customer's circumstances, for example:

a day or more if waiting for COVID-19 PCR test results

14 days if returned from overseas and in mandated quarantine

more than 14 days if:

-   the person is diagnosed with COVID-19 and needs an extra
    self-isolation period(s) including a positive RAT or PCR
-   the person needs to be retested for COVID-19 and re-enter isolation

The following customers are not eligible for a CrP-NHE:

-   People who are staying home because they have an existing health
    condition, even if told to do so by a health professional. They are
    not considered to meet the definition of 'required' to isolate
-   People who are staying home but still able to go out to complete
    essential activities, such as shopping or work. For example, people
    in restricted movement/lock down who can still leave their homes for
    essential reasons
-   People self-isolating to prevent getting COVID-19
-   People claiming CrP-NHE to care for a person who is in
    quarantine/self-isolation in a hospital, as care is being provided
    by hospital staff
-   A person who is caring for one of the above people
-   A person who has self-tested for COVID-19 using a rapid antigen test
    and received a negative result
-   A person who has self-tested for COVID-19 using a rapid antigen test
    and provided only a photo of the test cartridge with an event date
    from 7 March 2022

The Resources page has a number of examples.

Contacting customers

Contact with the customer is only needed if:

-   the uploaded COVID-19 test is not legible
-   the customer needed to provide evidence of bank balance as proof of
    financial hardship and is not legible
-   the customer is 'no fixed address' and confirmation of
    self-isolation or quarantine in an appropriate place needs to be
    established

Claiming CrP-NHE

Customers can claim CrP-NHE:

-   [A self service option is available for customers.]online (CCM
    applies) as a standalone claim
-   verbally through Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   by lodging a completed SU717 claim form submitted via their
    Centrelink online account or by post

Note: from 1 August 2021, the available claiming channels are online or
verbal claim (ACC) as the paper claim (SU717) was decommissioned from
the Services Australia website and the Forms intranet page. Paper forms
may still be in circulation in the community and may continue to be
submitted. If an SU717 is submitted, it must be processed, as the form
remains an approved manner of claim.

The customer must lodge the claim from within Australia.

Evidence requirements for CrP-NHE claims

Evidence of a COVID-19 test:

Customers must give evidence of:

-   a COVID-19 PCR test notification or result (positive or negative),
    or
-   a positive RAT result reported to the appropriate health registry in
    their state or territory on or after 13 January 2022

Evidence of financial hardship:

Customers must give evidence of their existing savings account balance/s
only if they updated these details in the claim.

Determining if COVID-19 test evidence is acceptable:

The evidence can be:

-   PCR test notification, a screen shot of a text message sent directly
    to the customer or the person they are caring for from a pathology
    service, state health service or doctor’s surgery advising that the
    test was done and the date
-   PCR test, a screen shot of a text message sent directly to the
    customer or the person they are caring for from a pathology service,
    state health service or doctor’s surgery with the test result
    (positive or negative) and the date
-   scanned document or photo of an ‘attendance certificate’ for a PCR
    test from a pathology service, state health service or doctor’s
    surgery with the test date
-   SMS, email notification or letter confirming the customer has
    notified the positive RAT to their state or territory registry on or
    after 13 January 2022, with the test date being on or after this
    date. If the date of the RAT is provided in the notification, it
    must correspond with the test date the customer has provided in
    their claim

Note:

-   If evidence is provided of a PCR test (positive or negative), it
    must show the date of the test
-   Evidence of reporting a positive RAT from customers in Western
    Australia will not have a date of test, only the date the test was
    registered. The self-declaration of the isolation date provided in
    the claim must be accepted in these cases. All other states and
    territories include dates relating to the isolation period in the
    notification. The date (depending on the state or territory) must
    correspond with the isolation start date stated by the customer in
    the claim. See the Process page for more details

It is not sufficient for a person to give a notice that they need to
self-isolate or quarantine. For example, close contact notification. The
person, or the person they are caring for, must give evidence that they
have been tested and need to self-isolate as a requirement after:

-   a PCR test (positive or negative), as it is a health requirement to
    isolate after being PCR tested awaiting results, or
-   reporting a positive RAT to the appropriate health registry in their
    state or territory and being required to self-isolate according to
    mandated state or territory health requirements

If a customer provides evidence that appears to be fraudulent, the claim
must be rejected and reported through the Report Suspected Fraud and
Corruption form.

The customer’s name does not need to be on the evidence.

Payment of CrP-NHE

Crisis Payment is equal to half (50%) of the maximum fortnightly basic
rate of the customer’s income support payment or ABSTUDY Living
Allowance. It does not include extra allowances or supplements.

If a person or the person they are caring for is required to
self-isolate after being tested for COVID-19, they may be eligible for 2
CrP-NHE payments within a rolling 6 month period. Customers already
granted the 2 payments within that period cannot submit more claims
online.

If a customer has a payment nominee arrangement in place, the payment
will be made to the payment nominee and not to the customer.

Deemed claim provisions

Deemed claim provisions apply to any customer who intends to claim
CrP-NHE.

A customer has 14 days from the start date of the period of
quarantine/isolation to:

-   register their intent to claim CrP-NHE
-   register their intent to claim a payment or concession card

If a customer contacts within 14 days of the quarantine/isolation
starting, the customer has 14 days from the contact date to lodge the
claim.

For periods of quarantine/isolation starting on or between 1 July 2022
and 19 July 2022, customers must register their intent to claim:

-   CrP-NHE on or before 2 August 2022
-   a payment or concession card on or before 2 August 2022

If an intent to claim is made, customers have a further 14 days from the
contact date to lodge the claim. If no intent to claim is made, claim
must be submitted on or before 2 August 2022.

The Resources page explains 'contact' for intent to claim and deemed
claims.

Social worker involvement, including family and domestic violence

Claims for CrP-NHE do not require a social worker assessment.

A referral to a social worker must be offered if a customer indicates
they have been impacted by family and domestic violence.

See New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence.

Notification of decision

After assessment of a CrP-NHE claim, the customer will be automatically
sent:

-   a CRPGR (grant) letter, or
-   a CRPRE (reject) letter

The letter will include review and appeal rights.

Customers with a Managed Service Plan (MSP)

If a customer has an MSP in place, see Customer service delivered
through a One Main Contact (OMC) as part of an MSP.

Service Officers must follow the correct servicing arrangements for MSPs
as per Operational Blueprint when assessing CrP claims. This is for
consistent servicing for this group of customers.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Raising a debt for a CrP

If a customer has been paid CrP incorrectly, a debt is required to be
raised. See Fixing an incorrect Crisis Payment (CrP).

The Resources page has the meaning of 'contact' for intent to claim and
deemed claims and examples.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
