
AGDRP (Special Supplement) 003-22030928

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This payment is only for customers who:
- received AGDRP or NZ DRP for the New South Wales Floods – February
2022, and
- reside in an eligible area at the time of being impacted by the New
South Wales Floods – February 2022.

The date a customer will be paid the AGDRP (Special Supplement) depends
on when they were paid AGDRP or NZ DRP and the eligible area they reside
in. See When a customer will be paid.

This document explains the purpose and eligibility criteria for the
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (Special Supplement) -
AGDRP (Special Supplement).

Purpose of the AGDRP (Special Supplement)

The purpose of the AGDRP (Special Supplement) is to help customers
significantly affected by the flooding that occurred in New South Wales
in February 2022.

What is the AGDRP (Special Supplement)?

Where a customer meets the eligibility criteria, the AGDRP (Special
Supplement) is 2 instalments, made seven days apart, of:

-   $1,000 per eligible adult, and
-   $400 for each child the eligible adult is the principal carer of

Note: the date a customer will be paid their 2 instalments will depend
on when they were paid AGDRP or NZ DRP and the eligible area they reside
in. See When a customer will be paid.

This means in addition to receiving AGDRP or NZ DRP of $1,000 per
eligible adult and $400 per eligible child, a customer will receive an
additional amount in total of

-   $2,000 per eligible adult, and
-   $800 per eligible child.

The AGDRP (Special Supplement) is:

-   payable in addition to any pension or benefit the customer may be
    receiving
-   exempt from tax and from all Australian Government means testing
    arrangements and waiting periods
-   not subject to compulsory income management

Services Australia will pay eligible individuals directly to their
Australian bank account. AGDRP (Special Supplement) cannot be paid
‘in-kind’ assistance such as vouchers or goods.

Eligibility for the AGDRP (Special Supplement)

A customer is eligible for the AGDRP (Special Supplement) if they:

received AGDRP or NZ DRP for the New South Wales Floods – February 2022,
and

reside in one of the following eligible areas at the time of being
impacted by the New South Wales Floods – February 2022

-   Local government area (LGA) of:
    - Ballina
    - Byron
    - Clarence Valley
    - Kyogle
    - Lismore
    - Richmond Valley
    - Tweed

‘Reside in’ means a customer has been granted AGDRP or NZ DRP for at
least one of the following:

-   their principal place of residence being destroyed or suffering
    major damage in one of the eligible areas, or
-   major damage to their major assets at their principal place of
    residence in one of the eligible areas, or
-   being seriously injured and their residential address is in one of
    the eligible areas, or
-   being an immediate family member of a person killed or missing as a
    direct result of the disaster and their residential address is in
    one of the eligible areas

This means a customer will not be eligible to receive the AGDRP (Special
Supplement) where:

-   they have been granted AGDRP or NZ DRP for being seriously injured
    or being an immediate family member of a person killed or missing,
    and
-   their residential address is not in an eligible area

Services Australia may rely on and use all information provided by a
customer in their AGDRP or NZ DRP claim to determine eligibility for the
AGDRP (Special Supplement).

A person can qualify for the AGDRP (Special Supplement) and

-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or
-   New Zealand DRA (NZ DRA)

Eligible areas

Eligible areas for the AGDRP (Special Supplement) are the following
areas declared for the New South Wales Floods – February 2022

Local government area (LGA) of:

-   Ballina
-   Byron
-   Clarence Valley
-   Kyogle
-   Lismore
-   Richmond Valley
-   Tweed

To receive the AGDRP (Special Supplement), customers must:

-   have received AGDRP or NZ DRP for the New South Wales Floods –
    February 2022 and
-   reside in an eligible area at the time of being impacted by the New
    South Wales Floods – February 2022

See Eligibility for the AGDRP (Special Supplement)

Claiming the AGDRP (Special Supplement)

Customers do not need to claim for the AGDRP (Special Supplement).

Services Australia will automatically make the payment to eligible
customers.

The date a customer will be paid their 2 instalments of the AGDRP
(Special Supplement) will depend on when they were paid AGDRP or NZ DRP
and the eligible area they reside in. See When a customer will be paid.

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received an instalment of
the AGDRP (Special Supplement), see If payments fall out of automation.

When a customer will be paid

Where a customer is eligible for the AGDRP (Special Supplement), AGDRP
or NZ DRP will be paid first. That is, the customer must have:

-   received AGDRP or NZ DRP before AGDRP (Special Supplement) will be
    paid, and
-   been eligible to receive the initial payment of AGDRP or NZ DRP

If staff identify a customer did not meet the eligibility criteria for
the initial AGDRP or NZ DRP, see If staff identify a customer should not
have been paid AGDRP or NZ DRP.

When a customer will be paid their 2 instalments of the AGDRP (Special
Supplement) depends on

-   when they were paid AGDRP or NZ DRP, and
-   the eligible area they reside in

Eligible areas of Clarence Valley, Lismore and Richmond Valley

Customers paid AGDRP or NZ DRP on or before 8 March 2022 will receive
the:

-   first AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment on 15 March 2022
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child
-   second AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment on 22 March 2022
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child

Customers paid AGDRP or NZ DRP on or after 9 March 2022 will receive
the:

-   first AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment 7 days later
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child
-   second AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment 7 days after that
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child

Eligible areas of Ballina, Byron, Kyogle and Tweed

Customers paid AGDRP or NZ DRP on or before 15 March 2022 will receive
the:

-   first AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment on 22 March 2022
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child
-   second AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment on 29 March 2022
-   - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child

Customers paid AGDRP or NZ DRP on or after 16 March 2022 will receive
the:

-   first AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment 7 days later
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child
-   second AGDRP (Special Supplement) instalment 7 days after that
    - $1,000 per eligible adult
    - $400 per eligible child

Note:

-   Paid AGDRP or NZ DRP is not the same as when an AGDRP or NZ DRP
    claim is granted. That is, AGDRP and NZ DRP may not be paid to the
    customer’s bank account on the same day their AGDRP or NZ DRP claim
    is granted automatically by the system or manually by a Service
    Officer
-   Staff must carefully check the date AGDRP or NZ DRP was paid to
    determine when a customer should be paid an instalment of the AGDRP
    (Special Supplement), as the method of payment may have failed and
    issued overnight
-   If a customer was paid an additional amount of AGDRP of NZ DRP for a
    dependent child or secondary claimant (NZ DRP only), as these were
    not included in their initial AGDRP or NZ DRP claim, this could
    impact the automatic delivery dates for the AGDRP (Special
    Supplement). These instances will be escalated automatically and
    will be paid as soon as possible. Staff do not need to take any
    further action

See If payments fall out of automation when a customer is eligible to
receive the AGDRP (Special Supplement) and they have not received their

-   first instalment of the AGDRP (Special Supplement) more than 7 days
    after receiving their initial payment of AGDRP or NZ DRP, or
-   second instalment of the AGDRP (Special Supplement) more than 7 days
    after receiving their first instalment

If payments fall out of automation

Customers should receive their

-   first instalment of the AGDRP (Special Supplement) within 7 days of
    receiving their initial payment of AGDRP or NZ DRP
-   second instalment of the AGDRP (Special Supplement) within 7 days of
    receiving their first instalment

If a customer contacts to advise they have not received a payment as
expected, staff need to check the customer’s record to determine the
action to be taken.

See Table 1

If staff identify a customer should not have been paid AGDRP or NZ DRP

If staff identify a customer was not eligible to receive the initial
payment of AGDRP or NZ DRP, these claims must be escalated.

See Table 1 and AGDRP or NZ DRP was incorrectly paid.

If a customer was paid for a different major disaster

Some customers may have been paid for a different major disaster, and
not the New South Wales Floods - February 2022.

For example, a customer:

-   accidentally claimed the South East Queensland Floods - February
    2022
-   had major damage to a principal place of residence in the LGA of
    Lismore
-   should have claimed and been paid for the New South Wales Floods -
    February 2022 and
-   meets all eligibility criteria for the AGDRP (Special Supplement)

Staff must not correct the major disaster claimed or create a minimum
standards ACTDOC with debt information for the incorrect major disaster
paid.

See Table 1.

Review

If a customer does not understand or agree with the reason/s for an
AGDRP (Special Supplement) decision, they will need to request a review
of the original AGDRP or NZ DRP decision. See Review and appeal process.

Method of payment

Eligible customers will receive the payment into their nominated
Australian bank account.

The AGDRP (Special Supplement) will be paid via the New Payment Platform
(NPP).

If an account is NPP reachable, but the payment fails to deliver, it
will automatically re-issue via Real Time Gross Settlement if available,
or via direct credit.

A recoverable payment

Services Australia undertakes checks to identify fraudulent claims.

If the agency does not have power under the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013 to pay an amount of the AGDRP
(Special Supplement) to a customer, then the relevant amount is a debt
due to the Commonwealth by the customer, and may be recovered.

See Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments.

Related links

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

New South Wales Floods – February 2022

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments

Assessing Special Benefit (SpB) entitlements

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
