
Unsupported under 16 year olds to be immediately referred to a Services Australia social worker 003-12030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines referring unsupported under 16 year olds to a
Services Australia social worker.

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Social worker referral

Services Australia has a responsibility to immediately refer unsupported
young people under 16 years of age to Services Australia's social
workers.

Procedure for liaison and referral with state/territory welfare departments

State/territory welfare departments are generally responsible for the
financial support and safety of independent young people under 15 years
and young people who are subject to a guardianship, care or custody
order. Service Officers are still required to refer all unsupported
young people under 16 years of age to a Services Australia social
worker.

Note: the Commonwealth and state/territory Youth Protocol is no longer
in force however, the principles still apply. The principles inform
referral procedures by which young people who are unsupported and at
risk are referred from the Commonwealth to state and territory Welfare
Authorities for assessment and support.

Services Australia social workers will be the point of liaison and
referral between the Department of Social Services and State and
Territory Welfare Authorities.

Any release of information in the public interest to a state or
territory child protection agency must be recorded on the release of
information form, to be reviewed and filed by the Information Release
team.

The Resources page contains links to the Public Interest Release of
Information form, Contact details and the Youth Protective Assessment
principles.

Related links

Assisting a customer aged under 16

Social worker's role regarding Youth Protective Assessments

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
