
Accessing a PST-skilled social worker 003-12080010

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child's safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

For PST-skilled Service Officers and PST-skilled social workers only.

This document explains when to access a Participation Solutions Team
(PST)-skilled social worker.

Key principles

PST-skilled social workers support Service Officers to identify customer
circumstances and how they impact their capacity to meet compulsory
requirements.

Consultation can occur during a:

-   Capability Assessment
-   Failure Investigation, or
-   Comprehensive Compliance Assessment

Each consult is an opportunity to build staff capability and improve the
quality of decisions and outcome for customers.

PST-skilled Service Officers should investigate and use available
information when deciding how the customer's circumstance(s) are
impacting on their capacity to comply.

PST-skilled Service Officers and PST-skilled social workers will attempt
to finalise decisions at first contact.

Consultation with a PST-skilled social worker during a Capability Assessment or Failure Investigation

A PST-skilled Service Officer must consult where the customer:

-   presents with family and domestic violence, or
-   has an assessed Circumstances Impacting Compliance (CiC) of 'Family
    relationships/Domestic violence' recorded for family and domestic
    violence

A PST-skilled Service Officer can consult where the customer meets one
of the following:

-   presents with mental health issues
-   has an assessed CiC of 'Medical conditions - Mental health'
-   is in crisis and has complex personal circumstances
-   receives Youth Allowance, especially if in receipt of Unreasonable
    to Live at Home rate

Referral to a PST-skilled social worker to undertake a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

PST-skilled Service Officers decide which CCA specialist is the most
appropriate based on the customer's individual circumstances. For more
details, see Generating and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance
Assessment (CCA).

Customers must be assessed by a PST-skilled social worker where it is
not a review CCA and the customer meets one of the following:

is in receipt of Youth Allowance

presents with, or the ‘Circumstances Impacting Compliance’ screen
identifies, either:

-   Medical conditions – mental health (MHI), or
-   Family relationship/Domestic violence (FMR)

is in crisis and there are exceptional circumstances identified

Referral to a social worker once compliance action is complete

If a customer needs social work help after all compliance action is
completed, the PST-skilled Service Officer can make a general referral
to the Social Work Line. See Social work service referral.

Related links

Social work role in the Participation Solutions Team (PST)

Recording participation and compliance interventions in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS)

Services Australia's responsibilities for managing compliance with
compulsory requirements

Generating and preparing for a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Completing a Comprehensive Compliance Assessment (CCA)

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
