
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document outlines the writing of social worker assessments and
reports. When social work assessments are required, there should be a
clear understanding about the reason for the referral and what the
social work assessment and report is expected to achieve.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour that raises
concerns about a child's safety, Services Australia sets out specific
steps that must be taken.

Follow the agency's Risk Identification and Reporting model when
identifying and responding to child safety concerns. See Risk
identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare of a
child for more information about this model and the agency's commitment
to child safety.

Reasons for assessment

Social work professional assessments and reports are required for a
range of reasons, including the following delegated assessments:

-   Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments
-   Crisis Payment (Domestic and Family Violence) claims
-   Child Support maintenance exemptions
-   Vulnerable Welfare Payment Recipient (VWPR)

Quality professional report writing is an important component of social
work service delivery for customers. The content and quality of social
work reports reflects social work values and ethics and represents the
profession to a potentially extensive audience. It documents the
professional interventions and decision-making processes. Effective
report writing is essential to quality assurance and accountability.

Requirement for assessment

A referral may not always require a report, a social work case note in
the Social Work Information System (SWIS), or a DOC may be more
appropriate in some cases.

The Resources page contains a link to the Records Management homepage.

Related links

Requirements for recording of social work customer contact activities

Storing scanned documents

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (including Fast Notes and DOA
DOCs)

Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
