
Recording unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) assessments for customers under 18 years of age - social work 003-12130080

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document outlines the different categories and fields used by
Services Australia social workers to record unreasonable to live at home
(UTLAH) assessments in the Social Work Recording Application (SWRA) in
Process Direct and the Social Work Information System (SWIS) in Customer
First.

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour that raises
concerns about a child's safety, Services Australia sets out specific
steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk Identification and
Reporting model, when identifying and responding to child safety
concerns. See: Risk identification and management of threats to the
safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this model
and the agency's commitment to child safety.

Under 18 assessments

The under 18 UTLAH assessment is often the most complex of all social
work interventions. The mandatory actions of the assessment include:

-   interviewing the customer
-   interviewing one or both of the parents (biological, adoptive or
    relationship parents)
-   interviewing the third party, and
-   writing a report

Social casework

Customers who have had an UTLAH assessment may be considered suitable
for social casework. Social casework involves repeated contact with a
young person and/or their family and/or a member of the young person's
social support network beyond the assessment and review processes
involved in granting or rejecting UTLAH, see Social casework. To refer a
customer for social casework see the Social casework referral table in
Social work services referral.

Customer over 18

Service Officers do the UTLAH assessment when the customer is over 18
the SWRA and SWIS are not used. See Assessing unreasonable to live at
home (UTLAH) for customers claiming or receiving Youth Allowance (YA),
Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or Tertiary
Access Payment (TAP).

Related links

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Conducting a social worker unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
assessment

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
