
New claim for Crisis Payment after customer released from prison or psychiatric confinement 003-07030030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the new claim process for customers just released
from prison or psychiatric confinement after being charged with
committing an offence. It also includes service issues for assessing the
main payment, Crisis Payment (CrP).

Prison release processes

Prison release processes covered in this document include:

-   deferring debt recovery for one month
-   recording information on the Circumstances Impacting Compliance
    screen
-   giving a temporary exemption from their mutual obligation
    requirements
-   offering an interim concession card
-   accepting a CrP claim
-   assessing a CrP claim
-   confirming eligibility of a CrP claim
-   processing the CrP claim
-   checking of the Marital (MS) screen

See Eligibility for Crisis Payment.

Timeframe for claim

A customer must contact Centrelink within 7 days of the date of release
from prison or psychiatric confinement.

After the initial contact, the customer must lodge the claim within 14
days. See Within 7 days after the extreme circumstance occurred.

If the date of the extreme circumstance was more than 7 days ago, the
customer may still qualify if there was contact about a CrP, or seeking
a payment or concession card within 7 days of release from prison or
psychiatric confinement.

One claim per circumstance

Only 1 CrP can be made for the same circumstances. For example if a
customer is paid CrP under the Social Security Act 1991, then becomes an
ABSTUDY customer, they cannot claim another CrP under ABSTUDY policy for
the same circumstances.

Method of payment

The preferred method of payment is New Payments Platform (NPP), Real
Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) or direct credit.

The Resources page has links to contact details, rejection codes and
reasons, error and warning messages, forms, prison servicing information
and contacts, referrals, peak post release NGO services and intranet
links.

Related links

Confirming prison admission and release dates

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for prison release
customers

Identifying barriers to participation for prison release customers

Income Management and Cashless Debit Card customers entering or leaving
prison

Referral to external support services

Replacing payments paid to prison trust account via direct credit

Return of payments paid to prison trust account via direct credit

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
