
Family and domestic violence 003-15000000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

Customers in immediate danger or at risk of harm must call 000.

If you have concerns about a child’s safety, follow the risk and
referral process.

This document explains how Service Officers and other staff across
Services Australia can recognise, support and appropriately refer
customers who may be affected by family and domestic violence. It covers
the Risk Identification and Referral (RIR) Model.

Family and Domestic Violence Strategy

This outlines the agency's commitment to help staff and customers
affected by family and domestic violence by providing information,
referrals and support.

The Resources page links to the Family and Domestic Violence Strategy
intranet page for more information.

What is family and domestic violence

Family and domestic violence is conduct that is violent, threatening,
coercive or controlling, or causes a person to be fearful.

It can include (but is not limited to):

-   abuse of older Australians
-   physical violence
-   sexual assault and other sexually abusive behaviour
-   economic (financial) abuse, such as taking control of a person’s
    money without permission
-   emotional or psychological abuse, such as controlling behaviour
-   stalking, following or harassment
-   kidnapping or deprivation of liberty
-   neglect where there is a relationship of dependence, such as denying
    food or access to support
-   causing or threatening damage to property
-   causing injury or death to an animal
-   causing or threatening injury to others
-   verbal abuse, such as insults or degrading someone
-   technology-facilitated abuse, such as constant texting or monitoring
    online activities
-   spiritual or cultural abuse, such as denying access to cultural
    events and/or religious practices
-   exposing a child to these behaviours

Family and domestic violence happens in many types of relationships,
including past or current intimate relationships. It can also happen in
relationships involving carers, relatives or guardians, kinship groups
and other family groups recognised by various cultures and communities.

Some people may be particularly vulnerable to family and domestic
violence, including:

-   Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
-   children and young people
-   people with disability
-   people experiencing financial hardship
-   people who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex
    and others (LGBTI+)
-   people living in rural, remote and regional areas
-   women at particular stages of life, such as young women, pregnant
    women, new mothers and women separating from their partners
-   refugees and newly arrived migrants

The Resources page links to the Information for vulnerable communities
intranet page for more information.

Abuse of older Australians is a form of family and domestic violence.
Abuse of older people includes any form of violence or mistreatment that
causes harm or distress to an older person. This includes physical,
sexual, psychological, financial, and social abuse and neglect of older
Australians. It can be unintentional or deliberate and occurs within a
relationship of trust. It is also known as elder abuse.

Role of Service Officers and staff

Service Officers are not expected to be experts in family and domestic
violence. Their role is to:

-   identify family and domestic violence concerns and
-   respond appropriately by offering referrals to available resources,
    social workers or other service providers

Supporting customers affected by family and domestic violence

The agency helps people who are concerned about family and domestic
violence access payments, services and support. This includes people
affected by family and domestic violence, and also people who perpetrate
violence.

When supporting customers affected by family and domestic violence, it
is important to recognise that family and domestic violence is
traumatic. Therefore, a customer may find speaking to the agency about
family and domestic violence extremely challenging. They may fear for
their safety in speaking out. It is important for all staff to:

-   be sensitive and respectful
-   be non-judgemental
-   be aware that it may be difficult for customers to access and
    provide documents, so use other processes if available
-   be aware of the impact that family and domestic violence may have on
    the customer's ability to make informed decisions that are free of
    intimidation

The agency can become aware that a customer is affected by family and
domestic violence in a number of ways. These include:

-   when the customer discloses they are affected by family and domestic
    violence
-   observing and listening for certain visual, conversational and
    administrative cues, and
-   using the RIR Model at key interaction points to ask the customer if
    they are concerned about the safety of themselves or their family

Supporting customers who self-disclose they perpetrate family and domestic violence

Do not ask a customer the Risk Identification Question (RIQ) if they
disclose they perpetrate violence against a partner or family member.

However, these customers can be referred to relevant services, both
internally and externally. For example, MensLine Australia, Men’s
Referral Service, and/or to an agency social worker to assess
eligibility for Crisis Payment.

Family and Domestic Violence Risk Identification and Referral (RIR) Model

The RIR Model supports staff to:

-   proactively identify customers affected by family and domestic
    violence, and
-   offer appropriate referrals information, resources and support

Support services and referrals are offered to all customers who have
concerns about family and domestic violence, if they are:

-   affected by family and domestic violence, or
-   a person who has or continues to perpetrate violence against a
    partner or family member

Family and domestic violence referral services

There are national and state referral services for those affected by
family and domestic violence.

See Family and domestic violence – external referral services.

Family and domestic violence and COVID-19 Vaccination certificates

If a customer is affected by family and domestic violence, and having
proof of COVID-19 vaccination causes them safety concerns, there is
support available. Services Australia can help customers access safer
options for their circumstances, for example:

-   Add their digital COVID-19 certificate to a digital wallet. Their
    device may allow a customer to use a security pass code to use Apple
    Wallet or Google Pay. They can set up or change their security pass
    code through their Settings
-   A customer’s vaccination provider can print their immunisation
    history statement for them. Customers can also call the Australian
    Immunisation Register and ask for proof to be sent to them. It can
    take up to 14 days for a customer’s statement or certificate to
    arrive in the post
-   If a customer is concerned about unauthorised activity to their
    online accounts, or the security of their Centrelink, Child Support
    or Medicare records, they can let Services Australia know. If
    someone else has access to a customer’s online accounts, they can
    change their passwords at any time

The Resources page has links to national and state family and domestic
violence services, intranet links, Services Australia website links,
guides and scenarios for helping customers affected by family and
domestic violence.

Related links

Centrelink

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

New claim for Crisis Payment under extreme circumstances family and
domestic violence

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Social worker assessment for Crisis Payment (CrP) Extreme circumstances
family and domestic violence

Circumstances impacting capacity to comply with compulsory requirements

Child Support

Collecting child support payments privately and/or discharging arrears

Ending a Child Support assessment

Social worker and other service referrals for child support customers

Updating Child Support customer and assessment information

Conducting a social work child support exemption due to fear of family
and domestic violence or other circumstances

Medicare

Sensitive information indicators in the CDMS

Referrals

Customer Referral Guidelines

Specialist officers and other internal supports for customers

Referral to external support services

Social work services

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

Other

Abuse of older Australians

Identifying a package of services for customers recently separated or
divorced

Identifying and offering services to customers in crisis or needing
special help

Customer password on a Display on Access DOC

Customer password for Medicare enquiries

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

Reporting, recording and escalating incidents of customer aggression

Customer aggression – Reporting and recording incidents

Customer aggression - Escalating incidents

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
