
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) - November 2019 London attack 003-22022448

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains event-specific details about the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) for November 2019 London
attack AVTOP is a one off payment of up to $75,000. AVTOP provides
financial help to Australians who have been harmed as a direct result of
November 2019 London attack, or who are a close family member of a
person who has died as a direct result of November 2019 London attack.

Declared overseas terrorist act

The following terrorist act is a declared overseas terrorist act:

-   at Fishmongers Hall and London Bridge United Kingdom, at
    approximately 13:58 on 29 November 2019

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

Primary victims for November 2019 London attack have until 17 February
2024 to lodge a claim.

Secondary victim

Secondary victims have 12 months from the death of the close family
member to claim. The death of the close family member must be a direct
result of the declared terrorist act and have occurred within 2 years of
it.

For the November 2019 London attack, the close family member must have
died on or before 28 November 2021. The latest date Services Australia
will accept claims for secondary victims is 16 February 2023.

Note: this is not the closing date for all secondary victim claims. The
closing date for secondary victims depends on when their close family
member died as a direct result of the declared terrorist act.

Eligibility for AVTOP

A person is eligible for AVTOP if they were:

-   an Australian resident, or held a qualifying residence exemption, on
    the day the terrorist act occurred
-   in the location and harmed as a direct result of the terrorist act
    (primary victim), or are a close family member of a person who died
    as a direct result of a terrorist act (secondary victim), and
-   not involved in the commission of the terrorist act, and their
    family members were not involved in the commission of the terrorist
    act

There is no age limit.

Claims will be assessed on a case by case basis.

Maximum amount payable

If a customer is harmed (primary victim) and a close family member dies
as a direct result of the same terrorist act (secondary victim), the
maximum payment any person can receive is $150,000.

For example:

-   If a customer is harmed and also loses a close family member, they
    may qualify for up to $75,000 for their injuries and up to $75,000
    for the deceased close family member
-   If the deceased has multiple close family members, the $75,000
    payable for the deceased may be shared among the eligible family
    members who submit a claim

If a claim is lodged for 2 or more close family members who have died as
a direct result of the same declared terrorist act, the maximum payment
a person can receive is $75,000 as a secondary victim of the terrorist
act.

Proof of identity requirements

Customers will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents. See Confirming a customer’s identity and Identity
Confirmation.

A customer over the age of 16 will need to provide one document from
each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

If claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the customer may need to provide
identity documents for the child. These documents include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

Customers have up to 28 days to provide proof of identity documents,
with an extension granted in exceptional circumstances.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the payment, customers may call the Australian Victim
of Terrorism Overseas Hotline.

Customers may also download a claim form from the Services Australia
website and post the completed claim form and supporting documents.

Keywords

Once a claim has been uploaded into Customer First, the claim will need
to be indexed and have the keywords added.

Claims to be rejected will also need to be indexed with the relevant
keywords. The Resources page contains keywords for indexing a claim and
rejecting an unsuccessful claim.

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel advice

If possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable for the 6 months
before the November 2019 London attack.

For how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see Reductions
and Deductions for the AVTOP.

Withdrawal of claim

Customers may choose to withdraw their claim if it has not been
finalised.

Social worker referrals

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

For information on the role of social workers for AVTOP and how to refer
AVTOP customers to a social worker, see:

-   Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the AVTOP
-   Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the AVTOP

The Resources page has keywords for indexing and rejecting claims and
links to claim forms, contact details for the Level 2 Helpdesk and a map
of the affected areas.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
