
Western Australian Bushfires, February 2021 003-21020345

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines assistance for the Western Australian Bushfires,
February 2021.

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details, see Operational Blueprint – Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Emergency payments

On 3 February 2021, the Australian Government made a determination under
the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster occurred. Payments
activated for this event:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for non-protected New Zealand Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for non-protected New Zealand Special
    Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). This was known as
    ex-gratia DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For the Western Australian Bushfires, February 2021, major disaster
means:

the bushfires that started on 1 February 2021 in Western Australia
affecting the Local Government Areas (LGAs) of:

-   LGAs for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP claims. See the Resources page for
    questions to ask the customer to assess major damage and reasonably
    close to a bushfire
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

To record and code claims, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

LGAs for AGDRP and NZ DRP

-   Shire of Mundaring
-   City of Swan

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas:

-   to confirm if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA
-   to assess if a customer’s principal place of residence is reasonably
    close to the major disaster. This is to assess major damage caused
    by smoke or ash

Do not use Office Locator.

LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

-   Shire of Mundaring
-   City of Swan

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas. Use these to confirm
if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA.

Do not use Office Locator.

NZ DRP and NZ DRA tax participation

For NZ DRP .and NZ DRA, a customer must have participated in the
Australian taxation system for at least 1 year in the past 3 financial
years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20.

If they have not, they must do so before 3 February 2022.

Claiming period

Claims must be lodged by 2 August 2021.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.

How to claim

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

Claim forms are on the Services Australia website and intranet.

If a customer calls another agency phone number, complete a warm
(announced) transfer to:

-   the internal transfer number for this event only is 176 266
-   the full number is 02 8566 5533 - do not give this number to
    customers

For DRA or NZ DRA claims, (as staff have been specifically trained for
this event and payment type) complete a warm (announced) transfer to:

-   internal transfer number 171 534
-   full number 02 8440 2538 - do not give this number to customers. Use
    only if the internal transfer number cannot be used

For staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments,
before transferring the customer to the correct phone queue, see
Claiming emergency payments.

Workflow names

Staff must select the correct workflow names:

-   AGDRP: Western Australian Bushfires - February 2021 - Australian
    Government Disaster Recovery Payment
-   NZ DRP: Western Australian Bushfires - February 2021 - NZ Disaster
    Recovery Payment
-   DRA : Western Australian Bushfires - February 2021 - Disaster
    Recovery Allowance
-   NZ DRA: Western Australian Bushfires - February 2021 - NZ Disaster
    Recovery Allowance

For more information, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Rejecting claims

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.

Formal approval has been given to reject claims that do not meet the
eligibility criteria. This includes claims for:

-   declared LGAs, and
-   non-declared LGAs (claims held with the keyword NOTLGA)

Before rejecting any claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim Fast
Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure the
customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected. See the Rejecting claims table in either:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

If the customer wants to apply for ACCS, complete an announced (warm)
transfer to the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue using the
Services Australia Workspace.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are
Department of Home Affairs policy documents for each payment. Documents
include details for this event and customer scenarios.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) rate
    thresholds
-   maps of affected areas
-   links to Operational Messages, forms, scenarios and the Services
    Australia website
-   evacuation centres

Related links

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and ex-gratia
Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP)

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Recording and coding a DRA and NZ DRA claims

Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP) and Disaster
Recovery Allowance (DRA) and their ex-gratia equivalent claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Claiming Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP),
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or ex-gratia equivalent payments

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Payment rates for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) and ex-gratia DRA

Ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
