-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only.

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document explains the role Services Australia social workers have
in assessing the family situation of the children when a non-parent
carer makes an application to Child Support for child support payment
action, and there is no consent for the non-parent carer arrangement.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

Services Australia has a zero tolerance approach to child abuse.

A staff member must act when they see or hear behaviour, which raises
concern about a child or young person’s safety. Follow the agency's Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child.

Eligibility of non-parent carers

A non-parent carer, who is not a legal guardian of a child, can apply
for an assessment of child support, payable by the parent(s)/legal
guardian(s) of the child, if they have at least 35% shared care of the
child.

However, if at least one of the child's parent(s)/legal guardian(s) has
said that they do not consent to the person caring for the child, they
will not usually be considered an eligible carer for Child Support
purposes. The exception is cases where it's unreasonable for the
parent/legal guardian to care for the child/ren themselves.

To determine if it is unreasonable for a parent/guardian to care for the
child:

-   The delegated Child Support officer must be satisfied there has been
    extreme family breakdown, or
-   there is a serious risk to the child's physical or mental wellbeing
    in the home of the parent or legal guardian concerned

To assist the delegated Child Support officer to make this decision, if
a parent or legal guardian advises Child Support that they do not
consent to the non-parent child support applicant providing care for the
child, Services Australia social workers will:

-   assess the family/care situation further to establish whether the
    non-parent child support applicant satisfies the requirements for an
    eligible carer, and
-   provide a professional recommendation to Child Support on whether
    the child/ren can reasonably live with a parent

Child Support Objections procedures apply for any party dissatisfied
with the decision made by the delegated Child Support officer on behalf
of the Child Support Registrar.

Referrals for social work assessment

Service Officers will request a social work assessment:

-   to determine if it is unreasonable for a parent or legal guardian to
    provide care for their child/ren
-   using the Centrelink/Child Support information exchange macro, see
    Application for assessment - non-parent carer

When the email is received, a nominated Social Work Support Manager
(SWSM) will register the request and allocate it to a social worker.
Assessments are actioned by social workers undertaking Unreasonable to
Live at Home (UTLAH) assessments for income support payments.

Social workers will provide a professional recommendation to Child
Support on the ability of the child/ren to reasonably live with a parent
or legal guardian through assessment of:

-   extreme family breakdown of the parent/child relationship, or
-   the presence of a serious risk to the child's physical or mental
    well-being in the home of the parent/legal guardian

Every effort will be made to complete social work assessment within 21
days of the referral.

Sharing social work non-parent carer assessment reports with Child Support

Services Australia social workers document Child Support non-parent
carer (NPC) assessments in a report on the child's Centrelink customer
record, since this is the location of the Social Work Information System
(SWIS). Social workers may disclose the full social work NPC assessment
report to the Child Support decision maker, for the purpose of the
non-parent carer assessment (the ‘original purpose’).

As the information in the report may be sensitive personal information,
the report should only be used for the original purpose or directly
related secondary purposes, such as an AAT review of the NPC assessment,
(a non-disclosure application so the report is not shared with the
parents may be appropriate in the case of AAT review).

The social work NPC assessment report must not be used by:

-   Child Support for other purposes. For example to enable collection
    of child support or better manage complex/sensitive child support
    cases, or
-   social workers for other purposes. For example other assessments and
    support to the agency’s master programmes, unless advice is provided
    allowing this

The Resources page has links to the Child Support website for
information about child support options for parents and the formula for
calculating child support, the referral form received from Child Support
and the report to be sent back after the social worker assessment has
been completed.

Related links

General information about child support assessments

Unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH) initial contact for Youth Allowance
(YA), Disability Support Pension (DSP), Special Benefit (SpB) or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

Social Work Information System (SWIS)

Child Support objections

Application for assessment - non-parent carer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
