
Recording National Redress Scheme referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS) 003-18061809

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000. If you have concerns about a child’s safety,
conduct the risk and referral process.

This document outlines how to record referrals in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS) for individuals linked to the National Redress
Scheme (the Scheme) administered by the Department of Social Services
(DSS).

Note: no information about the individual is to be recorded on the
individuals Customer First record, this includes the Document List (DL)
screen. Information must only be recorded within SWIS (case notes)
accessed through Customer First.

Recording referrals for individuals linked to the Scheme

Social workers will receive referrals for individuals linked to the
Scheme from the Department of Social Services (DSS) Redress Service
Officers.

The individuals will be advised that they are being transferred to a
Services Australia social worker who may seek personal information
regarding their circumstances. This is to enable the social worker to
appropriately record interactions and provide the most suitable support.
If the individual declines to provide information a referral can still
be made.

Social Work role in the National Redress Scheme

Social workers will provide support and assistance to individuals
contacting about the Scheme when there is an acute crisis.

A referral for an acute crisis occurs when the individual presents:

-   at imminent risk of suicide, self-harm or risk to others, or
-   an immediate and significant risk to the health and wellbeing of
    themselves or another person

Referrals are made for risk assessment, such as homicide risk, family
and domestic violence, and acute mental health crisis e.g. psychosis,
mania, dissociation.

Individuals referred to the Social Work Service include applicants,
nominees, carers, family members as well as survivors who are
considering applying to the Scheme.

Documenting the referral

The referral is recorded on:

Individuals Customer First record in SWIS, if the individual:

-   has a Customer Reference Number (CRN) and provides consent for the
    referral to be recorded
-   does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded; has a CRN
    and is at imminent risk of harm

SWIS as an anonymous record, if the individual:

-   does not provide consent for the referral to be recorded and is not
    at imminent risk of harm
-   does not have a CRN. Note: do not create a Customer First record or
    a Customer Reference Number (CRN) for the individual to record a
    social work interaction exclusively related to redress

The Resources page contains a link to information about the National
Redress Scheme and available support services, intranet links and a link
to the Releasing Information form

Related links

National Redress Scheme

Social work role in the National Redress Scheme

Disclosing information to third parties

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
