
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Assisted Customer Claims 003-22011601

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Do not follow this procedure for self-isolation, quarantine or caring
periods, or second or subsequent claim periods that start on or before
17 January 2022. See Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims
in Customer First.

Customers can claim online again from 8am Wednesday 20 July 2022. If a
customer calls, tell them to visit
https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/pandemic-leave-disaster-payment for
how to claim online. If a customer does not have access to online
services, they can claim over the phone using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) from 9am on the same date.

There are different claiming periods depending on the self-isolation,
quarantine or caring period claimed. See the Resources page.

If a customer has lodged a claim online or using ACC that has not yet
been finalised, they cannot lodge another one. If a customer calls to
ask why they cannot lodge more than 1 claim, tell them:
‘You can lodge your next claim once you have received confirmation from
Services Australia on the claim outcome of your previous claim.’

Reminder: more than one Flexible Support Payment (including Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment) cannot be paid on the same day. See Processing
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Process Direct.

This document explains how to take a phone claim for the Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment using Assisted Customer Claim.

Claims before 18 January 2022

For self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods, or second or
subsequent claim periods that start on or before 17 January 2022, see
Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First.

Eligibility

See Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Timeframes for claiming

See the Resources page in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

Claims withdrawn

Staff must check if a customer has withdrawn any Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment claims and follow steps in Table 1 to determine next steps.

Note: customers cannot submit an online claim if they previously
withdrew 2 claims.

Customers will see the following message:

-   ‘You have already submitted and withdrawn <withdraw limit> or more
    claims for this payment. If you want to make a new claim for
    Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, we’d like to help you. Please call
    us on 180 22 66’

This is to:

-   improve the customer experience where they may be having problems
    completing the online claim
-   form part of the agency’s fraud prevention measures
-   reduce the number of invalid claims in the workload

There are no changes to assessing claims where customers withdrew 2 or
more claims.

Staff receiving verbal claims will not see a similar message during ACC
if the customer has exceeded their withdrawn claim limit.

Staff must complete all pre-ACC checks including:

-   reviewing previously withdrawn claims, and
-   asking the customer why they withdrew their claims

Identity requirements

This applies for self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods that start
on or after 18 January 2022.

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment can be paid if a customer has not
completed identity confirmation.

Staff must be satisfied the person making the claim is:

-   who they say they are, and
-   eligible to receive the payment

For phone claims

If a customer has a confirmed identity status or a confirmed
transitional identity status, they meet the identity requirements for
the payment. No further identity documents need to be verified.

If not, customers are asked to provide one original document from each
category:

-   Commencement of Identity (CoI). If a customer cannot provide a CoI
    document, see Commencement of Identity
-   Primary Use in Community (PUiC)
-   Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)

Each identity document is coded and verified in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Customers must provide consent before documents can be verified through
the Document Verification Service (DVS).

For claims lodged over the phone via ACC, customers must agree to the
declarations read to them.

Customers do not need to attend a service centre to complete identity
confirmation. A ‘no linkage’ identity status applies and there is no
need for a photo ID comparison.

For customers genuinely unable to provide the required identity details
during their phone claim:

-   an Alternative Identity Assessment will be completed either in
    person or over the phone, and
-   an identity review period will be applied

Evidence

Customers will need to keep evidence to support their claim, as Services
Australia may ask for it later.

Statutory declarations will not be accepted as evidence to support a
claim.

See Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Process Direct.

EM252 form incorrectly lodged

The Claim for Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment form (EM252) is only valid
for self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods, or second or
subsequent claim periods that start on or after 9 December 2021 and up
to and including 17 January 2022.

Some customers may have lodged this form for a self-isolation,
quarantine or caring period, or second or subsequent claim period that
starts on or after 18 January 2022.

If this has occurred, staff are making outbound contact to speak with
the customer to advise their claim is not valid. See Processing Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment claims in Customer First.

If outbound contact is successful or a customer contacts Services
Australia to discuss the claim period in a Claim for Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment form (EM252), at the time of the call if the:

customer is still within their 14 day claiming period:

-   the customer can complete an online claim or an Assisted Customer
    Claim (ACC) if they do not have access to online services or are
    unsuitable to complete an online claim

customer’s 14 day claiming period has passed, check the date the EM252
claim form was lodged. If it was lodged:

-   within the 14 day claiming period, an ACC can be run. The customer
    cannot lodge an online claim
-   outside the 14 day claiming period, late claims will only be
    considered under 6 special reasons. The customer cannot lodge an
    online claim. ACC can be run

Signs of a fraudulent call

There are many warning signs that a call may be fraudulent. It may be an
odd feeling or inconsistencies in what the caller says.

Some signs may include if the customer:

-   has difficulty answering basic Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO)
    questions
-   wants to change recently updated contact details such as address
    (for example, moving from one state or territory to another state or
    territory)
-   wants to change a payment destination
-   cannot give verifiable contact details for the employer
-   insists on an urgent payment
-   has an inconsistent story (for example, claiming to be a delivery
    driver but cannot give driver licence details)
-   has contact phone numbers that are currently linked to other
    customers

This is not a complete list. If there are any doubts that the call is
legitimate, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

See Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Payment methods

See Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Process Direct.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer may need a third party (a person or organisation) to act on
their behalf when claiming the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. See
Appointing nominees and Obligations of nominees.

Establish a nominee's identity before processing an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313).

Customers who have not engaged with the agency for some time may be
unaware they have a current correspondence or payment nominee
arrangement.

Note: Make sure these are reviewed as sending payments or letters to a
nominee that is no longer valid could breach the customer's privacy.

If there are concerns about a nominee's identity or claim information
they provide, follow the process to report suspended fraud and
corruption.

Claims:

can be lodged by a correspondence nominee

cannot be lodged by a:

-   Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) or Person Permitted to Update
    (PPU)
-   payment nominee

Only a payment nominee can get a payment on a customer's behalf.

Customers claiming Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and DRA or NZ DRA

A customer may be eligible for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or New
Zealand DRA (NZ DRA) and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. However, staff
need to carefully check the reason for the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment claim:

-   If the self-isolation, quarantine or caring period came first then
    the customer would claim Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and could
    lodge a claim for DRA or NZ DRA after the self-isolation, quarantine
    or caring period ended
-   If the disaster affected the customer’s ability to earn or derive
    income first, then the customer’s eligibility for Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment would be dependent on if they were working any
    hours whilst receiving DRA or NZ DRA

See the Resources page Scenarios Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and
DRA.

Internal review process

If a customer does not understand or agree with the reason/s for a
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment decision, they can ask for an
explanation of the decision.

A review cannot be undertaken by:

-   an Authorised Review Officer (ARO), or
-   the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

See Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

Support for customers

Refer customers to a social worker if they:

-   are at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   are a young person without adequate support
-   are experiencing family and domestic violence
-   present with highly complex circumstances

The Services Australia website has more information about ongoing
financial help.

Payment and Service Finder can be used to get details for external
organisations that can provide additional support to customers.

Support for staff

See Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Process Direct.

Preventing fraud

All staff play an important role in detecting customer and third party
fraud.

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

Using the Interpreter Connect service - for emergency events

-   Staff should call the Interpreter Connect service (on-demand
    telephone interpreting) when helping non-English speaking customers
    impacted by emergency events
-   The service is available 24 hours per day, 7 days a week for staff
    helping Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare customers
-   Indigenous interpreters are available

For more details, see Contacting an on-demand telephone interpreter
(Interpreter Connect).

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Process Direct

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment – internal review process

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Social work service referral

Upload documents service

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
