
Indigenous homelessness 003-06010070

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the general provisions of homelessness in
relation to Indigenous customers. Indigenous customers face specific
homelessness issues. Assess this customer group under the general
provisions of homelessness, with consideration also given to the
information in this procedure.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency’s Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See, Risk identification and management of
threats to the safety or welfare of a child for more information
regarding this model and the agency’s commitment to the safety of
children and young people.

Definition of homelessness

Homelessness in the Indigenous context is complex and multidimensional.
Most definitions of homelessness are based on the non-Indigenous concept
of house and home as a physical entity.

However, Indigenous concepts of home include a spiritual aspect. An
Indigenous person may apply the concept of ‘home’ to a place or set of
places, none of which involves conventional accommodation.

This includes a sense of belonging or acceptance in an area. Indigenous
people may not see themselves as homeless, as long as their connections
to their home place and community are still intact. Many traditional and
older Indigenous people prefer, as a lifestyle choice, to live in
accommodation, which is considered in the mainstream context to be
substandard.

Categories of Indigenous Homelessness

There are five distinct categories of Indigenous Homelessness outlined
in this procedure:

-   Lack of access to stable shelter
-   Spiritual forms of homelessness
-   Over-crowding
-   Relocation and transient homelessness
-   Leaving an unsafe or unstable home

While Indigenous Australians may have similar contributing factors to
homelessness as other Australians, it is important to be aware of the
extent to which the above factors affect Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. Indigenous Australians in remote, rural and urban areas
have varied levels of social and economic disadvantage, which will
impact upon the extent and nature of their homelessness.

The Resources page contains a link to the Payment and Service Finder,
which can be used to locate appropriate referral options based on the
customer’s needs.

Related links

Where customers are unable to provide a residential address

Homelessness

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment Other Extreme Circumstances

Social work service referral

Specialist staff for Indigenous Customers

Alternative Identity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
