
Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA 003-03010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This file is for emergency events from 2021. Contact the Technical Peer
Support for help with claims for events before 2021 (because of rate
calculator changes).

This document explains the eligibility criteria for Disaster Recovery
Allowance (DRA) and DRA for New Zealand non-protected Special Category
(subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). NZ DRA was known as 'Ex-gratia
DRA'.

DRA and NZ DRA general eligibility

To receive DRA/NZ DRA, a customer must meet all the following criteria
on any day of the major disaster:

be at least 16 years old

earn, derive or receive income from:

-   one of the affected areas and does so by working in that area, or
    resides in one of the affected areas, or
-   one of the affected industries and does so by working in one of the
    affected areas

suffered a loss of income as a direct result of the disaster

did not receive or will not receive for the period they are claiming the
DRA or NZ DRA:

-   another social security entitlement, (select the Definitions icon or
    link on this page and search for ‘social security entitlement’)
-   a prescribed payment for DRA or NZ DRA,
-   NEIS allowance

have a rate of payment greater than nil when their DRA or NZ DRA claim
is finalised. A person’s income cut off rate (income below an income
threshold amount) is determined when assessing a customer’s income loss

Note: for affected areas (Local Government Areas) and income cut-off
rates, see Current emergency management events.

DRA additional eligibility

To receive DRA, a customer must meet DRA and NZ DRA general eligibility
and the following criteria on any day of the major disaster:

-   Australian resident, or
-   holder of a specified visa for DRA

To check if a visa is a permanent visa, see the References page for a
link to the Social Security Guide, Chapter 9.2, Visa subclasses and
payment eligibility for visas issued after 01/9/1994.

NZ DRA additional eligibility

To receive NZ DRA, a customer must meet DRA and NZ DRA general
eligibility and the following criteria on any day of the major disaster:

-   a New Zealand non-protected Special Category Visa (SCV) subclass 444
    holder (not an Australian Resident under the Social Security
    Act 1991) who is living in Australia, and
-   participated in the Australian tax system for at least one year in
    the past 3 financial years, or before the ‘next 12 months’ date in
    NZ DRA tax participation in the Background page Operational
    Blueprint for the event

Note: for ‘participation in the Australian tax system,’ see Table 1 Item
4.

Customers under 22 years of age additional eligibility

A customer aged 16 to 21 years old is not eligible for DRA or NZ DRA if,
on the day of the determination, all of the following apply:

-   wholly or substantially dependent on another person (except the
    person's partner)
-   is not the parent of another person, and
-   their income in the financial year when the determination occurs
    will be equal to or less than $6,403

This means the customer may be eligible for DRA or NZ DRA if one of the
following applies:

-   not wholly or substantially dependent on another person (except the
    person’s partner)
-   is a parent of a child, or
-   their income in the financial year when the determination occurs
    will be more than $6,403

Taxable payment

DRA and NZ DRA are normally taxable payments. Service Officers are told
if DRA and NZ DRA are not taxable for a specific event. See Current
emergency management events.

Family Assistance customers

If DRA and NZ DRA are taxable, customers will need to include the income
in their family income estimate for:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB), and/or
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

[A self service option is available for customers]The easiest way for
customers to view and update an estimate is online using:

-   their Centrelink online account through myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

Child Support customers

If DRA and NZ DRA are taxable, the income will:

-   form part of the adjusted taxable income for child support purposes
-   must be included in any income estimate they have lodged for current
    financial year

[A self service option is available for customers]The easiest way for
customers to view and update an estimate is online using:

-   a Child Support online account though myGov, or
-   the Express Plus Child Support mobile app

Customers can request voluntary tax deductions to be withheld from their
DRA. See Managing Australian Taxation Office (ATO) tax deductions.

DRA and NZ DRA are a rebatable benefit subject to the Beneficiary Tax
Offset scheme. Taxpayers who receive taxable DRA or NZ DRA may be
entitled to a Beneficiary Tax Offset. Note: the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO) will apply this offset automatically if a customer is
entitled. No action is needed by staff assessing claims.

Lump sum of DRA or NZ DRA

A customer may be eligible to receive a lump sum amount of DRA or NZ DRA
due to the date their claim was granted. This will be in the form of an
arrears payment.

When granting a lump sum arrears payment, consider if any evidence of
disaster affected income is needed. If there are doubts about the
validity of the fortnightly income reported by the customer, evidence of
disaster affected income should be requested.

See the Resources page for examples of evidence for disaster affected
income.

Reporting requirements

Customers do not need to report each fortnight once their claim has been
granted.

They must notify if their:

-   income is equal to or more than the average weekly income amount
    (AWOTE), or
-   circumstances change (for example, change of address)

As per payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA, the customer will receive
either their maximum rate, or a nil payment.

Once the customer has been granted, their payments will remain current
for the remainder of the 13 week payment period, even when the customer
advises their income has become equal to or greater than the AWOTE.
Where the income exceeds the AWOTE within the 13 week period, this will
display as DRA/CZR on the benefit status line.

If the customer's income then reduces below the AWOTE, they must contact
to have their income updated. This will adjust their payment to the
relevant maximum rate for the rest of the 13 weeks.

Unsuccessful claims

Claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can only be rejected
when formal approval is given to reject claims for the event.

Approval is given by staff communication channels, and published in
Current emergency management events.

Review and appeal process

DRA claims

If a customer has asked for a review of a DRA decision, see Request for
an explanation or application for a formal review.

NZ DRA claims

If a customer does not agree with a NZ DRA:

-   claim decision, they can ask for the decision to be reviewed by a
    Subject Matter Expert (SME)
-   SME review, they can ask for an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) to
    review the decision
-   ARO decision, they can appeal the decision within 4 weeks of the ARO
    decision

NZ DRA claims cannot be referred to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(AAT). If a customer wants to appeal an ARO’s decision, escalate the
claim to the Level 2 Helpdesk.

How to refer a claim for review

Run the Internal Review/Explanation script

select the correct payment type and emergency event:

-   DRA - select Disaster Recovery Allowance
-   NZ DRP - select Ex-gratia Regular Pymt

transfer the appeal activity to EMG

The Resources page has factsheets, templates, letters and messages,
contact details and links to Services Australia and external websites.
There is information on evidence of income and scenarios for
self-declaration and direct result.

Contents

Emergency payment claims lodged outside the time limit

Related links

Claiming emergency payments

Current emergency management events

DRA and NZ DRA

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

Emergency management events

Managing DRA and NZ DRA payments after grant

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Processing Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) claims in Process Direct

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Request for an explanation, quality check or review

The Assurance of Support (AoS) scheme

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
