
Assessing eligibility for Ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand (NZ) citizens - Tropical Cyclone Debbie - March 2017 003-17040102

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period for this event has now closed, unless special
circumstances apply. See Operational Instructions for more details.

This document outlines how to determine if ex-gratia Disaster Recovery
Allowance for New Zealand (NZ) non-protected Special Category visa (SCV)
(sub-class 444) holders can be paid to claimants affected by Tropical
Cyclone Debbie - March 2017. This payment is to assist individuals who
can demonstrate they have experienced a loss of income as a direct
result of the severe weather, rainfall and associated flooding that
occurred as a result of Tropical Cyclone Debbie that commenced on 28
March 2017 and continued in March and April 2017.

Affected Local Government Area (LGA)

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Byron
-   Gold Coast
-   Lismore
-   Logan
-   Mackay
-   Rockhampton
-   Scenic Rim
-   Tweed
-   Whitsunday

Claiming periods

Claiming periods for LGAs may vary.

Unless special circumstances apply (see the Operational Instructions for
further details), all claims for assistance must be lodged by:

-   30 September 2017 - Whitsunday
-   4 October 2017 - Gold Coast, Logan, Lismore, Mackay, Scenic Rim and
    Tweed
-   20 October 2017 - Rockhampton
-   19 January 2018 - Byron

The References page contains a link to the Operational Instructions.

Eligibility for ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance

A person is qualified for the ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance if:

the person is at least 16 years of age at the time of the disaster
(there are additional qualification requirements if the person is under
22 years of age), and

the person:

-   is a non-protected Special Category visa (sub-class 444) holder and
    a 'non-resident' under the Social Security Act, and
-   has participated in the Australian tax system for at least one year
    in the past three financial years or is currently engaged in income
    generating activities with a likelihood that they will pay tax in
    Australia on or before 31 March 2018, and

the person earns, derives or receives income from one of the affected
areas and does so by working in that area, or by residing in that area,
and

the person has suffered a loss of income as a direct result of the
disaster, and

the person did not receive or will not receive another social security
entitlement for the period of time for which they are claiming ex-gratia
Disaster Recovery Allowance, and

the person did not receive or will not receive a prescribed payment for
the period of time for which they are claiming ex-gratia Disaster
Recovery Allowance, and

the person will receive a payment greater than nil at the time the claim
for payment of ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance is determined

Additional qualification requirements for persons under 22 years of age

The person will not qualify for ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance if
on the 31 March 2017, the:

-   person is wholly or substantially dependent on another person
    (except for person's partner), and
-   person is not the parent of another person, and
-   person's income in the current financial year will not be more than
    $6,403
    Note: eligibility details and definitions can be found in the
    Operational Instructions. The References page contains a link.

Existing claimants receiving an income support payment

Claimants who formally cancel their current income support payment for
the purposes of claiming the ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance are
not eligible.

A claimant will be eligible to receive an ex-gratia Disaster Recovery
Allowance if they have been administratively granted an income support
payment or pension but have not received monetary payments under the
payment or pension at any point during the eight consecutive weeks prior
to the ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance claim lodgement, provided
all other eligibility criteria are met.

Proof of identity requirements

When a customer makes a claim for emergency payments Tier 1 Proof of
Identity (POI) is required.

Payment should not be refused when the customer cannot provide any or
all documentation required by POI Tier 1 guidelines unless there are
strong reasons for doubting the genuineness of the claim.

Lodgement of claim

Claims must be made within six months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGA.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia website, see the
Resources page for a link.

Staff can access the claim form from Services Australia Forms on the
intranet.

Claimants can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to the Services Australia,
    Reply Paid 7815, Canberra BC, ACT 2610, or
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at the nearest service
    centre, agent or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their form and supporting documents to 1300 727 760.

If the claimant provides their claim form and supporting documents to
the service centre, scan the form into the system.

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be notified via an Operational Message once they are able to reject
payments. The Resources page contains a link to Operational Messaging.

Withdrawal of claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Waiting periods and other income tests

Ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance will not be subject to any of the
following:

-   waiting periods
-   partner income test
-   parent income test
-   assets test

Reporting frequency

Claimants granted ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance must report
their fortnightly income for 13 weeks or until cessation of the payment
to allow for the ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance to be calculated
in arrears.

Taxation treatment

The ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance is considered taxable income
and is a 'rebatable benefit' subject to the beneficiary tax offset
scheme. Taxpayers who receive ex-gratia Disaster Recovery Allowance may
be entitled to a beneficiary tax offset when they lodge their income tax
return. Claimants should visit the Australian Taxation Office website
for more information about the beneficiary tax offset, or to discuss
their individual circumstances.

Documentation standards

See the Resources page for documentation standards templates for
granted, pending and unsuccessful claims. For cancelled claims, use the
unsuccessful documentation standards template as a guide.

The Resources page contains the relevant income cut-off points for
Newstart Allowance (NSA) and Youth Allowance (YA), links to the
Operational Messaging, forms and factsheets, documentation standards,
scenarios, contact details for the Emergency Management Teams, maps of
affected areas, a link to the Australian Taxation Office and a link to
the Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website. Links
on this page may be unavailable to external audiences.

Related links

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
