
Emergency management events 003-14000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This page provides a brief definition of current and closed emergency
payments delivered by Services Australia for emergency events. Links to
current and closed emergency payments are also provided.

Emergency payments

Emergency payments include:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Payment for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP) - previously known as ex-gratia
    Disaster Recovery Payment (ex-gratia DRP)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category
    (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA) - previously known as ex-gratia
    Disaster Recovery Allowance (ex-gratia DRA), and
-   Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Current emergency management events

Emergency payments may become available after an emergency event (for
example, a major disaster or following an overseas terrorist attack) and
only after a determination has been made by the relevant Minister (for a
major disaster) or by the Prime Minister (for an overseas terrorist
attack).

See Current emergency management events for further information and the
specific details of emergency payments that are open for claiming.

Closed emergency management events

When a claiming period for an emergency event (such as a major disaster
or terrorist attack) has ended the emergency event is then 'closed' and
claims may only be lodged where special circumstances apply.

See Closed emergency management events for further information and the
specific details of emergency payments that are now closed.

Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA)

Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA) is a jointly funded
Commonwealth and State/Territory disaster response and recovery
assistance program designed to provide assistance to the Australian
States and Territories. These payments are not delivered by the agency
and cannot be claimed via the agency. See Disaster Recovery Funding
Arrangements (DRFA).

The Resources page contains links to the Disaster Assist and Australian
National Security websites and Quick Links for access to Australian
Government Information and Services.

Contents

Current emergency management events

Closed emergency management events

Related links

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA)

AGDRP and NZ DRP

DRA and NZ DRA

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
