
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged outside of the time limit 003-17051800

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the guidelines for considering an Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claim lodged outside of the
time limit for claims.

On this Page:

Claiming AVTOP

Primary victims have 2 years from the date of the declaration by the
Prime Minister to make a claim.

Secondary victims have 12 months from the date of death of a close
family member, where the close family member died as a direct result of,
and within two years of, the day the declared terrorist act occurred.

If a claim is lodged outside of the allowable claiming period, a
decision must be made that there are special circumstance that justify
the acceptance of the claim before starting assessment of the claim.

For more information see:

-   Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)
-   Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Special Circumstances

Special circumstances are generally due to situations that are unusual,
uncommon or exceptional and each situation must be assessed on an
individual basis. As such, there is no precise, exhaustive definition or
list.

In all situations, consideration must be given to why the claimant was
unable to lodge their claim within the claiming period and each
application must be considered on its merits.

Factors to be considered when making a decision about special circumstances

A holistic view of the individual's circumstances should be applied when
making a decision about special circumstances. There may not be just one
factor which makes a situation unusual or 'out of the ordinary' but a
combination of factors that apply to the individual. Service Officers
should consider:

-   The nature of the event or situation that prevented the claimant
    from lodging their claim within the claiming period. (For example,
    natural disaster, bereavement, ill health, personal issues,
    accident)
-   Was the event or situation that delayed the lodgement of their claim
    outside the claimant's control?
-   Was the claimant prevented from taking action to lodge their claim
    before they were impacted by the event/situation? How were they
    prevented from taking action?
-   When did the event/situation that prevented them from lodging the
    claim occur?
-   How long was the delay between the event/situation that prevented
    them from lodging their claim and the actual lodgement of their
    claim?

The Resources page contains contact details, AVTOP rejection letter, the
disaster page on the Services Australia website for updated claim forms
and the emergency management events page for disaster specific
information. It also contains links to the Disaster Assist website and
Disaster Health Care Assistance Scheme.

Related links

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
