
Nominees for the National Redress Scheme 003-18050704

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines nominee arrangements for the National Redress
Scheme administered by the Department of Social Services (DSS).

On this Page:

Nominees for the National Redress Scheme

The National Redress Scheme (the Scheme) has a separate nominee process
to Services Australia programs. It is administered under specific
legislation for the scheme.

An applicant can appoint a person or organisation as a nominee to help
them to apply for Redress. Generally, a nominee can:

-   provide information to the Scheme
-   help an applicant to fill in an application
-   receive copies of all letters from the Scheme

Note: nominees appointed under the National Redress Scheme must meet the
same Identity Confirmation requirements as applicants, see National
Redress Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity processes.

To confirm their identity a nominee must:

have an existing Identity Confirmation Indicator (ICI) on their
Centrelink record with a status of 'Confirmed' and provide consent to
use their Customer Reference Number (CRN), or

establish their identity by providing one document from each category
below:

-   Commencement of Identity document (CoI). A nominee can demonstrate
    CoI in Australia by providing documents that confirm their birth in
    Australia, or arrival in Australia, thereby establishing a nominee’s
    existence in Australia
-   Primary Use in Community document (PUiC)
-   Secondary Use In Community document (SUiC)

Note: Use in Community documents demonstrate a nominee's continuing
involvement in the community.

Whilst documents can fit into multiple categories they cannot be used
more than once in the Identity Confirmation assessment. For example, a
document used as CoI cannot be used again as a PUiC or SUiC document.

For the full list of acceptable documents and the categories for which
they can be used, see Identity documents A to Z.

For nominee organisations, the organisation's Australian Business Number
(ABN) and contact information will be used to confirm identity.

Nominees who have difficulty in obtaining sufficient identity documents
can undertake an alternative identity assessment, see National Redress
Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity processes.

When applicants may appoint a nominee

An applicant may appoint a nominee if they:

-   want to apply for Redress, but do not want to deal directly with the
    Scheme themselves
-   want to apply for Redress and want support through the process, for
    example to complete the Application for Redress
-   need support to deal with the Scheme, for example help with
    providing the information required
-   have an existing legal arrangement where someone has the authority
    to act on their behalf

Types of nominees

A nominee is either an individual (such as a friend or relative) or an
organisation that has been appointed to act on behalf of an applicant.
The nominee must act in the best interests of the applicant at all
times.

A nominee must be an Australian citizen or permanent resident and live
in Australia. There may be other limitations on who the applicant can
appoint as their nominee.

There are 2 types of National Redress Scheme nominees:

-   assistance nominee
-   legal nominee

Assistance nominees

An assistance nominee can:

-   help an applicant complete an Application for Redress
-   receive copies of all letters from the Scheme
-   ask the Scheme questions about the applicant's Application for
    Redress
-   receive phone calls from the Scheme about the applicant's
    Application for Redress (if they are the primary contact)
-   provide the Scheme with information
-   ask for an offer of Redress to be reviewed in writing or cancel a
    review

An assistance nominee cannot:

-   make an application for redress (signing the application or
    statutory declaration page)
-   accept or decline an offer of Redress (including signing the
    Acceptance Document)

Either the applicant or their assistance nominee can make a request for
assistance nominee arrangements to be suspended or cancelled.

The Redress Nominee Form must be signed by the applicant and the
assistance nominee.

Legal nominees

A legal nominee has the same authority as the applicant and can perform
any actions of the applicant. A legal nominee can only be appointed
where the applicant has a:

-   legal guardian
-   power of attorney, or
-   ‘legal nominee’ who has been appointed by a court, tribunal, board
    or panel

Legal nominees have the power to make decisions for the applicant for
matters relevant to their appointed duties as a legal nominee.

The legal nominee can do anything the assistance nominee can do, plus:

-   apply for Redress on the applicant's behalf (including signing the
    Application for Redress or statutory declaration page)
-   accept or decline an offer of Redress on the applicant's behalf
    (including signing the Acceptance Document)

The Redress Nominee Form must be signed by the legal nominee and copies
of the relevant legal appointment documents must be provided, for
example court orders or Power of Attorney documents.

Redress Nominee Form

An applicant can appoint a nominee using the Redress Nominee Form. The
Redress Nominee Form can be downloaded from the National Redress Scheme
website or mailed out by the National Redress Scheme. The Resources page
includes a link to the National Redress Scheme website for a copy of the
Redress Nominee Form.

General rules for receiving Redress Nominee Form:

-   the Redress Nominee Form can be received at any stage in the Redress
    application process (with or without the Application for Redress)
-   each Redress Nominee Form can be used to appoint only one nominee
-   legal nominee forms need to have the relevant legal appointment
    documents attached

Notifying of a change of circumstances

Nominees must advise the Scheme of changes:

-   in the applicant's circumstances which may impact on the applicant's
    eligibility for and entitlement to any elements of Redress
-   in the nominee's circumstances, for example address or contact
    details

An applicant or nominee must notify the Scheme in writing about the
suspension or cancellation of a nominee arrangement. Updates to other
nominee details can be provided by phone.

Cancelling nominee arrangements

Nominee arrangements can be cancelled by:

Applicant request (in writing), for assistance nominee arrangements only

Nominee request (in writing), for either assistance or legal nominee
arrangements

The Scheme (in writing), in the following circumstances:

-   The nominee cannot be contacted, for example mail is returned from
    the nominee's address, 3 attempts to contact the nominee by phone
    have been unsuccessful or when a notice has been issued to the
    nominee and they fail to comply
-   The nominee has significant risk factors that impact on their
    ability to act in the applicant's best interests and fulfil their
    nominee responsibilities. Examples of risk factors include, but are
    not limited to, family and domestic violence; well-being issues;
    financial management difficulties; literacy or language barriers or
    conflict of interest
-   There is a possible conflict of interest between the third party's
    role as nominee and their other professional role
-   The nominee is not acting in the applicant's best interests;
    allegations of misuse have been made; the nominee arrangement is
    inappropriate or there are concerns of family and domestic violence
    between the parties

The Resources page contains links to the National Redress Scheme website
(which includes the Redress Nominee Form), external websites for the
Australian Business Register and Australian Securities and investments
Commission (ASIC) and contact details for the National Redress Scheme.

Contents list

Staff as nominees for the National Redress Scheme

Related links

National Redress Scheme enquiries and document lodgement in service
centres

National Redress Scheme Identity Confirmation and Alternative Identity
processes

Referring individuals linked to the National Redress Scheme to a social
worker

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
