
Assessing COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims 003-21060323

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims.

For COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims where a customer is receiving an
income support payment, see Assessing income support payment customers
COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims.

Do not process Abridged Customer Claims, as these are finalised
automatically. This can take up to 14 calendar days. Do not contact the
Technical Peer Support about un-finalised abridged claims. Do not tell a
customer to withdraw an abridged claim and resubmit it, as this may
cause further delays.

Workflows are only available when a claiming period for a relevant
period starts.

All online claims that do not meet eligibility requirements can be
rejected, except when the customer has a pending income support payment.

For staff not trained in processing claims, complete a cold
(unannounced) transfer to 'COVID-19 Disaster Payment' in Services
Australia Workspace.

The claiming period for all events has ended. See Timeframes for
claiming in each event-specific Operational Blueprint.

Eligibility

All claims must be fully assessed before they are coded.

For eligibility requirements, see:

-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - NSW
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria (August 2021)
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Australian Capital Territory
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Tasmania
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Northern Territory
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Queensland
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - South Australia
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria (July 2021)
-   COVID-19 Disaster Payment - Victoria 4-10 June 2021

Note: if the customer is receiving an income support payment, see
Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims.

Phone Claims

Phone claims are available to customers:

-   with no access to online services, or
-   deemed unable to or unsuitable to complete an online claim

Customers must claim online where possible, and can visit the Services
Australia website for information on how to claim.

Customers can be given a myGov linking code to claim online in certain
circumstances.

See Issuing a myGov linking code.

When taking phone claims, staff must make sure customers meet all
pre-claim requirements, including identity and residence, before
running:

-   an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow

ACC:

-   is used to lodge a verbal claim over the phone,
-   replicates the online claim experience, and
-   allows staff to complete and submit the claim on behalf of the
    customer

If staff start an ACC for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment, they must never
leave the ACC open (in ‘draft’) for the customer to complete and submit
it online. Note: this process may be different for other agency
payments.

Once staff submit an ACC, if the claim:

needs follow-up by specialist staff, the Disaster Recovery Payment
Claims workflow must be run and the claim selected for follow-up. For
example:

-   payment nominee claims
-   Dad and Partner Pay, Parental Leave Pay or income support payment
    trained staff need to speak with the customer

does not need follow-up by specialist staff, the claim enters the queue
for processing and is automatically assessed by Digitally Enabled
Processing (DEP). Note: income support customers - COVID-19 Disaster
Payment claims are automatically assessed by Digital Orchestration
Process (DOP)

Claims that do not meet the requirements for an automatic grant are
allocated back to staff for manual assessment.

For how to assess an ACC allocated back to staff for manual assessment,
see ACC allocated to staff for a manual assessment.

Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow and the verbal claim template
process

The verbal claim template process is used when the ACC process is not
available.

If a claiming period has closed, ACC will not work - staff will need to
run the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow.

Note: only certain claims can be accepted when a claiming period has
closed. See If a claiming period has closed.

Online claims

Online claims are available to customers:

-   with access to online services, and
-   able and suitable to complete an online claim

Customers must be encouraged and supported to claim online where
possible, and can visit the Services Australia website for information
on how to claim.

Customers can be given a myGov linking code to claim online in certain
circumstances. See Issuing a myGov linking code.

Note: non-Australian residents (temporary visa holders) will need a
myGov linking code:

-   to claim online
-   as they may not have a Medicare card

For this payment only

Do not make any outbound contact with customers to confirm information
in an online claim, unless:

-   advised to do so by the Level 2 Helpdesk, or
-   Operational Blueprint processes state this can be done

This includes identity requirements:

-   do not make any outbound contact to customers to confirm identity
    requirements
-   all online claims meet the 'identity requirements' for payment
-   do not try to verify documents through the Document Verification
    Service (DVS) or create any identity exemptions/identity manual
    reviews for online claims

Online claims will:

-   allocate to staff for processing using Workload Manager
-   include all information needed to assess the claim

Issuing a myGov linking code

All customers who contact the agency via phone to apply must be
encouraged and supported to claim online wherever possible.

A myGov linking code can be provided if the customer:

-   meets identity requirements for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment and
-   is successfully authenticated by completing Proof of Record
    Ownership

Note: non-Australian residents (temporary visa holders) will need a
myGov linking code:

-   to claim online
-   as they may not have a Medicare card

Abridged claim process

When a state or territory reaches 70% full vaccination of its population
who are aged 16 years and older an abridged claim process will be
available in certain circumstances. See Abridged claim process.

The Operational Blueprint for the event will include the date and
relevant period the abridged claim process is available from.

For abridged claims lodged over the phone, all pre-claim checks must
still be completed, as per standard process for all phone claims,
including Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). Note: staff must not process
any abridged claims they have submitted via ACC. Abridged claims can
take up to 14 calendar days to finalise. Do not contact the Technical
Peer Support about un-finalised abridged claims. Do not tell a customer
to withdraw an abridged claim and resubmit it, as this may cause further
delays.

ACC allocated to staff for manual assessment

When a phone claim is taken using the ACC process, the claim:

-   enters the queue for processing, and
-   is assessed by Digitally Enabled Processing (DEP)

Claims are allocated to staff for manual assessment when the claim:

-   does not meet the requirements for DEP assessment, and/or
-   where identity and/or residence checks were not completed at the
    time of claim

Staff must:

-   make sure the customer meets all pre-claim requirements, including
    identity and residence
-   assess the claim as though it were an online claim lodged by the
    customer
-   run the Disaster Recovery Payment claims workflow to finalise the
    claim

Phone claims that do not meet the pre-claim requirements are normally
not coded and finalised in the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow
as the customer is on the phone at the time of the claim.

If phone claims using the ACC process are allocated to staff for manual
assessment, the:

-   claim must be coded and finalised in the Disaster Recovery Payment
    Claims workflow
-   customer must be advised of the final decision by letter

Automatic payments

When a state or territory reaches 70% full vaccination of its population
who are aged 16 years and older

-   Automatic payments will stop
-   Customers must reapply for each new relevant period to confirm their
    eligibility. See Claiming options

If this occurs part way through a relevant period, the customer will

-   receive an automatic payment for that relevant period, and
-   need to apply for new relevant periods as they open

The Operational Blueprint for the event will include the:

-   date customers will need to apply for new relevant periods as they
    open
-   relevant period and date automatic payments will stop from

Note: customers claiming for relevant periods before these dates will
continue to receive automatic payments up to and including the relevant
period in which automatic payments stop.

An abridged claim process will be available in certain circumstances.
See Abridged claim process.

Customers can be given a myGov linking code to claim online in certain
circumstances. See Issuing a myGov linking code.

When a state or territory has not reached 70% full vaccination of its
population who are aged 16 years and older

Before granting a claim, staff need to check if a customer is already
set to receive automatic payments.

If a customer has a change in circumstances that may affect their
automatic payments, see COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment
and change of circumstances.

Note: staff should not grant claims where a customer is set to receive
automatic payments. However, if they do, the system will:

-   automatically identify this
-   not issue another automatic payment for the relevant period the
    claim was granted for

Change in payment rates and COVID-19 Disaster Payment ending

When a state or territory reaches 80% full vaccination of its population
who are aged 16 years and older the payment will reduce over the
following 2 relevant periods.

If this happens part way through a relevant period, the customer will
get paid the full weekly payment for that relevant period with the
reduced payment to start from the next full relevant period.

The final 2 payments for customers who claim the non-income support
payment rate will be:

Next payment:

-   $450 (that is, customers receiving $750 or $450 will all get the
    same amount of $450)

Final payment:

-   $320 (that is, everyone will get $320)

See ‘Payment amounts’ and ‘Timeframes for claiming’ in the Operational
Blueprint for the event for the relevant periods the final payments will
apply to.

To be eligible for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment once a state reaches
80% full vaccination of its population who are aged 16 years and older,
they must

-   have received payment for the relevant period immediately before the
    state or territory reached 80% full vaccination of its population
    who are aged 16 years of age or older, and
-   continue to meet the eligibility criteria for that state or
    territory

A customer’s first claim for COVID-19 Disaster Payment cannot be made in
the final 2 relevant periods once a state or territory has reached 80%
full vaccination.

Customers who need financial assistance after the COVID-19 Disaster
Payment ends should visit the Payment and Service Finder to find out
which payment best meets their needs and situation.

Document standards – taking phone claim details

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

The COVID19 DP ACC Pre-Claim Check Fast Note must be used to record the
customer’s intention to claim and if basic requirements have been met.

If:

-   met, a summary of the pre-claim check outcomes is recorded in this
    Fast Note and ACC is run
-   not met, the reason for the claim not proceeding must be recorded in
    this Fast Note and ACC is not run

After completing an ACC, the claim is automatically referred to
Automation teams to determine if the claim can be processed by Digitally
Enabled Processing (DEP).

If the claim is deemed unsuitable for automated processing, it will be
allocated back to staff for a manual assessment.

Verbal claim template process (when ACC cannot be run)

ACC will not run:

-   if a claiming period has closed, or
-   where sole traders do not have an ABN or customers cannot access
    their employer's ABN

When ACC cannot be run, phone claims must be documented using the
relevant verbal claim template.

Always use the version in the Resources page. Content is updated
regularly. Using the current version prevents accidental use of customer
data from a previous claim.

Once completed, it is then copied and pasted into the relevant Verbal
Claim Fast Note:

-   New South Wales - NSW- COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Verbal Claim Fast Note
-   Victoria (August 2021) - VIC-AUG-COVID-19 DP VERBAL Fast Note
-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT-COVID-19 DP Verbal Claim Fast
    Note
-   Tasmania – TAS-COVID-19 DP Verbal Claim Fast Note
-   Northern Territory - NT-COVID-19 DP Verbal Claim Fast Note
-   Queensland - QLD-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt VERBAL Fast Note
-   South Australia - SA-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt VERBAL Fast Note
-   Victoria (July 2021) - VIC-JULY-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt VERBAL Fast
    Note

The verbal claim template/Fast Note must be completed for each 'relevant
period' a customer is claiming for where automatic payments do not
apply.

Document standards – finalising phone claims

The following must be completed when the customer is eligible after

-   a manual assessment was completed for an ACC that was run, or
-   the verbal claim template process was used

-   New South Wales - NSW- COVID-19 DP Granted PHONE Fast Note
-   Victoria (August 2021) - VIC-AUG-COVID-19 DP Granted VERBAL Fast
    Note
-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT-COVID-19 Granted Verbal Fast Note
-   Tasmania – TAS-COVID-19 Granted Verbal Fast Note
-   Northern Territory - NT-COVID-19 Granted Verbal Fast Note
-   Queensland - QLD-COVID-19 DP Granted PHONE Fast Note
-   South Australia - SA-COVID-19 DP Granted PHONE Fast Note
-   Victoria (July 2021) - VIC- JULY-COVID-19 DP Granted VERBAL Fast
    Note
-   Victoria (4-10June 2021) - VIC- COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Granted Fast
    Note

Staff must complete the relevant Granted Fast Note for each 'relevant
period' a customer meets the eligibility criteria where automatic
payments do not apply.

The following must be completed when:

-   a manual assessment was completed for an ACC, and
-   the customer is not eligible

-   Northern Territory - NT-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Victoria (August 2021) - VIC-AUG-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Tasmania - TAS-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Queensland - QLD-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt REJECTED Fast Note
-   South Australia - SA-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected Fast Note
-   Victoria (July 2021) - VIC-JULY-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt REJECTED Fast
    Note
-   New South Wales - NSW - COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected Fast
-   Victoria (4-10June 2021) - VIC - COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected
    Fast Note

Staff must complete the relevant Rejected Fast Note for each 'relevant
period' a customer does not meet the eligibility criteria.

Document standards - finalising online claims

If a customer is eligible, complete for:

-   New South Wales - NSW- COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Victoria (August 2021) - VIC-AUG-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast
    Note
-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT-COVID-19 Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Tasmania - TAS-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Northern Territory - NT-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Queensland - QLD-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   South Australia - SA-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Victoria (July 2021) - VIC-JULY-COVID-19 DP Granted ONLINE Fast Note
-   Victoria (4-10June 2021) - VIC-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Granted Fast
    Note

Staff must complete the relevant Granted Fast Note for each 'relevant
period' a customer meets the eligibility criteria where automatic
payments do not apply.

If a customer is not eligible, complete for:

-   New South Wales - NSW - COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected Fast
-   Victoria (August 2021) - VIC-AUG-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Australian Capital Territory - ACT-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Tasmania - TAS-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Northern Territory - NT-COVID-19 DP REJECTED Fast Note
-   Queensland - QLD-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt REJECTED Fast Note
-   South Australia - SA-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected Fast Note
-   Victoria (July 2021) - VIC-JULY-COVID-19 Disaster Pymt REJECTED Fast
    Note
-   Victoria (4-10June 2021) - VIC - COVID-19 Disaster Pymt Rejected
    Fast Note

Staff must complete the relevant Rejected Fast Note for each 'relevant
period' a customer does not meet the eligibility criteria.

Customers receiving Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

A customer cannot receive PPL or DAP and a COVID-19 Disaster Payment in
the same relevant period.

When assessing a claim for a customer, staff must check that any past
and/or future PPL and DAP payments do not overlap the COVID-19 Disaster
Payment relevant period the customer is claiming.

PPL customers who have been on paid or unpaid leave from their employer
for any period before or since the birth of their child, are not
entitled to the COVID-19 Disaster Payment for any relevant period where
their paid or unpaid leave covers every day of that relevant period.

Where sole traders do not have an ABN or customers cannot access their employer's ABN

Some customers

-   will be unable to provide their employer's ABN, as it is suppressed,
    or
-   may be a sole trader who does not have an ABN

These customers

-   can only lodge phone claims using the relevant verbal claim
    template/Fast Note process
-   cannot lodge phone claims using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)
-   cannot lodge online claims

In the relevant verbal claim template, staff must record the reason why
the customer cannot provide an ABN. Staff will need to consider if a
customer is eligible for payment based on them not having an ABN or
access to their employers ABN. Customers who are working in the cash
economy, and not participating in the taxation system, and not complying
with their tax obligations are not eligible for payment.

Note: a person can apply to have details of their ABN suppressed where
it may be a risk to personal safety of someone associated with the
business or there are other exceptional circumstances.

If a claiming period has closed

If a customer advises of special circumstances that led to being unable
to lodge a claim within the claiming period:

-   these claims are escalated to the Level 2 Helpdesk (by the Technical
    Peer Support via a payment query template) for a decision to be made
-   the Disaster Recovery Payment Claims workflow is not run, unless the
    Level 2 Helpdesk advises special circumstances have been granted

Note: if a customer was awaiting a decision on a state small business
payment and this caused the delay in lodging a claim for the COVID-19
Disaster Payment, this is not considered a special circumstance. Do not
contact the Technical Peer Support to escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk.

This is also needed for any state or territory event where

automatic payments apply and:

-   a customer advises they have previously tried to claim via phone or
    online, and
-   the customer's Document List (DL) screen has a record of them
    previously contacting the agency before the claiming period closed
    to lodge a claim but they were told by staff they could not

For any state or territory where automatic payments do not apply,
special circumstances do not need to be escalated to the Level 2
Helpdesk where:

-   a customer advises they have previously tried to claim via phone or
    online, and
-   the customer's Document List (DL) screen has a record of them
    previously contacting the agency before the claiming period closed
    to lodge a claim but they were told by staff they could not

If a claiming period has closed, ACC will not work.

Staff will need to use the relevant verbal claim template.

Rejecting claims

ACC phone claims that do not meet the pre-claim checks are not run in
ACC, so are not ‘rejected’.

Phone claims using the verbal claim template process that do not meet
the pre-claim checks are not run in the Disaster Recover Payment Claims
workflow, so are not ‘rejected’ (unless Operational Blueprint processes
state this can be done).

For phone claims using ACC or the verbal claim template process,
customers are advised the payment is not suitable for them and their
claim cannot proceed.

If an ACC phone claim cannot be automatically assessed by Digitally
Enabled Processing (DEP) and is allocated back to staff for manual
assessment, the claim is

-   assessed like an online claim, however staff must make sure
    residence and identity checks were completed with the customer at
    the time of their claim
-   finalised (granted or rejected) in the Disaster Recovery Payment
    Claims workflow

If:

-   allocated a pending rejection, see COVID-19 Disaster Payment -
    rejecting claims
-   after assessing a new online claim, the customer does not meet the
    eligibility requirements, see Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment
    claims for how to reject the claim

Evidence

Do not ask customers to provide evidence for their claim to be granted.

Tell customers to keep documents to support they are eligible to receive
a payment such as:

-   driver's licence, rates notice or utilities notice - to support a
    residential address is in an area subject to a state public health
    order for a stay at home restricted movement
-   payslips, letter of employment, letter of offer - to support
    employment and address of an employer/s

They must declare before starting a claim that they:

-   will answer questions honestly and accurately
-   understand that Services Australia may contact their employer and
    other agencies to confirm that the information they provide is
    correct
-   understand there are serious penalties for deliberately claiming a
    payment they are not entitled to'

Exempt income for income tests

COVID-19 Disaster Payments:

-   are an exempt lump sum
-   are exempt income for Income Support Payments
-   will not be included in the income test

Customers who have a partner receiving these payments should not include
them for income support reporting purposes.

Income support payment customers

To receive the COVID-19 Disaster Payment, a customer must not have
received or will not receive an income support payment (including a zero
rate) for any day in the COVID-19 Disaster Payment relevant period they
are claiming for.

Note: 'zero rate' does not include customers with a pending, assessed
(ASS) or suspended (SUS) status.

Customers may ask to cancel an ISP so they can receive a COVID-19
Disaster Payment.

While this is the customer's choice, they need to be made aware of any
changes to add-on payments or services they may be receiving. The
customer's options should be explained so they can make an informed
decision.

If a customer chooses to cancel an ISP this should be for a date before
a relevant period for the COVID-19 Disaster Payment starts.

For help explaining the customer's options, contact the Technical Peer
Support or contact the queue for the relevant Income Support Payment.

Customer has been paid incorrectly

If a customer has been paid incorrectly, as the incorrect workflow was
run by staff, see COVID-19 Disaster Payment - customer paid incorrectly.

Reviews

For information on the explanation of decision (review) process, see
COVID-19 Disaster Payment - review process.

This process is not to be used if the incorrect workflow was run by
staff. See COVID-19 Disaster Payment - customer paid incorrectly.

Customers with nominee arrangements

A customer lodging a phone claim may need a third party (a person or
organisation) to act on their behalf when claiming the COVID-19 Disaster
Payment. See Appointing nominees and Obligations of nominees.

A nominee's identity must be established before an Authorising a person
or organisation to enquire or act on your behalf (SS313) form is
processed.

If there are concerns about a nominee's identity or claim information
provided by a nominee, submit a Fast Fraud tip-off form.

Phone and online claims where a customer has a payment nominee
arrangement are finalised by specialist staff.

Support for customers

During a phone claim, refer customers to a social worker if they:

-   are at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   are a young person without adequate support
-   are experiencing family and domestic violence
-   present with highly complex circumstances

The Services Australia website has more details about ongoing financial
help.

Payment and Service Finder can be used to get details for external
organisations that can provide additional support to customers.

Support for staff

Eligibility criteria

If help is needed to assess eligibility, contact the Technical Peer
Support. See Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support
(TPS) in Smart Centres.

If needed, the claim will be escalated to the Level 2 Helpdesk using the
payment query template.

See Escalation of claims.

System issues/errors

Contact a Service Support Officer (SSO) on site, if available. Talk to a
Team Leader about how to access an SSO.

If ACC is offline or inaccessible:

-   escalate to mySupport, and
-   use the verbal claim template process

The Resources page has links to attachments, templates, event codes,
forms, task cards, contact details and Services Australia website links.

Related links

COVID-19 Disaster Payment

Coding COVID-19 Disaster Payment claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - rejecting claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - automatic payment and change of
circumstances

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - review process

COVID-19 Disaster Payment - customer paid incorrectly

Assessing income support payment customers COVID-19 Disaster Payment
claims

COVID-19 Disaster Payment claim or automatic payment - customer calls to
enquire

Current emergency management events

Actioning a Data Quality Unit (DQU) request on a multiple or intertwined
Centrelink Customer Reference Number (CRN)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
