
Social workers role in Payments and Integrity 003-12070000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the service social workers provide to the
Payments and Integrity Group. Social workers provide support and
professional consultation to Payments and Integrity staff in their
engagement with customers. Support and professional consultation is also
provided to Services Australia social workers outside the Payments and
Integrity network in their engagement with customers who are affected by
a Payments and Integrity related activity (for example, debt, review,
investigation).

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the agency’s Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the agency’s commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

Social Work Service

The Payments and Integrity Social Work team is a 'virtual' team of
social workers located in different Payments and Integrity sites around
the nation. They deliver a service across the Divisions in the Payments
and Integrity Group.

Social Work Priorities

Social workers are focused on providing support to customers with highly
complex needs and particularly with the following priorities:

-   customers presenting at risk of suicide or self-harm
-   young people without adequate support
-   customers experiencing family and domestic violence

Consultation

Service Officers can consult with social workers about how to
effectively interact with people experiencing significant
vulnerabilities. Social workers can provide help with internal and
external options of support for vulnerable customers.

Risk of suicide or self-harm referrals

Suicidal or self-harm customers

Social workers take direct referrals from staff for customers who are at
risk of suicide or self-harm. These referrals are prioritised and
treated as urgent by the social work team. It is mandatory for staff to
refer customers who may be at risk of suicide or self-harm.

If a customer presents as suicidal or at risk of self-harm, a direct
referral is required via the following avenues:

-   If there is no social worker locally available, contact the Social
    Work Line
-   Choose 'option 1' from the IVR list for priority access to a social
    worker. The call will be answered by the next available social
    worker

Note: customers who are at risk of suicide or self-harm must not be
referred via the Social Work Guided Procedure.

Guided Procedure referrals

Referrals for vulnerable customers are made via workload manager using
the following Social Work Guided Procedure process:

-   Referral Reason select Payments & Integrity Social Worker
-   Referral Details select one of the applicable circumstances for the
    customer
-   Please include the reason for referral in additional information

Professional recommendations

Social Work Support Manager in the Payments and Integrity Social Work
team can provide professional recommendations about:

-   vulnerability reports prior to the execution of search warrants
-   vulnerability reports for fraud investigation cases prior to
    referral to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecution
-   Internal Fraud Control Investigation referrals and support

Direct social work support, if required, is provided by telephone.
Social work staff do not attend the execution of warrants.

All social workers can provide professional recommendations about:

-   special circumstances debt waivers, and
-   compensation preclusion periods

In these cases, the social worker will undertake a holistic assessment
of a person's circumstances and provide a recommendation.

Online Document Recording (ODR) may be used if the matter is not complex
and the total debt for consideration for a waiver in under $1,000.

Templates for the Special Circumstances waiver report and the
Compensation Preclusion Period report are located on the Resources page.

If the case is complex or involves a large debt over $10,000, consult a
Payments and Integrity Group social worker for guidance.

Intelligence and Investigations Branch - search warrants

Guidelines state that before the execution of the search warrant, social
work review is mandatory.

A file assessment completed by a Payments and Integrity social work
Social Work Support Manager (SWSM) is conducted and a summary of risks
provided to the Intelligence and Investigations Branch.

Under no circumstances does the social worker contact the customer
before the execution of a search warrant.

The Payments and Integrity SWSM role in warrant execution is to support
the investigation team and if the circumstances require, provide
outbound telephone support to customers who are suicidal or at risk of
harm.

Intelligence and Investigations Branch requests for social work authored documents or call recordings for release to the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions

The agreed process is as follows:

-   Intelligence and Investigations Branch requests social work authored
    documents, required as part of an investigation, directly from
    Payments and Integrity social work team Social Work Support Manager
    (SWSM)
-   Payments and Integrity social work team SWSM collects these
    documents (in PDF format) and completes a file assessment of the
    customer's record, reviewing the content of the documents to be
    released, identifying sensitivities, risks to the customer and third
    parties or other concerns based on customer circumstances
-   The Payments and Integrity social work team SWSM provides the
    documents in full, as well as any considerations regarding the use
    of the social work authored content, to both Intelligence and
    Investigations Branch and social work referrals via email
    concurrently
-   If a Payments and Integrity team SWSM is unavailable, the
    Intelligence and Investigations Branch can email social work
    referrals directly requesting a file assessment be completed and the
    provision of the required social work authored documents

Social work call recordings (if available) that are required as part of
an investigation, are to be collected by the Intelligence and
Investigations Branch and included in a request email directly to social
work referrals mailbox. The Professional Service Delivery Operations
Team (PSDO) in the Social Work Services Branch have oversight of these
requests and provide guidance to social workers on the correct processes
for the external release of social work authored documents.

Learning and development

Social Work Services will respond to training requests that are
identified. All requests can be made via the Requests for Social Work
Training SharePoint page.

Social workers are skilled to deliver the following:

-   Suicide Awareness
-   Self care and Resilience
-   Family and Domestic Violence

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for social work
referrals.

Related links

Social work service referral

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

Special and unusual circumstances waivers

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
