
Special Benefit (SpB) customer going overseas 003-08070040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to decide if Special Benefit (SpB) is payable
to the customer while they are overseas and for how long. It explains
actions the Service Officer and the customer are to take before the
customer’s departure. Use the portability script when assessing a
customer's departure from Australia.

Leaving to live in another country

If a SpB customer leaves Australia to live in another country, SpB and
any concessions or add-ons will stop on the date of departure as the
customer is no longer an Australian resident and loses qualification.

Temporary absence - approved reason for travel

SpB customers (including principal carers of a dependent child and
certain temporary visa holders) who temporarily leave Australia for an
approved reason may be entitled to payment for a specific negotiated
period but no more than 6 weeks.

SpB is portable for a specific negotiated period (expected to be only a
few weeks but not more than the maximum portability period) for absences
about:

-   eligible medical treatment of a kind not available in Australia
-   humanitarian reasons such as custody or adoption proceedings
-   an acute family crisis such as the death of a family member or a
    family member suffering an illness which is serious

The allowable absence reasons are subject to very specific guidelines.

Attention should be given to the source of the funds used to pay for
overseas travel and any free board and lodgings or financial support
that may be provided. Make sure all general qualifications for Special
Benefit will be satisfied during the period of absence.

The rate paid for SpB customers who are payable overseas will include
add-ons (if qualified) for the period of the absence up to the maximum
portability period.

Supporting documents - acceptable proof of the absence

Customers will need to provide acceptable proof of the absence to
determine if they satisfy one of the approved reasons, preferably before
their departure.

In an emergency, if it is accepted that the customer is leaving for an
approved reason they will need to provide supporting documents on their
return. If the documents are not acceptable or not provided, a debt will
be raised.

If a customer provides evidence or supporting documents to a service
centre about a previous temporary absence, which was not for an approved
reason at the time, there is no need to run the Review officer script as
a decision on their portability has not yet been made. Refer the case to
Centrelink International Services (CIS). See Resources for contact
details.

SpB will stop from the date of departure if the reason for leaving
Australia is not acceptable or proof of the reason is not provided
either before or after the absence.

Portability interview

Use the Portability Script - Departures and Returns to assess the
customer's entitlement to payment while they are outside Australia. If
the script is available, use it to code the absence from Australia.

Service centre and Smart Centre staff are responsible for handling the
portability interview and any departure coding where a customer clearly
does not satisfy an approved reason or where the customer is leaving
Australia to live in another country.

If a customer has indicated their overseas travel meets the initial
criteria for an approved reason, refer the case to Centrelink
International Services (CIS) to assess entitlement and code the
departure. The portability script will guide service centre and Smart
Centre staff when it is necessary to refer to CIS.

Only CIS have the delegation to assess, approve and record an approved
absence.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not inside Australia for any
part of the day they departed Australia regardless of the time of
departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia on a cruise,
the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last Australian
port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence. They are considered to be inside Australia on that day, and
therefore no longer affected by portability. If they leave and return on
the same day, this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The system
assesses portability of the payment, regardless of whether the customer
notified or not. Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities
should not be cancelled.

Services Australia uses the date of departure or arrival provided by the
Department of Home Affairs. If adversely affected, the customer can
provide evidence of alternative dates. The agency must consider applying
the alternative dates if it is reasonable and results in a beneficial
outcome for the customer.

In many cases, customers do not have to advise the agency they are
leaving Australia temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations when customers must advise of a
departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have returned to
Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
using the Travelling outside of Australia service within their
Centrelink online account. If a customer's circumstances are more
complex, the system will prompt them to contact the agency.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they have leaving or returning to Australia, see Resources.

Customer advises change to departure or return dates

If a customer who is travelling for an approved reason advises they are
departing on a specific date, and then departs Australia more than 3
days before or more than 3 days after the advised date:

-   Any specific negotiated period of portability approved for the
    original date of departure will no longer apply
-   The customer's approved reason for travel outside Australia may no
    longer be valid, and payments will stop when the immigration
    datalink verifies the customer's actual date of departure
-   It is essential that a customer advises of any change in their
    departure details before they travel if they want to be paid for the
    absence

If the customer is unable to return to Australia at the end of the
specific negotiated period, they should contact Centrelink International
Services (CIS) or their payment will stop. If more time overseas is
needed, this can be discussed and any approved absence possibly
extended.

Services Australia has the discretion to extend the period of
portability under certain circumstances:

-   if the customer is unable to return to Australia for a reason other
    than an  approved reason  (for example, they are hospitalised), or
-   the customer is still needed overseas at the end of the maximum
    portability period

In both situations, refer the customer to CIS for assessment and coding.

Customer's dependent child leaving Australia

If the customer is the principal carer of a dependent child (or
children) and that child (or all dependent children) leaves Australia,
it can affect the customer's entitlement. It may also have an impact on
the mutual obligation requirements of a customer.

If the child goes overseas to live in another country, they stop being a
dependent child and the customer will stop being considered the
principal carer for that child immediately on the child's departure. Any
payment or concession paid to the customer for the care for the child
will stop on departure.

If a child leaves Australia temporarily or was born outside Australia,
the customer will generally still be regarded as the principal carer for
up to 6 weeks, even if the customer remains in Australia.

A person cannot be the principal carer of any child who has been outside
Australia for more than 6 weeks, unless:

-   the customer is outside Australia with that child, and
-   they are still entitled to the social security payment they were
    receiving when they left Australia (that is, the customer's maximum
    portability period has not stopped)

If the customer returns to Australia without the child and the child has
already been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks, the customer will
stop being considered the principal carer for that child from the date
of their return.

The customer will stop being the principal carer of that child for the
entire period of the later absence, if:

-   a customer has stopped being the principal carer of a child because
    the child has been outside Australia for more than 6 weeks, and
-   the child returns to Australia for less than 6 weeks before going
    overseas again

If the child returns to Australia and the customer remains overseas, the
customer continues to be the principal carer for the child for the
remainder of the customer's portability period. If the child leaves
Australia again less than 6 weeks from return and re-joins the customer
overseas, the customer will continue to be considered the principal
carer for that child for the remainder of the customer's portability
period.

Restoration of payment upon return to Australia

If a customer remains outside Australia after their payment has stopped
for a portability related reason, continuation of payment on their
return to Australia may be possible. Generally, payment can be
automatically or manually restored, if they return to Australia within
13 weeks of their payment stopping. See Returning to Australia.

The Resources page has Centrelink International Services (CIS) contact
details for staff, Special Benefit (SpB) portability scenarios and links
to the Services Australia website for information for customers
travelling overseas.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Overseas absences for eligible medical reasons

Overseas absences for humanitarian reasons

Overseas absences due to acute family crisis

Portability of Add-ons

Discretion to extend portability period

Returning to Australia

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Reviews and change of circumstances for Special Benefit (SpB)

View/update overseas travel online

Actioning immigration datalink activities

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
