
Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA 003-03040000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This file is for emergency events from 2021. Contact Technical Peer
Support for help with claims for events before 2021, (because of rate
calculator changes).

This procedure gives details about the payment rates for Disaster
Recovery Allowance (DRA) and Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand
non-protected Special Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRA). NZ
DRA was known as ex-gratia DRA.

Rates for customers aged 22 years or over

The fortnightly rate of DRA/NZ DRA is the same as the maximum applicable
basic rate of JobSeeker Payment (JSP) for the period the customer is
claiming for:

-   Single, no children
-   Single, with a dependent child/ren
-   Partnered (each)

For current rate information, see Rates and Thresholds: JobSeeker
Payment (JSP) - rates.

Rates for customers under 22 years

The fortnightly rate of DRA/NZ DRA is the same as the maximum applicable
basic rate of Youth Allowance (YA):

-   Single, under 18 years at home
-   Single, over 18 years at home
-   Single or partnered - no dependants (away from home)
-   Partnered with dependants
-   Single with dependants

For current rate information, see Rates and Thresholds, Youth Allowance
(YA) - rates (incl. special Rate and YDS).

Reporting income

Customers do not need to report their income each fortnight to receive
payment.

Customers will need to report any change in circumstances or if their
income is equal to or more than the Average Weekly Ordinary Time
Earnings (AWOTE) for full-time adults.

When customers report income, go to Managing DRA or NZ DRA after grant.

Additional information

When receiving DRA/NZ DRA, customers will not be paid the Energy
Supplement.

No waiting periods apply to DRA/NZ DRA.

There is no partner income test for DRA/NZ DRA.

There is no assets test for DRA/NZ DRA.

The Resources page has the DRA and NZ DRA – calculating payment rates
factsheet.

Related links

DRA and NZ DRA

Eligibility for DRA and NZ DRA

Claiming emergency payments

Processing Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) claims in Process Direct

Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First

Managing DRA or NZ DRA after grant

Raising emergency payment debts and grant and ex-gratia overpayments

Reporting option online

Reporting using Phone Self Service option

Emergency management events

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Rate thresholds

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
