
Eligibility and coding MH17 Family Support Package claims 003-19080806

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to assess a customer’s eligibility to receive
an MH17 Family Support Package payment and how to record and code MH17
Family Support Package claims.

The claiming period closed at 11:59 pm 25 August 2022. Late claims may
be accepted in special circumstances. To discuss special circumstances,
customers should email the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade -
MH17.

Eligibility criteria

To be eligible to receive the MH17 Family Support Package, a customer
must be:

-   the family member of an Australian victim, and
-   seeking to observe or participate in the Dutch national prosecution
    of the individuals responsible for the downing of MH17, and
-   have travel insurance that includes coverage for illness and
    COVID-19 related disruptions

Customers:

-   must provide evidence of their relationship with the Australian
    victim
-   who received assistance in travel period 1 who are claiming for
    travel period 4, see Received assistance in travel period one

The child’s legal guardian must lodge claims for a child under 16 years.

If more than one legal guardian lodges a claim, evidence of who is
paying for the child’s travel and accommodation must be provided.

Customers must notify the agency if circumstances that may affect their
eligibility change. For example, travel arrangements have been
cancelled.

If the customer does not notify the agency within 14 days of the change
in circumstances, an overpayment may result.

Attachment B of the MH17 Family Support Package - Guidelines includes
the names of all Australian victims.

Limit to assistance

The assistance is limited to one trip in each travel period for up to 4
family members for each Australian victim.

If more than 4 family members submit a claim, special circumstances may
be considered.

If only one family member submits a claim, and no other known family
members are identified as intending to claim, that family member can
have a support person accompany them.

In all other circumstances, if a family member requests a support
person, escalate the claim as a special circumstance.

Each customer (including the support person) must submit a separate
claim.

Received assistance in travel period one

Customers who received assistance in travel period one must have used in
full, or have plans to use in full, this assistance for travel before 30
June 2022 to be eligible for assistance in travel period 4.

See Travel period one and did not travel because of COVID-19.

Rates of payment

If granted, the agency will provide eligible customers with a one-off:

-   travel payment of up to $3,000, to help with the cost of airfares,
    insurance and ground transport to attend the proceedings
-   living allowance payment of up to $210 per night, capped at $2,100
    to help with the cost of accommodation and meals
-   a payment of up to $1,000, to help with quarantine and/or other
    increased or unexpected travel expenses because of COVID-19

The travel payment of up to $3,000 and payment of up to $1,000 for
quarantine and/or other increased or unexpected travel expenses because
of COVID-19 is only available to customers who live outside of the
Netherlands.

Customers may also be eligible to receive additional assistance.

The agency will not provide customers with travel advice or make any
travel arrangements on their behalf.

Customers:

are expected to take out appropriate travel insurance

-   this includes coverage for illness and COVID-19 related disruptions

will not need to provide evidence of this to the agency

are responsible for complying with all COVID-19 entry exit and transit
requirements

Additional assistance

A customer may receive additional financial assistance beyond the grant
amount.

The claim form includes the following question:

-   Do you believe you will have substantial difficulty travelling to
    the Netherlands for the purposes of observing or participating in
    the Dutch National Prosecution unless you receive additional
    financial assistance beyond the grant amount?

If a customer selects Yes to this question, they will also need to
complete a statutory declaration form and send this to Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade - MH17.

If a customer may be eligible to receive the additional assistance, see
Special circumstances.

Family member hierarchy

When assessing a claim for the MH17 Family Support Package,
consideration of the family member hierarchy must be applied in the
following order:

1. Partners

2. Children

3. Parents

4. Siblings

5. Step-parents at the time of the downing (17 July 2014)

6. Step-siblings at the time of the downing (17 July 2014)

7. Other family relationship

The MH17 Family Support Package claim form asks customers to detail all
Australian victim(s) they had a relationship with and provide evidence
to verify their relationship.

Evidence

When lodging their claim, customers must provide evidence to support
their relationship with the Australian victim. Evidence can include:

-   birth/ marriage/ adoption certificate
-   joint bank account statements
-   lease agreements

Customers who are unable to provide evidence of their relationship with
the Australian victim have been advised to contact the agency.

If the customer is unable to provide sufficient evidence to support
their relationship, the customer may submit a Commonwealth Statutory
Declaration. The declaration must provide details of the relationship.
For example, length and nature.

Customers must make their own travel bookings and arrangements,
including flights and accommodation, and must keep all relevant travel
documentation for a period of up to 5 years. This includes original
receipts for accommodation and flights as proof of attendance. While
customers do not need to provide this as evidence when lodging a claim,
the agency may request proof of travel at a later date.

If a customer claiming the MH17 Family Support Package needs to provide
more evidence to support their claim, see the Requesting evidence table.

Identity confirmation requirements

A customer, their nominee or a legal guardian of a child under 16 years
who does not have an Identity Confirmation Indicator (ICI) of confirmed
must provide identity documents to the agency. See Identity confirmation
for the MH17 Family Support Package.

Special circumstances

Special circumstances allow the agency to deal with unforeseen
individual circumstances. Special circumstances can include:

the claim is submitted outside the lodgement period

more than 4 family members for any one MH17 Australian victim submit
claims in the travel period

a customer advises additional costs incurred in travelling to the
Netherlands will significantly impact their ability to acquire food,
clothing, accommodation and/or other basic needs

-   Note: additional costs do not include flights and accommodation, but
    may include and is not limited to significant medical or allied
    health costs. If eligible, additional assistance of up to $1,000 per
    customer may be provided

if a customer receives a partial refund or credit for travel cancelled
due to COVID-19 they

-   should use the partial refund received for travel the next time they
    travel for the purpose of observing or participating in the Dutch
    national prosecution
-   can apply under special circumstances to receive the balance not
    refunded or credited

if a customer has requested a review of a decision and does not agree
with the outcome, see Reviews

If a customer is seeking the additional financial assistance of $1,000,
the customer must provide a statutory declaration to include the
following information, to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade -
MH17:

-   an explanation of their circumstances,
-   evidence of their difficulty/ additional costs, which may include
    statements of income, information on their liquid assets, supporting
    statements from a medical practitioner, and
-   an estimate of costs involved, including invoices or quotes for
    transport and accommodation

All special circumstances claims must be escalated to the Level 2
Helpdesk. See the Escalating claims and special circumstances table.

Timeframes for claiming

There are 5 claiming periods:

-   1 November to 16 December 2019. Note: claiming period closed
-   1 March to 30 April 2020 (did not occur due to COVID-19
    restrictions)
-   1 March to 30 April 2021 (did not occur due to COVID-19
    restrictions)
-   11 April 2022 to 20 May 2022. Note: claiming period closed
-   11 August 2022 to 25 August 2022. Note: claiming period closed

Late claims may be accepted in special circumstances. To discuss special
circumstances, customers should email the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade - MH17.

Travel period dates:

-   1 March 2020 and 30 June 2020
-   1 July 2020 and 30 June 2021 (did not occur because of COVID-19
    restrictions)
-   1 July 2021 and 30 June 2022 (did not occur because of COVID-19
    restrictions)
-   1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023 (2 claiming periods)

The MH17 Family Support Package will end once the prosecution
proceedings have ended or the allocated funding is exhausted, whichever
is first.

The Resources page contains a table with claiming and travel dates.

Customers receiving other Centrelink benefits or allowances

Customers in receipt of a Centrelink Benefit or Allowance travelling to
the Netherlands to attend the Dutch national prosecution should be
considered for a Restricted Portability assessment and should be advised
to speak with Centrelink International Services line.

This applies to any person travelling to the Netherlands to attend the
Dutch national prosecution. It is not limited to customers eligible to
receive the MH17 Family Support Package.

Note: In the unlikely event, a customer’s Centrelink benefit or
allowance will be cancelled because travel to attend the Dutch national
prosecution, they may be eligible to receive the additional assistance
payment of up to $1,000. See Special circumstances.

COVID-19 related cancellation of travel

A customer may transfer a payment to a family member to observe or
participate in the Dutch national prosecution when they

-   have received a payment, and
-   cannot travel during the travel period due to COVID-19, and
-   have not booked travel or have received a full credit or refund for
    cancelled bookings,

If a customer receives a partial refund or credit for travel cancelled
due to COVID-19 they:

-   should use the partial refund received for travel the next time they
    travel for the purpose of observing or participating in the Dutch
    national prosecution
-   can apply under special circumstances to receive the balance not
    refunded or credited

If a customer cannot get a credit or refund for travel cancelled due to
COVID-19, the assistance received is considered spent for the purposes
the payment was made.

If a customer cannot travel during the travel period due to COVID-19 and
cannot transfer the payment to a family member to observe or participate
in the Dutch national prosecution

the case is referred to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trading
(DFAT)

-   DFAT will decide an outcome

staff must escalate the claim to the Level 2 Helpdesk

Reviews

If a customer does not agree with a decision, they can ask for a
decision to be reviewed. See Request for an explanation, quality check
or review (CLK).

All requests for a review must be lodged by the customer no later than
28 days after each travel period end date. See Timeframes for claiming.

If the decision is unchanged after a review by a Subject Matter Expert
(SME) and the customer wishes to continue with the appeal, the case is
referred to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trading (DFAT) as a
Special Circumstance Case. Staff must escalate the claim to the Level 2
Helpdesk.

Method of payment

Australian bank account

Eligible customers with an Australian bank account will receive payments
into their nominated bank account.

Payments must be made to a bank, building society or credit union
account held in the customer’s name. A joint account is acceptable.
Note: payments cannot be made into an account used exclusively for
funding from the National Disability Insurance Scheme.

Non-Australian bank account

For customers with a non-Australian bank account, assess all other
eligibility criteria and escalate the claim to the dedicated MH17
Service Support Officer (SSO). The MH17 SSO will contact the customer to
discuss the required process. For details on how to access the MH17 SSO,
speak with a Team Leader.

Claim Finalisation

Do not grant or reject claims for the MH17 Family Support Package until
the end of each claim period and after the Operational Response Branch
have confirmed when claim finalisation can start.

See the claim finalisation start dates.

Recording and coding a claim and access required

All MH17 Family Support Package claims must be coded in the Flexible
Support Payment (FSP) subsystem. See the How to access ISS subsystems
task card.

Access to the Flexible Assistance Payments (!FFAP) screen is needed.

To request this access refer to the How to request access to the
Flexible Support Payment !FFAP screen to code amounts for payment
taskcard.

Note: all relevant information for a claim must be recorded as per the
Online Document Recording (ODR) standards.

To record and code a claim, access is also required to the Family
Hierarchy Spreadsheet.

For more details on how to request access to the spreadsheet, where to
find the spreadsheet and information that needs to be inputted into the
spreadsheet refer to the Family Hierarchy Assessment taskcard.

System issues/errors

Escalate any system issues/errors to the dedicated MH17 Service Support
Officer (SSO). For details on how to access the MH17 SSO, speak with a
Team Leader.

Fast Notes

Fast Notes are to be used to document a decision or progress of a claim.

The following Fast Notes are available and can be located via Workspace.
Select Auto Text use Emergency > Claim > MH17:

-   Grant/Reject
-   Progress DOC
-   Act/Call

Manual letters

The following manual letters for the MH17 Family Support Package can be
found in the Resources page:

-   Grant (family member)
-   Grant (support person)
-   Reject
-   Withdrawal
-   Request for information

These need to be issued locally using the manual letter templates.

Before being sent to a customer, manual letters must be reviewed by an
APS6 Team Leader or the APS5 dedicated MH17 Service Support Officer
(SSO).

For details on how to access the MH17 SSO, speak with a Team Leader.

After reviewing the letter, the Team Leader or SSO should annotate the
relevant Grant/Reject or Progress DOC Fast Note on file.

After the letter has been reviewed and approved by Team Leader or SSO,
the letter is to be issued and sent locally. A copy of the letter must
be uploaded to the customer’s record.

Withdrawal of a claim

If a customer wishes to withdraw a claim, it must be done before the
claim has been processed. Details of the withdrawal of the claim must be
recorded in a DOC on the customer’s record and a letter sent to the
customer. See the Withdrawal manual letter.

After the letter has been reviewed and approved by Team Leader or SSO,
issue and send the letter locally.

Upload a copy of the letter to the customer’s record.

Additional support

Customers who are distressed, present with highly complex circumstances
and/or have indicated that they are at risk of suicide or harming
themselves should be offered a referral to a social worker.

Payment and Service Finder can be used to obtain details for external
organisations that can provide additional support to customers.

The Resources page has links to the MH17 payment query template,
Services Australia's website, Australian Federal Police (AFP) next of
kin communications portal, the Dutch Court’s website, Attorney General’s
Department - Statutory declarations, letter templates, contact details
and task cards.

Related links

MH17 Family Support Package

Initial contact and claiming the MH17 Family Support Package

Identity confirmation for the MH17 Family Support Package

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Withdrawal of claims

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Referring customers to a social worker

Identity fraud

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
