
Raising emergency payment debts and grant/ex-gratia overpayments 003-01100000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how potential debts can be raised for emergency
payments and grants (previously known as ex-gratia payments). These
include Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP),
Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA), Disaster Recovery Payment for New
Zealand Special Category (subclass 444) visa holders (NZ DRP) and
Disaster Recovery Allowance for New Zealand Special Category (subclass
444) visa holders (NZ DRA).

Grants

From October 2020, the term 'ex-gratia payments' changed to 'grants'.

Grants include:

-   NZ DRP - previously known as ex-gratia DRP
-   NZ DRA - previously known as ex-gratia DRA
-   Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
-   MH17 Family Support Package

Relevant legislation

AGDRP and DRA are paid under the Social Security Act 1991.

Grants/ex-gratia payments are paid under the Financial Framework
(Supplementary Powers) Act 1997.

When to raise a debt or overpayment

A debt is raised for Social Security Act 1991 payments as per general
procedures for raising debts.

For AGDRP, a debt is raised where a customer was not eligible to receive
a payment.

For DRA, a debt is raised where a customer

-   was not eligible to receive a payment, and/or
-   continued to receive a payment when they were no longer eligible to
    receive a payment

Under similar circumstances, an overpayment is raised for Financial
Framework (Supplementary Powers) Act 1997 payments. These are
grants/ex-gratia payments as listed above.

Overpayments are:

-   raised as outlined in the specific policy guidelines (often known as
    Operational Instructions), and
-   recovered under the Public Governance, Performance and
    Accountability Act 2013. This replaced the Financial Management
    Accountability Act 1997 from 1 July 2014

Systems

AGDRP and grants/ex-gratia payments

-   From December 2011, AGDRP and one-off grants/ex-gratia payments are
    paid in the Flexible Support Payment (FSP) system
-   Before December 2011, the Emergency Recovery Payment (ERP) and
    Emergency (EMG) systems were used to deliver these payments

DRA and NZ DRA

DRA and NZ DRA (previously paid and known as ex-gratia DRA) were
implemented in October 2013 and have always been paid in the FSP system.

Request for a formal review

AGDRP or DRA debts

Customers wishing to appeal an AGDRP or DRA debt decision have access to
the standard review and appeals process.

Grants/ex-gratia payments

These are not appealable and cannot be reviewed by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal.

For more information on the appeal options for current grants, see the
Review and appeals section of:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims
-   Eligibility and coding the MH17 Family Support Package
-   Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First

If the customer disagrees with the decision, they can contact the
Commonwealth Ombudsman and/or request a waiver of debt through the
Department of Finance and Deregulation.

The Resources page contains a link to the latest delegation instruments,
the payment query template, how to determine a Disaster ID, and
information on emergency system debt letters.

Related links

Current emergency management events

Waiving Centrelink debts

General debt raising information

Raising Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) debts

Recovery of Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013
(PGPA) overpayments

Claiming emergency payments

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Request for an explanation, quality check or review (CLK)

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
