
Assessing and coding COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program May 2021 (Round 2) claims 003-21050331

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 1 November 2021, enquiries relating to the COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program are to be referred directly to Austrade. This includes
requests for late lodgement, updates on claims that are yet to be
finalised and complaints in relation to claim decisions and grant
outcomes. Applicants can contact Austrade via phone on 1300 729 401 or
email at consumertravelsupport@austrade.gov.au.

This document explains how to assess and code COVID-19 Consumer Travel
Support Program May 2021 (Round 2) claims.

Eligibility and claiming

See COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2 for:

-   how to claim
-   claiming period
-   eligibility requirements
-   Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for applicants
-   payment rates
-   taxable payment details
-   payment methods
-   exceptional circumstances
-   Frequently Asked Questions

Evidence

During the online claim process, applicants must make a declaration that
they:

qualified for the COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program, December
2020 (Round 1)

received the Round 1 payment based on their turnover, not based on Total
Transaction Value (TTV)

are solvent

intend to operate for the April to June 2021 quarter

will make best endeavours to:

-   retain their staff, and
-   meet the business’ obligations to process refunds and travel credits
    to Australian consumers

understand that giving false or misleading information is a serious
criminal offence

will need to repay some or all of the grant if Services Australia later
decides the business was not entitled to the grant

No evidence needs to be lodged with the online application for Round 2.

For claims that have a turnover of $500,000 or more, Services Australia
will send to Austrade:

-   documents lodged by the applicant with their Round 1 and
-   the applicant’s Round 2 claim details

Austrade may ask the applicant to provide more documents to them as part
of:

-   a financial verification review
-   an exceptional circumstances review

The grant amount is calculated using the turnover amount the business
was paid for under Round 1. For payment rates, see COVID-19 Consumer
Travel Support Program, December 2020 (Round 1).

Access needed

Process claims in Process Direct.

Access needed for COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program.

Only staff who have received COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program
Round 2 training should request access.

Claim status

The claim status depends on the step the online application is up to:

-   Cancelled - applicant has cancelled online application
-   Withdrawn - applicant has withdrawn their online application
-   In Process - applicant has started the online application but not
    submitted it
-   Lapsed - applicant has started the online application but not
    submitted it within 90 days
-   Submitted - claims with a turnover of under $500,000 - where the
    system cannot auto assess the payment as the applicant has recorded
    an appeal is pending or that bank account details have changed
-   Under Assessment - claims with a turnover of $500,000 or more - to
    be sent to Austrade for financial assessment
-   Pending Approval - claims with a turnover of $500K or more that have
    been sent to Austrade for financial assessment - Austrade may take 8
    weeks to make decision. Services Australia will be notified of the
    outcome and will implement it
-   Approved - claim finalised with decision to ‘grant‘
-   Rejected - claim finalised with decision to ‘reject’

Referring claims to Austrade

Claims with a status of Under Assessment must be manually referred to
Austrade.

Only specialist staff who receive targeted training will refer these
claims.

To decide if a claim has been sent to Austrade, check:

-   claim status - those pending approval have been sent, and
-   assessment notes in the AusTrade page of the Round 2 claim
    workflow - those sent will have a note to confirm the date the claim
    was sent to Austrade

Actioning claims assessed by Austrade

Austrade will:

complete a financial verification assessment based on:

-   documents provided by Services Australia
-   any other documents they request from the applicant

email Services Australia with the outcome of their review

Claims with a status of Pending Approval must have Austrade’s decision
implemented when it is received.

Only specialist staff who receive targeted training will action claims
assessed by Austrade. The Process page has details.

Document standards

Staff must complete the Round 2 Assessment template before finalising a
claim.

Rejecting claims

Claims that do not meet the eligibility requirements can be rejected.

Quality Management Application (QMA) checking

QMA checking will be a manual process.

The sampling rate is:

-   at least 10 claims checked through QMA
-   to achieve the minimum correctness rate as per the proficiency
    requirements

Further claims may be quality checked if the Round 2 Assessment template
shows that policy and/or processes are not being applied correctly.

See Updating proficiency for QOL.

Review process

For businesses with an eligible assessed turnover under Round 1
totalling:

less than $500,000, Services Australia will manage the review

-   The decision is discussed with the applicant, and the applicant is
    given the chance to provide new information to have the decision
    reassessed
-   If the applicant does not understand the decision and any
    reassessment, they can request an explanation to be provided by a
    Subject Matter Expert (SME)

$500,000 or more, an Austrade SME will review the claim decision. Tell
applicants to contact Austrade by emailing Consumer Travel Support

Claim decisions cannot be referred to an Authorised Review Officer (ARO)
or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

The Process page has more details.

Support for staff

Contact the Level 2 Helpdesk using the Payment query template.

See the Escalation of claims table.

Reassessment of Round 2 claims

Specialist staff will be assigned to a claim when:

-   it has been finalised
-   it has been reviewed, and
-   more action must be taken on the record

These staff will follow a special process outside Process Direct.

Related links

COVID-19 Consumer Travel Support Program Round 2

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Social work service referral

Quality Management Application (QMA) in Process Direct

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
