
Requirements for recording of social work customer contact activities 003-12100000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

For Services Australia social workers only.

This document outlines the responsibility of Services Australia social
workers to record all contacts with customers that involve the social
worker taking some action on a DOC on the customer's record.

On this Page:

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour that raises
concerns about a child's safety, Services Australia sets out specific
steps that must be taken. Follow the agency's Risk Identification and
Reporting model, when identifying and responding to child safety
concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats to the
safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this model
and the agency's commitment to child safety.

Recording customer contact

When a contact is recorded on the Social Work Information System (SWIS),
social workers have the option of directly adding a DOC to the
customer's record.

The professional social work intervention with customers does not always
require a full social work report, however all information relevant to a
customer's entitlement should be recorded as a DOC (or placed on file).

Mandatory actions to record

Social workers should ensure that the following actions are recorded:

the date and type of contact with the customer, for example:

-   telephone contact
-   office interview

the action taken by the social worker, for example:

-   referral to a service
-   referral to other Services Australia staff
-   appointment made to interview customer

any action requested of the customer, for example, to provide supporting
documentation for a claim/review

the existence of a report/social work notes and their location, and

name, designation, and site (service centre, Smart Centre) of the social
worker

Sensitive information should not be recorded as a DOC and in exceptional
circumstances where sensitive information needs to be recorded and
retained; the information should be stored in SWIS Case notes. As this
information is subject to Privacy and Freedom of Information (FOI)
Legislation, a DOC to the effect that further information is available
in SWIS Case notes should be completed.

Related links

Medical/Sensitive Information Storage (MIFE/SIE)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating, reviewing and deleting documents (Fast Note, Callbacks,
ACTDOCs and DOA DOCs)

Social Work Information System (SWIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
