
Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family assistance 003-06010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains services available to help families in crisis or
families experiencing financial hardship who are seeking to expedite the
processing of their family assistance claim.

Special assistance

The majority of customers have relatively straightforward circumstances
and can largely self-manage their business with Services Australia
through a variety of channels and with normal handoff protocols and
supports.

A small number of family assistance customers are in crisis situations
and may contact requiring special assistance.

Financial hardship or customer at risk options

If staff become aware of a particular vulnerability for a customer, they
should be able to access help to expedite the customer's business.

Customers often present with multiple issues, which need a brokered
solution across a number of programs.

In these situations, local relationships are essential in achieving the
best outcomes.

A family in crisis or a family experiencing financial hardship often
have trouble in understanding and complying with claim requirements
and/or need a speedy outcome to meet immediate financial needs.

For a family in crisis, it is reasonable to escalate a request for more
help to provide a suitable outcome for the customer. If appropriate,
consider a verbal claim if a claim is needed.

Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can be run with families in crisis, if
they:

-   are experiencing difficulty in understanding or complying with claim
    requirements, and/or
-   need a speedy outcome to meet immediate financial needs

If a customer cannot submit their claim electronically:

-   a verbal signature declaration script needs to be read to the
    customer, or
-   a Family Declaration form (FDF) signed and returned before the ACC
    can be submitted

From 10 June 2019, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) top-ups, supplements, lump
sum claim amounts and instalment arrears can be used to recover any
debts from the following payments:

-   family assistance
-   social security
-   student assistance, and
-   Paid Parental Leave

This will occur even if the customer has a current payment arrangement.
Previously, FTB amounts could only be used to recover debts from the
following payments:

-   FTB
-   Child Care Benefit (CCB), and
-   Child Care Rebate (CCR)

If exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances apply that may cause the
customer to suffer severe financial hardship, customers can request to
be temporarily excluded from debt recovery before any money being taken
from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up payments.

Advocates

The following is a list of staff best equipped to help a Families
customer in crisis:

-   Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Advisers
-   Community Liaison Unit officers or Community Engagement Officers
-   Prison Liaison Officers
-   Multicultural Service Officers
-   Indigenous Service Officers
-   Service Centre Managers, Team Leaders or Service Support Officers
-   Case Co-ordinators (affected sites only)

Note: if a customer is at risk of suicide or self-harm, experiencing
family and domestic violence, has multiple and complex issues or is a
young person without adequate support, consider a referral to Social
Work Services for more help.

One of the above listed advocates or a Social Worker can submit a

WLM Technical Assistance Form to request urgent allocation of a claim in
unusual and traumatic cases, where there may not be established pathways
for escalation. A locally negotiated approach may be appropriate.

The Resources page has contact information and links to the Services
Australia website.

Related links

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing proof of a child’s birth

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave Scheme payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
