
Processing Special Benefit (SpB) claims 003-08060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process SpB claims in Process Direct (PD).

Submitting claims and documents

A customer and/or their nominee can make a claim for SpB by:

-   submitting an online claim []
-   Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), or
-   lodging a completed Claim for Special Benefit form (SU004)

Claims submitted online or via ACC are subject to Circumstance Change
Monitor (CCM). The Tasks icon displays the status of requested documents
the customer needs to provide to support their claim.

When a SpB paper claim (SU004) is lodged, a Social Application (SOA)
Shell for processing in Process Direct is automatically generated. Paper
claims will not have any tasks attached to the SOA activity. If needed,
a Request for Information (RFI) letter will be sent to the person making
the claim and will be present on the Tasks icon.

When claiming SpB for an Australian Citizen Child, the custodial
parent/guardian must submit a completed paper Claim for Special Benefit
form (SU004). Online claiming is currently not available for these
customers.

Claim processing in Process Direct

Process Direct is used to review the SpB claim information and to
process the claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a Work Item when the SpB claim has been
submitted online, submitted via ACC, or a SOA Shell has been created
from the SpB paper claim.

Process Direct:

-   has information provided by the customer and/or nominee online or
    recorded using ACC
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   loads provisional online claim and ACC information into a SpB claim
    activity
-   has tables and workflows for SpB claims, generating a compliance
    action activity where a Nominated Visa Holder customer is unemployed
    due to a voluntary act or misconduct
-   has functions required to process claims such as the ability to view
    scans, make referrals and request information from the customer

The SOA Shell created from a SpB paper claim (SU004) has no claim
information apart from the CRN, personal details and receipt date. Claim
information will need to be manually updated into the Work Item using
information from the scanned claim and documents.

Mutual obligation requirements

SpB customers who are capable of working, are subject to mutual
obligation requirements, except for Criminal Justice Stay Visa/Victim of
Human Trafficking customers.

There are 2 types of mutual obligations requirements that apply to SpB:

-   SpB Nominated Visa Holder (NVH) mutual obligation requirements,
    which are based on legislation, and
-   SpB mutual obligation requirements, which are based on policy

Both customer groups need to negotiate and enter into a Job Plan, and
satisfy the requirements outlined in their Job Plan. SpB Nominated Visa
Holder customers have the same mutual obligation requirements and
consequences for non-compliance as Job Seeker customers.

If a customer is a Nominated Visa Holder and has recently stopped
suitable employment voluntarily or is unemployed due to misconduct,
compliance action is generated by the Generate Unemployment Non-Payment
Period (UNPP) workflow in Process Direct.

Exemptions can apply for some customers.

To determine which requirements apply, see Mutual obligation
requirements for Special Benefit (SpB).

Study

While SpB is not intended for students, a customer can undertake part
time study provided they simultaneously undertake job search and other
relevant obligations.

The customer’s employment services provider in limited circumstances can
only approve full-time study:

-   less than 12 months or short course
-   vocational study less than 12 months in duration, and the course is
    likely to lead to an employment outcome

Customers under 18 years may undertake secondary study of more than 12
months in duration. When the customer turns 18 years while undertaking
secondary study, they can complete the secondary study that year on a
full-time basis.

For more information, see Mutual obligation requirements for Special
Benefit (SpB).

Payment from DVA

If the customer is receiving a disability payment from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs (DVA), their claim should not be rejected based on
income before checking whether they may be entitled to receive Defence
Force Income Support Allowance (DFISA).

The system will be able to identify these customers if the claim is
correctly coded including DVA disability payment details.

Tax File Number (TFN) exemption for customers under 16

Young customers under 16 years claiming SpB are vulnerable. Generally,
these customers are claiming Special Benefit in the following
categories:

-   Under 16 years for whom it is unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
-   Australian Citizen Children in the custody of a non-permanent
    resident

If a customer under 16 years meets all eligibility criteria except TFN,
SpB is to be granted with a TFN exemption code of U16 - Under 16 years
of age.

Social work intervention

In some cases, social worker involvement is mandatory, such as those
where:

-   a customer is aged under 16
-   unreasonable to live at home (UTLAH)
-   it is identified that the customer may be affected by family and
    domestic violence

In other cases, it may be beneficial to obtain a social worker
assessment and provide a range of service options to the customer (for
example, external services outside of Services Australia).

Weekly payments

SpB customers are able to receive their payments weekly if one of the
following applies:

-   homeless
-   at risk of being homeless
-   experiencing difficulty managing finances

Weekly payments are voluntary and reviewable, however it precludes
customers from receiving advance and urgent payments.

See Weekly payments, and Assessing, coding and reviewing weekly
payments.

Reassessment of SpB claims

SpB claims rejected for reasons FRC, FSD or POI may be reassessed, where
all outstanding requested documents have been provided within 13 weeks
of the rejection notice. See Requested documentation not provided
resulting in rejection of new claim.

The SpB processing team will re-index SpB claims where required.

If the customer has failed to supply all documents at the time of the
request for reassessment, the original claim must not be re-indexed.

For more information, see Cancelling claim activities and re-indexing
claims.

Review of decision

If a customer requests an explanation or a formal review of their SpB
claim, staff must follow Request for an explanation or application for a
formal review.

Related links

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Special Benefit (SpB) categories

Special Benefit (SpB) for Australian Citizen Child (ACC) and Australian
permanent resident children

Requested documentation not provided resulting in rejection of new claim

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

Mutual obligation requirements for Special Benefit (SpB)

Unemployment due to a voluntary act or misconduct

Applying an Unemployment Non-Payment Period (UNPP) and determining
hardship provisions

Identify Confirmation

Waiting periods for income support payments

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Self service for nominees

Withdrawal of claims

Review of decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
