
Fixing an incorrect Crisis Payment (CrP) 003-21051929

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to undo a Crisis Payment (CrP) when the
customer was not eligible, or make a top up payment when the customer is
eligible.

When to undo a CrP

Use the Undo Crisis Payment function in Process Direct or the CRIPAY
screen in Customer First:

in very limited circumstances

only to reverse a decision for the following reasons:

-   PRC (pre-release claim) when a CrP-PRI pre-release customer was not
    released on the expected release date. Note: there is no need to
    undo CrP if the customer was released before their expected release
    date. CrP is still payable as per policy advice
-   ERR (processing error) when staff incorrectly granted a CrP. For
    example; CrP granted on the wrong customer record or the customer
    was clearly not entitled
-   REV (review) when a Subject Matter Expert (SME) or Authorised Review
    Officer (ARO) review determines the customer was not entitled to
    receive CrP
-   FRD (fraud) only when third party fraud has been identified in the
    granting of a CrP

Result of undo CrP coding

If the payment and letter have not issued, they will be stopped.

If the payment has issued, CrP entitlement will be reversed and a debt
shell generated.

The system will count the number of CrPs paid. This will make sure the
incorrect grant will not count towards the number of payments a customer
can receive under each category of CrP.

The One Off Payment (OOP) screen will show:

-   the original CrP grant and Activity Management Receipt (AMR) of the
    payment which has been deleted by the AMR of the reversal action
-   the reversal activity will display an amount of 0.00 and the change
    reason: REV (review), ERR (processing error) or PRC (pre-release
    claim)

The One Time Payment Summary (OTPSUM) screen will show the reversal
activity with entitlement of 0.00.

When to make a top up payment for CrP

A customer may be assessed for Crisis Payment when on a partnered rate
of payment before a marital assessment of separation is completed.

These cases must be escalated using Roxy for a top up payment to be
issued.

Access to CRIPAY screen

Access is limited to:

-   staff with access to the PYAJ screen, including service centre and
    Smart Centre APS5 staff or above
-   ICT Service Desk staff
-   payment helpdesk staff

Access can be granted in limited circumstances. Access must be required
for a person’s ongoing role, if they do not have PYAJ access.

For example, a Prison Liaison Officer needs access to reverse CrP
pre-release grants for customers who are released from prison later than
the expected date.

The Resources page has a link to contact details for the Crisis Payment
Program team.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
