
Social work assistance for vulnerable Australians who arrive in Australia without any local support structure to assist them 003-12090000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only

This document outlines the role of social workers in Services Australia
in assisting vulnerable Australians returning to Australia without
support to help them reintegrate into society.

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)

DFAT assists Australian citizens overseas who are in need. Part of their
role is to help Australians needing support in their return to
Australia.

DFAT may seek assistance from Services Australia for vulnerable
Australian citizens returning to Australia if there is no known support
from family or friends to help integrate them back into the community.

A Services Schedule, agreed by both Services Australia and DFAT, details
the social work service offer and criteria for its eligibility.

Referrals and direct contact with staff

Requests for assistance from DFAT to Services Australia are made via the
Social Work Services Branch. The Resources page includes a link for
information about Social Work Services Branch positional mailboxes.

DFAT completes the referral form, Repatriation of vulnerable Australians
DFAT, to Services Australia, Social Work Services.

DFAT gives Services Australia as much notice as possible before the
customer's return to Australia to allow time for the assisting social
worker to consider appropriate payments and services, and explore
referrals to potential service providers.

Staff contacted directly by:

-   DFAT seeking assistance for a customer, should refer the contact to
    Social Work Service Branch who will follow up the enquiry on behalf
    of Services Australia
-   a customer living overseas asking about possible repatriation,
    should refer the customer to the Australian Consulate in the country
    they are in
-   a customer living overseas asking about payments or payment
    eligibility, should refer the customer to Centrelink International
    Services (CIS)

Role of Social Work Services Branch

The Business Support team in the Social Work Services Branch provides
support and direction for each referral received. They also provide the
response to DFAT regarding a proposed service offer for the returning
customer.

An 'Information for Returning Australians' information sheet outlines
the service offer provided by Services Australia and is provided to DFAT
for eligible customers seeking support on their return to Australia.

All documents referred to on this page are available from the Social
Work Services Branch. The Resources page includes a link to the Social
Work Services Branch intranet page for contact details.

Service offer for returning Australians

The service offer considered by Services Australia for returning
Australians is included in the Service Schedule, signed by Services
Australia and DFAT.

To determine if a referral from DFAT is accepted by Services Australia,
agreed criteria (included in the Service Schedule) are assessed by the
Social Work Services Branch. A major consideration in determining if a
referral is accepted is the health of the returning Australian. Services
Australia will not offer a service if the customer presents with known
health issues that need be addressed by health professionals. The Social
Work Services Branch advises DFAT of their decision with advice to
contact service providers appropriate for the customer's condition.

The Social Work Services Branch:

-   liaises with the social work manager responsible for the geographic
    footprint to which the vulnerable Australian will return, to
    determine the service offer provided, and
-   coordinates logistics between DFAT and the identified social work
    manager to ensure the returning Australian is aware of the service
    offer they can expect

Services Australia will not release any personal or payment information
about the customer to DFAT without a signed Consent to the Use and
Disclosure of Personal Information form.

The Resources page contains a link to the Social Work Services Branch
page on the Services Australia intranet and contact details for
Centrelink International Services (CIS).

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
