
Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Process Direct 003-22011652

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Do not follow this procedure for self-isolation, quarantine or caring
periods that start on or before 17 January 2022. See Processing Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First.

If allocated an online claim or Assisted Customer Claim, do not process
it in Customer First. If staff are allocated one and not trained in
processing in Process Direct, they should speak with their team leader
or Service Support Officer (SSO) for help reallocating the work item.

Customers can claim online again from 8am Wednesday 20 July 2022. If a
customer calls, tell them to visit
https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/pandemic-leave-disaster-payment for
how to claim online. If a customer does not have access to online
services, they can claim over the phone using Assisted Customer Claim
(ACC) from 9am on the same date.

There are different claiming periods depending on the self-isolation,
quarantine or caring period claimed. See the Resources page.

If a customer has lodged a claim online or using ACC that has not yet
been finalised, they cannot lodge another one. If a customer calls to
ask why they cannot lodge more than one claim, tell them:
‘You can lodge your next claim once you have received confirmation from
Services Australia on the claim outcome of your previous claim.’

Reminder: more than one Flexible Support Payment (including Pandemic
Leave Disaster Payment) cannot be paid on the same day. See Processing
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims in Process Direct.

This document explains how to process Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment
claims received from 18 January 2022 where the period of self-isolation,
quarantine or caring starts on or after 18 January 2022. These claims
are processed in Process Direct.

Claims before 18 January 2022

For self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods that start on or before
17 January 2022 see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
Customer First.

Timeframes for claiming

See the Resources page in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment.

Processing claims in Process Direct

Staff must have the:

-   ZCCRM_DHS_CPO security role approved in ESSentials to access Process
    Direct, and
-   skill tag of NV_CLK_NCL_PDP in Essentials to receive Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment claims

Only staff trained in processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claims
should process claims.

Use Process Direct to review the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment claim
information and to process the claim once all required information is
available.

A claim ID is created as a work item when the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment claim is lodged online or via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Note: if an ACC claim does not meet the business rules for an automatic
assessment, it will be allocated to staff to manually process in line
with agency priorities. The ‘Channel’ of these claims shows as INTERNAL.
The ‘Channel’ of online claims shows as WEB CHANNEL.

Process Direct:

-   has information provided by the customer or their correspondence
    nominee online or recorded using ACC
-   loads provisional claim information into a Pandemic Leave Disaster
    Payment claim activity
-   has functions to view any scanned documents

Note: claims where a payment is to be issued to a payment nominee will
be ‘handed over’ to appropriately trained staff with access to Flexible
Support Payment FFAP to finalise in the !FFAP screen.

If allocated a claim in Customer First to complete do not action it.
Speak with your team leader.

Do not process claims in Customer First

If allocated an online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), do not
complete it in Customer First.

If staff are allocated one and not trained in processing in Process
Direct, they should speak with their team leader or Service Support
Officer (SSO) for help to reallocate the work item.

Staff can identify these claims

in the Activity List (AL) screen

-   Description: Emergency Exgratia/New Claim
    - if the activity is selected a Handover Confirmation (COV) screen
    will display

In the Document List (DL) screen

-   Summary: CUS CLM EXG EXG OLC Claim Progress

Lodging claims

Claims for self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods that start:

-   on or before 17 January 2022, see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster
    Payment Claims in Customer First
-   on or after 18 January 2022, customers can claim online

Details on how to claim are available for customers on the Centrelink
online account website.

If a customer calls to enquire about how to claim online, a myGov
linking code should only be issued after all identity documents have
been verified.

A phone claim using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) can be offered to
customers:

-   with no access to online services, or
-   deemed unable to or unsuitable to complete an online claim

Restricted Access customers

Customers with Restricted Access can only claim over the phone using
ACC.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing, is where a claim is assessed using criteria
to identify if it is suitable for an automated outcome.

If a claim meets the business rules for an automatic assessment DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer’s record relating to the claim will show
that ROXY has created these.

If it does not meet the business rules for an automatic assessment:

-   it will be allocated to staff to manually process in line with
    agency priorities, and
-   it is automatically checked against the agency’s Fraud Management
    System blacklist and Fraud

Customer Identity Watch List. If a match is identified the claim is
automatically allocated to a Fraud Analyst for assessment

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation, the Service Officer must enter
their own logon as the Decision Maker when running the script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

myGov linking code

If a customer calls to enquire about how to claim online, a myGov
linking code should only be issued after all identity documents have
been verified.

Identity requirements

The following only applies for self-isolation, quarantine or caring
periods that start on or after 18 January 2022.

For self-isolation, quarantine or caring periods that start on or before
17 January 2022 see Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in
Customer First.

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment can be paid if a customer has not
completed identity confirmation.

Staff must be satisfied the person making the claim is:

-   who they say they are, and
-   eligible to receive the payment

Online claims

Staff do not need to review or follow-up any identity requirements for
online claims.

These customers meet:

-   identity requirements by being previously known to Centrelink and
    using their existing Centrelink online account to lodge their claim,
    they do not need to provide any further identity documents to be
    verified, or
-   abridged identity requirements (Connected ID) by creating a new
    myGov account and linking it to a Centrelink online account. This
    way they meet identity requirements to receive a payment

When allocated a claim, staff must check the ‘Channel.’ If it shows as
WEB CHANNEL, this is an online claim lodged by a customer and the
customer will meet the identity requirements. ‘Submitted by’ will show
the customer’s CRN.

If the ‘Channel’ shows as INTERNAL, this is a phone claim lodged using
Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). ‘Submitted by’ will show the User ID of
the Service Officer who submitted the ACC.

If a claim that shows as INTERNAL does not meet the identity
requirements for phone claims (see below), their claim is to be
rejected.

Phone claims - Assisted Customer Claim (ACC)

If a customer has a confirmed identity status or a confirmed
transitional identity status, they meet the identity requirements for
the payment. No further identity documents need to be verified.

If not, customers are asked to provide the details of one document from
each category:

Commencement of Identity (CoI)

-   A customer can demonstrate CoI in Australia by providing documents
    that confirm their birth in Australia or proof of arrival in
    Australia, establishing the customer's existence in Australia
-   If a customer cannot provide a CoI document, see Commencement of
    Identity

Primary Use in Community (PUiC)

-   These documents are generally government issued and most have a
    photograph and security features

Secondary Use in Community (SUiC)

-   These documents can be government or non-government issued and show
    use of identity in the community

Each identity document will be coded and verified in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Customers must provide consent before documents can be verified through
the Document Verification Service (DVS).

For claims lodged over the phone by Assisted Customer Claim (ACC),
customers must agree to the declarations read to them.

Customers do not need to attend a service centre to complete identity
confirmation. That is, a ‘no linkage’ identity status applies and no
facial comparison to photo identity is needed.

For customers genuinely unable to provide the required identity
credential details during their phone claim:

-   an Alternative Identity Assessment will be completed either in
    person or over the phone, and
-   an identity review period will be applied

Evidence

Customers self-declare all information in their claim. However, there
are details that staff must check before a claim can be finalised. See
Table 1 on the Process page.

Customers are advised to keep evidence to support their claim, as
Services Australia may ask for it later.

If a customer is asked to provide evidence to support their claim, a
statutory declaration will not be accepted as evidence.

Evidence customers are asked to keep includes:

evidence of their residential address in Australia, such as driver’s
license

evidence of their employment and address of employers, such as payslips,
letter of employment, letter of offer or contracts

bank statements or other documents to support they had less than $10,000
in liquid assets as at the first day of the period they are claiming

evidence of a positive test result for COVID-19 from a testing centre or
health professional, or evidence they or the person they are caring for
have registered a positive test with their state or territory health
authority

a direction from a state or territory health official (or an authorised
contact tracer) to self-isolate or quarantine due to being a close
contact, noting this is not a requirement for self-isolation, quarantine
or caring periods that start on or after 18 January 2022

evidence of a positive test result and the address of the COVID-19
positive case for whom they or the person they are caring for are a
close contact

-   positive test result means, the person who caused the close contact
    status has
    - a positive test result for COVID-19 from a testing centre or
    health professional, or
    - registered a positive test result for COVID-19 with their state or
    territory health authority

for a customer who has COVID-19 or the person they are caring for has
COVID-19 and are quarantining for greater than 7 days

-   for any period in the same continuous isolation period, evidence
    - of a positive COVID-19 test from a testing centre or health
    professional, or
    - that they have registered a positive test result for COVID-19 with
    a health official, for example Services NSW (that is, evidence they
    have registered a positive result from a home-administered Rapid
    Antigen Test (RAT) with their state or territory health authority),
    and
-   a medical certificate or letter from an appropriate health
    professional that outlines the customer or the person they are
    caring for is still required to isolate in the current period
    claimed due to the effects of COVID-19

See Table 1 and Table 5 in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Second or subsequent claims

Staff will be allocated claims if a customer lodges a second or
subsequent claim

for the same impact reason as their previously granted claim, where the
impact reason was due to the customer:

-   testing positive with COVID-19
-   being a close contact of a person who has tested positive with
    COVID-19
-   caring for another person who has tested positive with COVID-19
-   caring for a person who is required or recommended to self-isolate
    as a close contact of a person who has tested positive with COVID-19
    and the person has a disability or severe medical condition, or
-   caring for a child 16 years or under in their care who:
    - has tested positive with COVID-19
    - is the close contact of a person who has tested positive with
    COVID-19, and

with a start date less than 8 days from their previously granted claim,
and

answers, ‘The period I am claiming for is not an extension of an
isolation period I previously claimed for’

Note: subsequent means any claim lodged after a second claim that was
granted as per the above points

Staff must review these claims to determine if it is a claim extension
of the customer’s previously granted claim.

These claims will have the keyword PLDP2NDEXT

Note: any second or subsequent claim allocated for manual assessment
must be reviewed to determine if it is a claim extension of the
customer’s previously granted claim:

-   regardless of the impact reason, and
-   even if the claim does not have the keyword PLDP2NDEXT

Decide if the current claim is an extension of a customer’s previously
granted claim

The customer is asked if their claim is an extension of a previous
period. However, staff must carefully check the impact reasons and dates
of claims through:

the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Summary (PLDP_PS) screen, which
outlines start dates and impact reasons, and

the customer’s online claim question responses to current and previously
granted claims, to confirm the name/s of any person

-   being cared for and/or
-   who tested positive and resulted in the close contact status of the
    customer or the person the customer is caring for

When a claim is an extension of a customer’s previously granted claim

This occurs when their impact reason has not changed and a customer has
been paid for a 7 day claiming period:

-   immediately before their new claim, or
-   that ended 7 days or less before the start date of their new claim

for example:
- a customer lodges a new claim for the period 10 February to 16
February as they tested positive with COVID-19. Their last claim was for
the period 1 February to 7 February as they tested positive with
COVID-19. There are 2 days between the end date and start date of these
2 claims and this would be considered an extension
- a customer lodges a new claim for the period 20 to 26 March as they
tested positive with COVID-19. Their last claim was for the period 5 to
11 March as they tested positive with COVID-19. There are 8 days (12 to
19 March) before the start date and end date of these 2 claims. This is
not 7 days or less, so this would not be considered an extension
- a customer lodges a new claim for the period 10 February to 16
February, as they were caring for a person who tested positive with
COVID-19. Their last claim was for the period 1 February to 7 February,
as they were caring for a person who tested positive with COVID-19. If
the names of the person being cared for are different this would not be
considered a claim extension, as the customer is caring for a different
person

If the new claim is considered a claim extension of the customer’s
previously granted claim, further assessment is needed on if the
customer has completed the required extension questions correctly. If
not these claims:

-   are not valid, and
-   must be rejected with no further customer contact

See Process Steps 22 and 23 in Table 1 and Table 5 in Resources.

Fifth or subsequent claims

Evidence must be requested for fifth or subsequent claims.

Note: subsequent means any claim lodged after a fifth claim that was
previously lodged.

See:

-   Table 5 Step 12 in Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, and
-   Table 7

Statutory declarations will not be accepted as evidence to support a
claim.

Note: a claim can be rejected with no further customer contact if:

a customer lodged a fifth or subsequent claim, and

an RFI letter was sent requesting evidence to support that claim or that
claim was rejected as the customer ‘Failed to Provide Information’
(FPI),, and

they withdrew that fifth or subsequent claim, and

they then lodged a new fifth or subsequent claim without the evidence
previously requested

-   To reject the claim using the rejection reason Do not meet
    conditions of payment, see the Claim Decision step in Table 1

Continue to assess the claim if the customer has:

-   lodged a fifth or subsequent claim after a previous withdrawal, and
-   has provided all evidence previously requested to support previous
    claims paid and their current claim

Internal review process

If a customer does not understand or agree with the reason/s for a
Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment decision, they can ask for an
explanation of the decision.

A review cannot be undertaken by:

-   an Authorised Review Officer (ARO), or
-   the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT)

See Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - internal review process.

Payment methods

Customers will receive payments in their:

-   nominated Australian bank account, or
-   nominee's Australian bank account if they have a payment nominee

If updating a bank account when completing an ACC for a current
customer, make sure the customer can provide their previous bank account
details.

Immediate payment is the default method. This allows customers to
receive the payment as soon as possible using:

-   priority direct credit using the New Payment Platform (NPP)
    This method is the default in Process Direct, It is not available
    for all banks. If an account is NPP reachable but the payment fails
    to deliver, it will automatically deliver via RTGS if available, or
    direct credit

Claims processed in Process Direct will default to NPP.

Rejecting claims

Approval to reject claims that do not meet eligibility criteria has been
given for all states and territories.

Quality Management Application

Claims will be checked for accuracy through the Quality Management
Application (QMA).

QMA identifies which work items need checking based on the auto sampling
model.

Staff should check their QMA Feedback tile at least daily to make sure
they consider any feedback when assessing and processing future claims.

Customers with nominee arrangements

If a customer:

has previously claimed a payment in the FSP system and an entry shows in
that system on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS) screen, Process
Direct should allow finalisation of the claim

has not previously claimed a payment in the FSP system an error may show

-   these claims are allocated to appropriately trained staff with
    access to Flexible Support Payment FFAP to finalise via the !FFAP
    screen in Customer First

Staff without !FFAP access must not use the Handover to CF/CR option in
Process Direct.

Customers claiming the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and DRA or NZ DRA

A customer may be eligible for Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA) or New
Zealand DRA (NZ DRA) and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment. However, staff
need to carefully check the reason for the Pandemic Leave Disaster
Payment claim:

-   if the self-isolation, quarantine or caring period came first, then
    the customer would claim Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and could
    lodge a claim for DRA or NZ DRA after the self-isolation, quarantine
    or caring period ended
-   if the disaster affected the customer’s ability to earn or derive
    income first, then the customer’s eligibility for Pandemic Leave
    Disaster Payment would be dependent on if they were working any
    hours whilst receiving DRA or NZ DRA

See the Resources page for Scenarios Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment and
DRA.

Support for staff

Eligibility criteria

Contact Technical Peer Support. See Service Officer role when seeking
Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart Centres.

If needed, the claim will be escalated by Technical Peer Support. They
will contact the Level 2 Helpdesk using the Payment Query Template.

See Escalating claims.

System issues/errors

Contact the Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Service Support Officer
(SSO). Talk to a Team Leader about how to access this SSO.

Preventing fraud

All staff play an important role in detecting customer and third party
fraud.

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has links to Visa subclass numbers, contact details,
the Services Australia website and external websites. It also has
scenarios.

Related links

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - Assisted Customer Claims

Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment - internal review process

Processing Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment Claims in Customer First

Process Direct navigation, common screens and functions

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Service Officer role when seeking Technical Peer Support (TPS) in Smart
Centres

Social work service referral

Emergency payments - preventing fraud

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
