
Queensland floods – January 2022 003-22010921

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
For more details see Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time
limit.

Check the dates a customer was adversely affected by the major disaster
(AGDRP or NZ DRP) or suffered an income loss as a direct result of the
major disaster (DRA or NZ DRA). This will determine the event the
customer should claim under. Customers may be eligible to claim under
the South East Queensland Floods - February 2022 and this event,
depending on dates they were impacted and the local government area
(LGA) they are claiming. See the start and end dates and declared LGAs
in South East Queensland Floods - February 2022 and this procedure. For
help, contact the Level 1 Helpdesk/TPS.

All claims that do not meet the eligibility criteria can be rejected.
See Rejecting claims.

Debt pause provisions are in place for customers in Local Government
Areas (LGAs), see Debt pause for customers in locations affected by a
disaster event in 2022.

This document explains the help available for the Queensland floods -
January 2022.

Emergency payments

On 9 January 2022, the Australian Government has made a determination
under the Social Security Act 1991 that a major disaster has occurred.
Payments activated for this event:

-   AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing and coding claims

For the Queensland floods - January 2022, major disaster means:

For AGDRP/NZ DRP

the severe storms, heavy rainfall and associated flooding that started
on 7 January 2022 and ended on 10 January 2022 in Queensland affecting
the local government areas of:

-   Bundaberg
-   Fraser Coast
-   Gympie
-   North Burnett

For DRA/NZ DRA

the severe storms, heavy rainfall and associated flooding that started
on 7 January 2022 and ended on 10 January 2022 in Queensland affecting
the local government areas of:

-   Cherbourg
-   Bundaberg
-   Fraser Coast
-   Gympie
-   North Burnett
-   South Burnett

Start date of the event: 7 January 2022

End date of the event: 10 January 2022

To assess eligibility, see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP. See the Resources page for
    questions to ask the customer to assess major damage when helping
    them with their claim
-   Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

To record and code claims, see:

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Event keywords (codes)

See the Resources page.

Local Government Areas (LGA) for AGDRP and NZ DRP

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets LGA criteria.

LGAs declared on 9 January 2022

-   Bundaberg
-   Fraser Coast
-   Gympie

LGA declared on 13 January 2022

-   North Burnett

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas:

-   to confirm if an address provided by a customer is in a declared LGA

Do not use Office Locator.

LGAs for DRA and NZ DRA

LGAs have been declared on different dates. Consider all LGAs listed
below when assessing if a customer meets LGA criteria.

LGAs declared on 9 January 2022

-   Bundaberg
-   Fraser Coast
-   Gympie

LGAs declared on 13 January 2022

-   Cherbourg
-   North Burnett
-   South Burnett

See the Resources page for maps of affected areas. Use these to confirm
if an address given by a customer is in a declared LGA

Do not use Office Locator.

Customer’s LGA is North Burnett, South Burnett, Bundaberg or Gympie

Discuss the date the loss occurred, if a customer claims DRA or NZ DRA
for the LGAs:

-   North Burnett
-   South Burnett
-   Bundaberg
-   Gympie

Note: when discussing the date of impact, do not give any dates or date
ranges.

If the loss of income occurred on or after 7 January 2022, assess the
customers claim for this event.

If the loss of income occurred between 10 November and 3 December 2021,
assess the customers claim for the Queensland Storms and Floods
(November 2021).

Note: there may be instances where the customer’s income has been
impacted by both events. Therefore, the customer may be eligible for
both events. If this occurs:

-   Take their claim for the Queensland Floods - January 2022 event by
    completing the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim template
-   Complete the DRA/NZ DRA verbal claim template for the Queensland
    Storms and Floods (November 2021)
-   Contact Level 1 Helpdesk/TPS to have them escalate to the Level 2
    Helpdesk via the Payment Query Template
-   The Level 2 Helpdesk will review claim and provide instructions in
    how to assess and complete the claim
-   Do not complete either claim until instructions are provided by the
    Level 2 Helpdesk

If a claim for one of the events has already been completed and the
customer is already receiving DRA or NZ DRA follow the above and
escalate the second claim for the remaining Queensland Flood event.

The customer cannot be paid DRA or NZ DRA for the same period for the 2
different events, but if they were impacted by both events an adjustment
to the payments may be needed.

Get as much information as possible from the customer on how they were
impacted by the 2 different flood events.

The Level 2 Helpdesk will advise how to proceed.

NZ DRP and NZ DRA tax participation

For NZ DRP and NZ DRA, a customer must have participated in the
Australian taxation system for at least 1 year in the past 3 financial
years:

-   2020-21
-   2019-20
-   2018-19

If they have not, they must do so before 13 January 2023.

Claiming period

Claims must be lodged by 12 July 2022.

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.

How to claim AGDRP and NZ DRP

Customers can claim AGDRP and NZ DRP online. The Services Australia
website explains how to claim online.

A phone claim, using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC), can be offered to
customers

-   with no access to online services, or
-   deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim

To make a phone claim, customers can call the Australian Government
Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this phone line.

If a customer calls another agency phone number:

staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments, see
Claiming emergency payments for important steps to follow before
completing an unannounced (cold) transfer to:

-   internal transfer number - 176395
-   full number - 02 8566 6075. Do not give this number to customers.
    Use only if unable to use the internal transfer number

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia website and
intranet.

Note: encourage customers to claim online where possible, or lodge a
phone claim via Assisted Customer Claim (ACC). Claim forms are used by
mobile servicing teams deployed to assist impacted LGAs.

How to claim DRA and NZ DRA

The easiest way for customers to claim is by calling the Australian
Government Emergency Information Line. Services Australia operates this
phone line.

If a customer calls another agency phone number:

staff not trained in assessing or processing emergency payments, see
Claiming emergency payments for important steps to follow before
transferring the customer:

warm transfer the customer to:

-   internal transfer - 171534
-   full number - 02 8440 2538. Do not give this number to customers.
    Use only if unable to use the internal transfer number

Claim forms are on the Services Australia website and intranet.

Automation of ineligible claims– AGDRP only

From 10 April 2022, the system will automatically assess and finalise
ineligible AGDRP claims where specified business rules are met in
circumstances where a customer is:

not residentially qualified (NRQ)

-   The customer does not meet the residence requirements for AGDRP

not in a qualifying area (NQL)

-   The customer does not live in the state of Queensland and has not
    claimed
    - they or their dependent child/ren were seriously injured, or
-   they have an immediate family member who has died or is missing as a
    direct result of the major disaster

Note: Automation of ineligible claims does not apply to NZ DRP, DRA or
NZ DRA

Rejecting claims

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Formal approval has been given to reject AGDRP and NZ DRP claims that
are ineligible and do not meet eligibility criteria. This includes
claims for:

-   declared localities
-   non-declared localities - claims held with an ON HOLD reason of not
    in relevant area (LGA)

Before finalising an ineligible claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim
Fast Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure
the customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or is ineligible. See the Process claim table in Processing
AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct. Progress through the claim to
get to the Claim Decision screen.

DRA and NZ DRA

Formal approval has been given to reject DRA and NZ DRA claims that are
ineligible and do not meet eligibility criteria. This includes claims
for:

-   declared localities
-   non-declared localities

Before finalising an ineligible claim, staff must check any Verbal Claim
Fast Note/DOC, paper claim or DOC on the customer’s record to make sure
the customer is not eligible. Staff must determine if a claim should be
granted or rejected.

See Processing DRA and NZ DRA claims in Customer First.

Extra help with the cost of child care

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) may
be paid if the customer or their partner is affected by the declared
disaster.

If the customer wants to apply for ACCS, warm transfer the customer to
the Family and Parenting (FAO) phone queue using Services Australia
Workspace.

Operational Instructions

The References page links to the Operational Instructions. These are
National Recovery and Resilience Agency (formerly the Department of Home
Affairs) policy documents for each payment. Documents include details
for this event and customer scenarios.

Preventing fraud

For more details, see Emergency payments - preventing fraud.

The Resources page has:

-   keywords for this event (codes)
-   DRA and NZ DRA average weekly income cut-off point information
-   links to JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) rate
    thresholds
-   links to maps of affected areas
-   links to forms, scenarios and the Services Australia website

Related links

Emergency events

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Claiming emergency payments

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Process Direct

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Coding and recording DRA and NZ DRA claims

Emergency payment claims lodged outside the time limit

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

DRA and NZ DRA

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Grants and ex gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
