
Helping customers to build their financial capability 003-11020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to refer customers to appropriate financial
capability services. These services are free, voluntary and
confidential. Although the services are available to everyone, they are
targeted at those most at risk of financial and social exclusion.
Customers can also self-refer to these services at any time.

Background

Financial capability is defined as the capacity, based on a combination,
of financial knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours, to make sound
financial decisions to improve financial wellbeing.

Financial capability is an essential everyday life skill. It means being
able to understand and navigate the financial landscape, manage money
and financial risks effectively to avoid financial pitfalls. Being
financially capable means we are able to make sound decisions about our
money.

Staff are responsible for identifying when people need support, and to
provide information, tools and resources targeted to customer’s personal
circumstances. While it is important to support customers build their
financial capability, staff are not expected to be financial planners or
counsellors.

Referrals to support services

A customer can be referred to the following supports for enhancing
financial capability:

-   Financial Information Service
-   Financial Counselling
-   Manage Your Money
-   MoneySmart

Customers can also be referred to the following loan schemes as an
alternative to payday loans from commercial providers:

-   No Interest Loans Scheme (NILS)
-   Saver Plus Program

Financial Information Service (FIS)

FIS provides free, independent and confidential information, tools and
resources to help customers make informed decisions about their current
and future financial needs to build their financial capability and
self-sufficiency. FIS works with financially vulnerable people to
improve their financial capability.

FIS fosters self-sufficiency by looking at financial options beyond the
payments and services offered by the agency.

FIS doesn’t provide financial advice, counselling, advocacy or promote
particular products or providers.

Financial counselling

Financial counsellors are skilled professionals who work for
not-for-profit community organisations and provide free advice and
support to people experiencing financial hardship. They can help with:

-   bills, fines, or debts that people are struggling to pay
-   being harassed by debt collectors
-   gas, electricity, or telephone disconnections
-   paying rent or mortgages
-   insurance and superannuation issues, for example car accidents and
    deceased estates.
-   tax debts, and other serious matters like bankruptcy

Service Officers should offer a referral to financial counselling where
it is considered that financial support and counselling may benefit the
customer.

A referral is voluntary and the customer is under no obligation to
accept, however, the Service Officer should highlight the advantages for
the customer in attending. Customers who do not accept a referral
initially may be offered a referral at a subsequent contact.

Manage your Money

Manage your money is on the Services Australia website with information
on budgeting, debts, loans, savings and other information. It includes a
link to the Australian Securities and Investments Commission ASICs
budget calculator, Good Shepherd Australia New Zealand No Interest
Loans, advice on choosing a financial advisor and various specialist
referrals.

MoneySmart

The MoneySmart website helps Australians take control of their money by
providing tools, tips and calculators.

MoneySmart is managed by the Australian Securities and Investments
Commission (ASIC), the corporate, markets, financial services and
consumer credit regulator in Australia.

MoneySmart contains information about budgeting, reducing debt, savings,
superannuation and investment, among other topics.

No Interest Loans Scheme (NILS)

NILS is a loans option provided by community organisations to low income
earners who are holders of Pensioner Concession Cards (PCC) or Health
Care Cards (HCC).

The loans are to help people buy essential goods and services such as
household items like fridges and washing machines and medical
procedures. Loans are not considered for food, rent, bond, electricity
bills, phone bills, debt consolidation, car repairs or other recurrent
expenses.

Note: these loans are an alternative form of credit provision and should
not be confused with emergency relief.

NILS approved organisations offer customers the option of making loan
repayments using Centrepay.

Saver Plus Program

Saver Plus Program helps families on low incomes develop a savings
habit, build assets and improve financial capability.

Participants set a savings goal and receive support and education to
help them achieve it.

The Resources page has contact details for financial counselling. There
are also links to Department of Social Services – Financial Wellbeing
and Capability and Commonwealth Financial Counselling pages, MoneySmart,
the No Interest Loans Scheme (NILS), Saver Plus Program, the Managing
your money page on the Services Australia Website, and Payment and
Service Finder.

Related links

Social work services

Referral to external support services

Urgent payments due to exceptional and unforeseen or extraordinary
circumstances

Financial Information Service (FIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
