
Evacuation and Recovery Centres during emergency events 003-01090000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines centres created by state/territory governments or
local authorities in response to a disaster (natural or otherwise) in
Australia or offshore, and the role of Services Australia.

On this Page:

Services Australia’s role in evacuation and recovery centres

States and territories are primarily responsible for managing
emergencies in their jurisdictions.

If an evacuation or recovery centre is established, the relevant state
or territory may request the participation of the Services Australia.

Requests to participate in evacuation and/or recovery centres should be
received in writing and escalated to the relevant Service Leader.

The Service Leader will discuss this request with the agency’s Emergency
Management Liaison Officer, (National Manager, Operational Response
Branch) and appropriate General Managers to determine the appropriate
service offer for the affected community.

The agency’s core responsibility during emergencies is to:

ensure the continuity of Services Australia payments and services for
existing customers

offer appropriate Services Australia payments and services to new
customers

This may include:

-   assistance to individuals such as those who may have lost their
    income to test their eligibility for a relevant income support
    related payment and/or service
-   Medicare approvals and processes, as well as support for providers
    and pharmacies, and
-   targeted child support services to individuals and employers

Evacuation centres

Evacuation centres are set up by the relevant state or territory
government in response to an emergency. These centres are short-term.
They are closed when the need no longer exists or when longer term
arrangements are available.

An evacuation centre provides a place of temporary refuge for people
evacuated from homes near the disaster, and for people who may be
travelling through the affected area but cannot continue.

Immediate support is provided for basic needs such as food, clothing,
blankets, shelter, information and personal support, as well as other
practical assistance.

Recovery centres

Recovery centres are set up to provide access to information or services
that meet the medium and longer-term assistance needs of people affected
by disaster.

These centres offer a range of services that may include financial
assistance, counselling, personal support, information and referrals to
other services.

Services offered from recovery centres are designed to help people
resume a normal life as quickly as possible.

The recovery centre site may be at the original evacuation centre site.
The location may be the same, but its functionality (and priorities)
will have changed.

Contents

Role of the Team Leader in the Recovery Centre

Zone and National role in emergency management of evacuation and
recovery centres

Related links

Claiming emergency payments

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

Storing documents

Proof of identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
