
Recording Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) Carer Payment child referrals in the Social Work Information System (SWIS) 003-12130040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Services Australia social workers only

If a child is in immediate danger or risk of harm you must act, and a
delegate must call 000.

This document outlines the different categories and fields used by
Services Australia's Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) social
workers to record Carer Payment child referrals in the Social Work
Information System (SWIS).

On this Page:

Child safe framework

In line with a zero tolerance approach to harm of children, if a staff
member in the course of their duties observes behaviour, which raises
concerns about a child or young person's safety, Services Australia sets
out specific steps that must be taken. Follow the Service Australia Risk
Identification and Reporting model when identifying and responding to
child safety concerns. See Risk identification and management of threats
to the safety or welfare of a child for more information regarding this
model and the Agency’s commitment to the safety of children and young
people.

Social worker assessment

CSAT social workers provide information that contributes to decisions
about qualification for Carer Payment (CP) - child. The delegate, not
the social worker makes the decision regarding qualification. Social
workers provide assistance in determining CP claims for Carer Specialist
assessments completed by the Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) for
child care receivers under 16.

Integrity of data

It is important that social workers follow this procedure to ensure
integrity of the data collected via SWIS for CSAT referrals. It is vital
that all contacts with either the customer or other relevant parties,
for example, Treating Health Professionals (THP), are recorded in SWIS.

The Resources page contains the process for attaching a Carer Specialist
Assessment Team (CSAT) social work report for Carer Payment child
assessments under 16 to a customer’s record.

Related links

Carer Specialist Assessment Team (CSAT) referrals for Carer Payment (CP)
(child)

Risk identification and management of threats to the safety or welfare
of a child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
