
Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) – March 2019 Christchurch attacks 003-19091307

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document contains event-specific information about the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) for March 2019 Christchurch
attacks. AVTOP is a one off payment of up to $75,000. The purpose of
AVTOP is to provide financial assistance to Australians who have been
harmed as a direct result of March 2019 Christchurch attacks, or who are
a close family member of a person who has died as a direct result March
2019 Christchurch attacks.

The claiming period for this event has now closed unless special
circumstances apply.

Declared overseas terrorist act

The terrorist acts in Christchurch, New Zealand, on 15 March 2019 that
occurred at:

-   al-Noor Mosque at approximately 1.40pm local time, and
-   Linwood Islamic Centre at approximately 1.55pm local time

Claiming periods

Primary victim claims

Primary victims have 2 years from the date the declaration was signed by
the Prime Minister to claim.

Primary victims for March 2019 Christchurch attacks have until 11
October 2021 to lodge a claim.

The claiming period for primary victims for the March 2019, Christchurch
attacks closed at midnight 11 October 2021 unless special circumstances
apply.

Secondary victim

Secondary victims have 12 months from the death of the close family
member to claim. The death of the close family member must be a direct
result of, and have occurred within 2 years of, the declared terrorist
act.

For the March 2019 Christchurch attacks, the close family member must
have died on or before 14 March 2021.

The latest date the agency will accept claims for secondary victims is
14 March 2022. Note: this is not the closing date for all secondary
victim claims. The closing date for secondary victims depends on when
their close family member died as a direct result of the declared
terrorist act.

The claiming period for secondary victims for the March 2019
Christchurch attack closed on midnight 14 March 2022 unless special
circumstances apply.

Eligibility for AVTOP

For the March 2019 Christchurch attacks only, customers who have been
harmed as a direct result of the declared overseas terrorist act i.e.
primary victims can be an Australian citizen on the day the terrorist
act occurred. The Australian residency criteria that normally applies to
primary victims is not a requirement for the March 2019 Christchurch
attacks.

A person is eligible for AVTOP if:

-   the person was an Australian resident, or held a qualifying
    residence exemption, on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   the person must have been in the location of, and harmed as a direct
    result of, the terrorist act (primary victim), or be a close family
    member of a person who died as a direct result of a terrorist act
    (secondary victim), and
-   the person must not have been involved in the commission of the
    terrorist act, and must not have had family members involved in the
    commission of the terrorist act

There is no age limit.

Claims will be assessed on a case by case basis.

Maximum amount payable

Where a customer is harmed (primary victim) and a close family member
dies as a direct result of the same terrorist act (secondary victim),
the maximum payment any 1 person can receive is $150,000. For example:

-   where a customer is harmed and also loses a close family member,
    they may qualify for up to $75,000 for their injuries and up to
    $75,000 for the deceased close family member
-   if the deceased has multiple close family members, then the $75,000
    that is payable in respect of the deceased may be shared among the
    eligible family members who submit a claim

Where a claim is lodged for 2 close family members who have died as a
direct result of the same declared terrorist act, the maximum payment
one person can receive is $75,000, as a secondary victim of any one
terrorist act, regardless of how many close family members have died as
a direct result of the event.

Proof of identity requirements

A customer will need to confirm their identity by providing identity
documents. See Confirming a customer's identity and Identity
Confirmation.

For the purposes of claiming AVTOP, a customer over the age of 16 will
need to provide one document from each of the 3 categories below:

-   Commencement of identity (for example, a valid Australian passport,
    birth or citizenship certificate)
-   Primary Use in Community (for example, a driver's licence or proof
    of age card)
-   Secondary Use in Community (for example, an ATM/bank card or
    educational certificate)

For the purpose of claiming AVTOP on behalf of a child, the customer may
need to provide identity documents on behalf of the child. These
documents include:

-   one Commencement of Identity document (for example, a valid
    Australian passport, birth or citizenship certificate), or
-   any other documents required to confirm the child's identity

A period of up to 28 days can apply for the provision of proof of
identity documentation, with an extension granted in exceptional
circumstances.

Lodgement of claim

To enquire about the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment,
customers may call the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Hotline.
The operating hours for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas
Hotline can vary, refer to the Services Australia website for current
details. The Resources page contains a link.

Customers may also download a claim form from the Services Australia
website and post the completed claim form and supporting documentation.
Note: paper claim forms previously advised customers they can lodge
their claim form via their Centrelink online account. This option is no
longer available.

Keywords

Once a claim has been uploaded into Customer First, the claim will need
to be indexed and have the keywords added.

Claims that are to be rejected will also need to be indexed with the
relevant keywords. The Resources page contains a table of keywords for
indexing a claim and rejecting an unsuccessful claim.

Note: unsuccessful claims cannot be rejected until approval has been
sought from the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Travel Advice

Where possible, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will provide
Services Australia with the travel advices applicable for the March 2019
Christchurch attacks for the period 6 months prior to the terrorist act.
The Resources page contains travel advices that have been received. For
information on how to apply a reduction based on the travel advices, see
Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP).

Withdrawal of claim

If a customer wishes to withdraw a claim it must be done before the
claim has been determined.

Social worker referrals

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

For information on the role of social workers for AVTOP and how to refer
AVTOP customers to a social worker, see:

-   Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
    Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)
-   Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
    Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

The Resources page contains links to Operational Messaging, claim forms,
contact details for Emergency Management Helpdesk and Teams, travel
advices and a map of the affected areas.

Related links

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Identity Confirmation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
