
Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) 003-04020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility and rate calculation for primary
victims for AVTOP.

Definition of a primary victim

For the March 2019 Christchurch attacks only, customers who have been
harmed, as a direct result of the declared overseas terrorist act i.e.
primary victims can be an Australian citizen on the day the terrorist
act occurred. The Australian residency criteria that normally applies to
primary victims is not a requirement for the March 2019 Christchurch
attacks.

A person is a primary victim of a declared overseas terrorist act if the
person:

-   was in the in the place where the terrorist act occurred, and
-   was harmed as a direct result of the terrorist act, and
-   was an Australian resident or had a qualifying residence exemption
    on the day the terrorist act occurred, and
-   they and/or their close family members were not involved in the
    commission of the terrorist act

A primary victim can be of any age. If the primary victim is under 16
years, a legal guardian must claim on their behalf.

Claiming period to lodge a primary victim claim

Primary victims are encouraged to submit a claim once their injuries are
fully realised as the full impact of an injury may not be known
immediately. A primary victim can only claim once in relation to their
injuries.

Primary victims have 2 years from the date of the declaration by the
Prime Minister to make a claim.

Primary and secondary victim and amount of AVTOP

A person, who is harmed as a direct result of a declared overseas
terrorist act and whose close family member dies in the same declared
overseas terrorist act may claim as both a primary victim and a
secondary victim. The claimant may receive up to $75,000 in relation to
each claim, to a maximum of $150,000.

Deceased estate

A claim cannot be made for a deceased estate.

Close family members can make a claim for AVTOP as a secondary victim
for a deceased close family member. Any monies paid to the deceased
person as a primary victim will be deducted from any subsequent
secondary victim claims.

Withdrawal of a claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw an AVTOP claim, it must be done before
the claim has been processed.

Payment Queries

If uncertain about a particular claimant's circumstances, use the
Payment Query Template located on the Resources page, and escalate the
question to the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk. For contact
details, see Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Role of social workers for AVTOP

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

Social workers can:

-   help primary or secondary victim claimants who are distressed or
    requiring additional support
-   help with complex 'close family member' assessments for secondary
    victims
-   provide consultation and advice about adverse decisions, and
-   work collaboratively with processing teams to support the assessment
    of claims

In addition, social workers may provide interim case management (as part
of the Family Liaison Officer role) for both primary and secondary
victim claimants who require additional support. Support will include
emotional and practical help to claimants to gather information required
to support their claim and support them to manage family conflict or
complex family circumstances. If required, this support may be provided
by telephone, or by a local social worker.

Social workers are also available to Service Officers who are taking or
assessing claims for case consultations, debriefing or advice as needed.

Circumstances to refer to or consult with a social worker

-   Primary or secondary victim claimants who request social work
    contact (either via phone or as part of the AVTOP claim)
-   Secondary victim claims with complex family relationships
-   Assessment Services assessing complex claims, where social worker
    help may be needed
-   16 and 17 year old claimants who are eligible to receive AVTOP
    payments independently, before the claim is finalised
-   Claimants in need of social work support to manage the claim process
    (presenting with significant vulnerabilities)
-   Cases that may involve media escalation and require social work
    intervention

Reviews and appeals

For reviews and appeals relating to AVTOP claims, see Request for an
explanation, quality check or review (CLK).

Electronic Messaging (EM) service

The EM service is now available for AVTOP claims. For more information,
see Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging.

The Resources page has the AVTOP processing task card, AVTOP New Claim
keywords, links to forms, letters and messages, Payment Query Template,
pending status codes, contact details, intranet and website links.

Related links

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Claiming Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian
Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reductions and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
