
Secondary victim eligibility and rate calculation for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) 003-04020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility and rates for secondary victims for
AVTOP.

Definition of a secondary victim

A person is a secondary victim of a declared overseas terrorist act if
the person:

was an Australian resident or had a qualifying residence exemption on
the day the terrorist act occurred

they and/or their close family members were not involved in the
commission of the terrorist act, and

is a close family member of a deceased person who:

-   was in the place where the terrorist act occurred, and
-   died within 2 years of the day the declared terrorist act occurred
    and died as a direct result of the terrorist act

A secondary victim can be of any age. If the secondary victim is under
16, a legal guardian must claim on their behalf.

Claiming period to lodge a secondary victim claim

If the death of the close family member occurs within 2 years of the
declared terrorist act, a secondary victim must lodge a claim within 12
months of the death of the close family member.

Services Australia can invite a close family member of a deceased person
to lodge a secondary victim claim.

Amount payable

A person who is harmed as a direct result of the declared terrorist act
and who also has a close family member who died as a direct result of
the same declared overseas terrorist act may claim as both a primary
victim and a secondary victim. The claimant may receive up to $75,000 in
relation to each claim, to a maximum of $150,000.

Withdrawal of a claim

If a claimant wishes to withdraw an AVTOP claim, it must be withdrawn
before the claim has been processed.

Payment Queries

If uncertain about a particular claimant's circumstances, using the
Payment Query Template located on the Resources page, escalate the
question to the Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk. For contact
details, see Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Role of social workers for AVTOP

Social workers are available to provide support to the AVTOP telephony
and processing teams when an incident is declared as an overseas
terrorist attack.

Social workers can:

-   help primary or secondary victim claimants who are distressed or
    requiring additional support
-   help with complex 'close family member' assessments for secondary
    victims
-   provide consultation and advice about adverse decisions, and
-   work collaboratively with processing teams to support the assessment
    of claims

In addition, social workers may provide interim case management (as part
of the Family Liaison Officer role) for both primary and secondary
victim claimants who need additional support. Support will include
emotional and practical help to claimants to gather information needed
to support their claim and support them to manage family conflict or
complex family circumstances. If needed, this support may be provided by
telephone, or by a local social worker.

Social workers are also available to Service Officers who are taking or
assessing claims for case consultations, debriefing or advice as needed.

Circumstances to refer to or consult with a social worker

-   Primary or secondary victim claimants who request social work
    contact (either via phone or as part of the AVTOP claim)
-   Secondary victim claims with complex family relationships and/or
    where help is needed to prove death occurred as a direct result of
    the terrorist act
-   Assessment Services assessing complex claims, where social worker
    help may be needed
-   16 and 17 year old claimants who are eligible to receive AVTOP
    payments independently, before the claim is finalised
-   Claimants in need of social work support to manage the claim process
    (presenting with significant vulnerabilities)
-   Cases that may involve media escalation and need social work
    intervention

Reviews and appeals

For reviews and appeals relating to AVTOP claims, see Request for an
explanation, quality check or review (CLK).

Electronic Messaging (EM) service

The EM service is now available for AVTOP claims. For more information,
see Centrelink letters online and Electronic Messaging.

The Resources page has the AVTOP processing task card, claiming period
calculator, links to forms, letters and messages, Payment Query
Template, contact details, intranet and website links.

Related links

Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Claiming the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Primary victim eligibility and rate calculation for Australian Victim of
Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

Reduction and Deductions for the Australian Victim of Terrorism Overseas
Payment (AVTOP)

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Australian Victims of Terrorism Overseas Payment (AVTOP) claims lodged
outside of the time limit

Quality On Line (QOL) checklist for Australian Victim of Terrorism
Overseas Payment (AVTOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
