
Assessing claims for emergency payments for Victorian Bushfires, February 2019 003-19120526

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

The claiming period has now closed, unless special circumstances apply.
See Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

There are different Local Government Areas (LGAs) for AGDRP/NZ DRP and
for DRA/NZ DRA for the Victorian Bushfires, February 2019.
This is not the same as the Victorian Bushfires, December 2019. When
assessing claims for the Victorian Bushfires, December 2019, go to
Assessing claims for emergency payments for Victorian Bushfires,
December 2019.

Customers in receipt of:
- Family Tax Benefit and/or Child Care Subsidy who receive DRA/NZ DRA
for this historical event need to revise their income estimate. This
payment will be included in their taxable income for the financial year
in which it is received at reconciliation. Note: there are no
retrospective/historical changes to the Child Care Subsidy activity test
required as part of this claim
- an income support payment who receive DRA/NZ DRA for this historical
event need to report this as earnings in the fortnight it is paid to
them

This document outlines how to work out if the Australian Government
Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP), or the associated ex-gratia payment
can be paid to customers affected by an emergency event.

On this Page:

Emergency payments

The federal government made a determination under the Social Security
Act that a major disaster has occurred. The following payments have been
activated for the Victorian Bushfires, February 2019:

-   Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment (AGDRP)
-   NZ Disaster Recovery Payment (DRP) - for New Zealand non-protected
    Special Category visa (subclass 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent
    of AGDRP
-   Disaster Recovery Allowance (DRA)
-   NZ DRA - for New Zealand non-protected Specific Category visa
    (subclauses 444) holders, that is NZ equivalent of DRA

Affected Local Government Areas (LGA) for AGDRP and ex-gratia DRP

The determination specifies which LGAs are eligible for each emergency
payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Baw Baw
-   Cardinia
-   Latrobe

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Affected LGAs for DRA and ex-gratia DRA

The determination specifies which LGAs are eligible for each emergency
payment.

The determination covers the affected LGAs of:

-   Alpine
-   Baw Baw
-   Benalla
-   Campaspe
-   Cardinia
-   East Gippsland
-   Indigo
-   Latrobe
-   Macedon Ranges
-   Mitchell
-   Murrindindi
-   South Gippsland
-   Towong
-   Wangaratta
-   Wellington
-   Yarra Ranges

The Process page contains more information on the current active
emergency events LGAs.

Reasonably close (AGDRP/ex-gratia DRP only)

For the Victorian Bushfires, February 2019 the customer’s principal
place of residence must be:

-   within one of the designated LGAs and
-   ‘reasonably close’ to the bushfires

Static maps can be used to assist in assessing reasonably close. Static
maps detail the burn scar for each fire and can be used to assist in
determining the likelihood that any major damage was a direct result of
the designated bushfire.

See the Resources page to access these maps.

Assessing claims where a customer's principal residence is outside 10km burn scar radius

Customers located outside of the 10km radius of a bushfire burn scar may
require a greater degree of examination and customer questioning to
ensure the damage claimed was a direct result of the declared major
disaster.

Where the customer's principal place of residence is outside the 10km
burn scar radius, Service Officers can escalate the claim to the
Emergency Management Technical Peer Support once the following have been
completed and the investigation is documented on the customer's record:

-   All other eligibility criteria has been assessed as met
-   Major damage criteria has been established, the customer has clearly
    demonstrated how they have met the criteria. For information see the
    Process page when assessing 'major damage' and 'reasonably close'
-   If the Service Officer doubts the validity of the customer’s claim,
    evidence should be requested before escalating to the Emergency
    Management Technical Peer Support

The Emergency Management Technical Peer Support reviews the customer's
record to ensure all information has been provided/documented. If more
information is required, they advise the Service Officer to:

-   ask the customer to provide the information required, and
-   place the claim on hold with the relevant keyword

If all information has been provided, the Emergency Management Technical
Peer Support escalates the claim to the Emergency Management Level 2
Helpdesk/TPS.

If the customer’s principal place of residence is more than 15km from
the closest burn scar, evidence to support the major damage assessment
should be requested. Once evidence has been provided a referral is made
to the Emergency Management Technical Peer Support for escalation to
Emergency Management Level 2 Helpdesk.

Eligibility for payments

To be eligible to receive a payment, a customer must have been impacted
on any day of the major disaster, which started on 1 February 2019.

For more information on assessing eligibility, reviews and appeals see:

-   Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP
-   Assessing DRA or NZ DRA claims

Claiming periods

Claims must be made within 6 months of the date the disaster was
declared for the affected LGAs unless special circumstances apply. See
Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit.

Claim lodgement dates

Claims must be lodged by 4 June 2020.

Rejection of claims

Formal approval has been given to commence rejection of claims for all
declared LGAs. This includes:

-   all claims previously held with the keyword NOTLGA, that is
    non-declared LGAs
-   DRA/ex-gratia DRA Determination 2020 claims where a Request for
    Information (RFI) letter was sent requesting documentary evidence of
    income

For more information about Determination 2020, see Assessing DRA and NZ
DRA claims

Before rejecting claims for DRA/ex-gratia DRA consider if a
self-declaration is an option for the customer. See Table 3 of Assessing
DRA and NZ DRA claims.

When coding and rejecting claims, follow

-   Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First
-   Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Lodgement of claims

For information on how a customer can claim, steps relating to initial
contact and Callback DOCs and ACTDOCs, see Claiming emergency payments.

Claim forms are available on the Services Australia Website and on the
intranet, see the Resources page for a link.

Customers can:

-   call the Australian Government Emergency Information Line on 180 22
    66 to claim over the phone, or
-   post their form and supporting documents to:
    Emergency Processing Centre
    Reply Paid 7815
    Canberra BC, ACT 2610
-   lodge their form and supporting documents at their nearest services
    centre, access point or recovery centre (if available), or
-   fax their completed form and supporting documents 1300 727 760

Note: only staff trained in processing emergency payments can process
these claims.

Claims cannot be rejected until formal approval has been provided. Staff
will be advised once they are able to reject payments.

Payment methods

There are a range of payment methods available for customers advising
they are in financial hardship. These include:

-   New Payments Platform (NPP)
-   Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) payments

Discuss the preferred method of payment for the customer. Use of NPP and
RTGS will help customers adversely affected by the major disaster
receive their payment/s faster.

Note: NPP is not available for all banks, however RTGS is available for
most banks. Check which payment methods are available before discussing
payment options with the customer.

NPP is capped at $3,000. Any attempt to transfer more than that amount
will result in no funds being transferred in that attempt.

Claims must be finalised before using the NPP. For further information
see Immediate payment by payment method New Payments Platform (NPP)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers may be able to get ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) if they
have been impacted by a declared disaster and claiming AGDRP.

To support an application for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
customers must:

-   provide evidence that the event(s) occurred less than six months
    prior to the application
-   demonstrate a causal link between the event(s) and their financial
    hardship

Customers applying for ACCS Temporary Financial Hardship (as a
standalone application or a combined Child Care Subsidy claim) can
submit evidence that they or their partner have claimed for or received
AGDRP. No further evidence is required.

Customers still need to provide evidence the emergency event has caused
financial hardship and demonstrate the causal link between the event and
their reduced ability to pay child care fees.

If a customer wants to apply for ACCS transfer the customer to 13  6150.

The References page contains a copy of the Operational Instructions, the
policy documents for each payment from the Department of Home Affairs.

The Resources page contains Determination 2020 average weekly income
information, tables with Determination 2015 Disaster Recovery Allowance
(DRA) and DRA ex-gratia income cut-off points for Newstart Allowance
(NSA) and Youth Allowance (YA) and links to maximum rates. There are
also links to Operational Messages, Suburbs in declared Local Government
Areas (LGA), maps of affected areas, Forms, Minimum Activity Management
Standards, Scenarios, the Payment and Service Finder and who to contact
if more information is required.

Related links

AGDRP and NZ DRP

Eligibility for AGDRP and NZ DRP

Emergency payment claims lodged outside of the time limit

Claiming emergency payments

Processing AGDRP and NZ DRP claims in Customer First

Proof of Identity (POI) requirements for Emergency payments

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing
major disaster

Initial contact and identification of services for people experiencing a
crisis

Scanning Centrelink documents using an MFD

DRA and NZ DRA

Assessing DRA and NZ DRA claims

Payment rates for DRA and NZ DRA

Recording and coding DRA and NZ DRA claims

Grants and ex-gratia payments

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
