
Suspending, cancelling, or restoring Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payments 005-06120000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how entitlement to Status Resolution Support
Services (SRSS) payments may be suspended or cancelled for various
reasons.

Suspending the SRSS payment

Services Australia can only suspend SRSS customers in Bands 4, 5 or 6.

Customers can be suspended, for reasons such as:

-   pending an investigation
-   failure to reply to correspondence
-   failure to report earnings
-   failure to attend an interview
-   imprisoned/on remand
-   whereabouts unknown
-   assets over the limit

The Department of Home Affairs may also suspend a customer's SRSS
payment via the data link for reasons such as:

-   earnings
-   non-engagement
-   failure to resolve their immigration status
-   breach in visa conditions
-   any other reason provided by Department of Home Affairs

Restoring the SRSS payment

When a customer's SRSS payment is suspended, the restoration can only be
completed by the agency/department that initiated the original
suspension. For example, If Services Australia suspends a customer's
SRSS payment, only Services Australia can restore their payment. These
same rules apply to suspensions applied by the Department of Home
Affairs.

Update any change of circumstances before restoring a SRSS customer's
payment.

If the customer has had their SRSS payment suspended by the Department
of Home Affairs, tell the customer to contact:

-   their Service Provider, or
-   Department of Home Affairs to discuss their suspension

In cases where the Department of Home Affairs determines the customer's
SRSS payment can be restored, Services Australia will be advised
(including the date of restoration) via the datalink.

Note: if a customer released from custody had their SRSS payment
suspended and contacts, do not restore. Staff must escalate the case to
the SRSS Helpdesk.

Cancelling the SRSS payment

Both Services Australia and the Department of Home Affairs can cancel a
customer's SRSS payment.

Department of Home Affairs will:

-   automatically cancel customers via the data link
-   refer cancellation due to death to Services Australia via the
    Stop/Suspension modification listing

Services Australia will:

-   automatically cancel a SRSS payment 13 weeks after suspension of
    payment, except in cases where a customer has passed away

Where a customer has passed away, see Death of a Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) customer or their child.

If the suspension has not been applied by the system, do not cancel the
payment, escalate to the SRSS Helpdesk.

Reasons for cancellation by Services Australia may include:

-   assets over limit
-   customer request (Services Australia will cancel the payment, the
    Department of Home Affairs will be advised via the SRSS Helpdesk)
-   Customer's employment income precludes SRSS payment for 6
    consecutive fortnights
-   failure to return SRSS Payment Review form
-   failure to attend compulsory appointment
-   failure to respond to correspondence
-   investigation
-   mail returned/whereabouts unknown
-   no payment destination details
-   returned direct credit payment

The Resources page contains a link to contact information, a link to
contact details for the SRSS Helpdesk, a taskcard on how to run change
processes in Customer First and Cancellation, Suspension and Rejections
codes for SRSS.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
