
Determining financial assistance for an unaccompanied humanitarian minor (UHM) 005-02040030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what a Service Officer should do when an
unaccompanied humanitarian minor (UHM) contacts Services Australia and
requests financial assistance. It outlines what assistance is available
and which payment options are most appropriate.

Unaccompanied humanitarian minor (UHM)

Unaccompanied humanitarian minor (UHM)

A UHM is a non-citizen child, under 18 years of age who arrived in
Australia under the Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP) and does not
have a parent to care for them in Australia. There are 2 types of UHM.

Options for financial support

There are 4 options for financial support for a UHM:

State or Territory child protection: The Department of Home Affairs
refers UHM to state or territory Government Child Welfare Authorities to
provide support under relevant state or territory child protection
legislation, for example, foster care

UHM Program Support Allowance (UPSA): The Department of Home Affairs
provides support and can pay the UHM Program Support Allowance (UPSA)
fortnightly until the age of 18 years. Before 1 January 2020, UPSA was
paid until the age of 16 years. Note: Services Australia has kept the
name of the payment as Maintenance Allowance for Refugees

Income Support Payment: Holders of permanent visa's (subclasses 200 -
204 and 866) can claim an income support payment such as:

-   Youth Allowance (YA) when they reach the minimum school leaving age
-   Special Benefit (SpB) for those under 16 years and homeless, or
    unsupported. Customers may only be granted SpB if the relevant
    state/territory authority has conducted a protective assessment and
    does not intend to provide support to the young person. Or, the
    delegate has determined the support provided by the state/territory
    welfare authority is inadequate. The young person must still meet
    the eligibility requirements for SpB

Holders of certain temporary visa's (subclass 785 and 790) can claim
Special Benefit (SpB) if:

-   the relevant state/territory welfare authority has conducted a
    protective assessment and does not intend to provide support to the
    young person. Or, the delegate has determined the support provided
    by the state/territory authority is inadequate. The young person
    must still meet the eligibility requirements for SpB

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Double Orphan Pension (DOP): if an
individual or Approved Care Organisation (ACO) has care, and can receive
FTB for the UHM child, they may also be eligible for DOP

Payment of SpB

Special Benefit (SpB) is a payment of last resort. SpB should only be
granted to a young person aged under 18 years if a state/territory
welfare authority is not providing sufficient support, or the young
person is required to contribute to this support.

SpB under the Under 16 years (USY) category may be granted for permanent
visa holders if there is insufficient, and/or no support provided by
other parties. SpB under the Temporary Visa Holder (TPA/TPP) categories
may be granted for certain temporary visa holders (subclass 785 and 790)
if there is insufficient and/or no support provided by any other
parties.

A UHM claiming SpB must be referred to a social worker for assessment to
determine if a customer is receiving or might receive care from the
state or territory government.

Before granting SpB, refer the customer’s details to the Special Benefit
Helpdesk who will check with Department of Home Affairs to see if the
customer is receiving any financial support.

The Resources page contains a link to the Special Benefit Helpdesk
webform, the form for applying to be an Approved Care Organisation and
an example of when a Service Officer should refer a customer to the
Services Australia social worker.

Related links

Social Work Services

Approved Care Organisation (ACO)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Approval, rejection, withdrawal and monitoring of Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Foster Care for principal carers

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Claiming and assessing Youth Allowance (YA) full new claim under 18

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
