-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the interpreter services available for customers
who are deaf or hard of hearing.

Deaf or hard of hearing customers

Deaf or hard of hearing customers use many forms of communication to
conduct their business with Services Australia.

To make sure they access the services and support they need, it is
important to determine their communication preference. These include:

Sign language interpreters:

-   the agency provides free interpreters for customers who are deaf or
    hard of hearing
-   customers can access an agency supplied interpreter, or use their
    own interpreter
-   if using their own, the interpreter can be in person or via video
    chat (on the customer’s own device)

The National Relay Service (NRS):

-   a telephone service for people who are deaf or hard of hearing
-   for information on how to help customers via the NRS, see Using the
    National Relay Service (NRS)

Using Auslan interpreters for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Auslan is the official and most commonly used sign language of the
Australian deaf or hard of hearing community. It is also known as
Australian sign language.

Interpreters use gestures instead of sounds to facilitate comfortable
and smooth communication for the deaf or hard of hearing customer. They
convert spoken language into sign language and vice versa.

When using an interpreter to communicate with a deaf or hard of hearing
customer:

-   Be prepared. Brief the interpreter of the appointment’s purpose or
    any special terminology that will be used. Provide material that
    will be discussed or signed
-   Service centre staff - consider printing the customer's name in
    large font on A4 paper instead of calling their name in the waiting
    room
-   Make sure the customer and interpreter can see each other’s hands
    and facial expressions clearly
-   Allow for regular breaks. Sign interpreting for long periods can be
    physically and mentally exhausting for both the interpreter and the
    customer
-   Consider the same principles and techniques as using interpreters
    who interpret for different languages. See Guidelines for using
    interpreters

The agency offers other forms of sign languages for customers who are
deaf or hard of hearing. For more information, contact Language
Services.

The Resources page contains links to notices, contact details and
external websites.

Related links

Interpreter Services

Language Services

Booking an interpreter for an appointment

Guidelines for using interpreters

Providing services to customers with disabilities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
