-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Resolution of Status (RoS) visa Class CD,
subclass 851 (CD 851). It details entitlement to income support payments
and other services provided by Services Australia.

Creation of the RoS (CD 851) visa

RoS (CD851) visas commenced from 9 August 2008. It is a permanent
refugee visa. Upon commencement of the RoS (CD851) visa the 447
Secondary Movement Offshore Entry visa, 451 Secondary Movement
Relocation visa, 695 Return Pending visa and 785 Temporary Protection
visa (TPV) were all repealed. For more information on visas, see Common
types of Australian visas.

Note: issuing of the RoS subclass BL851 visa ceased 9 August 2008. This
was an 'ordinary' permanent visa. People who hold this visa, granted
prior to 9 August 2008, are assessed as a normal permanent resident visa
with no refugee conditions.

Temporary Protection visa (TPV) issued before 9 August 2008 to refugees

Before 9 August 2008, asylum seekers who arrived in Australia unlawfully
but found to be in need of protection under the Refugees Convention were
issued a TPV. These visas gave people access to limited payments such as
Special Benefit (SpB), Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and ancillary payments.
After 9 August 2008, people who held one of the following visa types
were eligible to apply for a RoS (CD 851) visa:

-   447 Secondary Movement Offshore Entry
-   451 Secondary Movement Relocation
-   785 Temporary Protection
-   695 Return Pending

There is no closing date to apply for the RoS (CD 851) visa class.
People issued with a RoS (CD 851) visa are recognised as refugees for
Services Australia purposes. After the grant of their RoS (CD 851) visa,
former TPV holders have immediate access all other applicable income
support payments or benefits and associated services. As this visa is
granted onshore, people are not entitled to Crisis Payment for
Humanitarian Entrants.

Note: customers must have applied for and granted the RoS (CD 851) visa
before their residence status for Services Australia purposes changed.
They continued to hold their TPV until granted the RoS (CD 851) or their
TPV expires.

Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) and Safe Haven Enterprise Visa (SHEV) transition to permanent Resolution of Status (RoS) visa after 14 February 2023

On 13 February 2023, the Australian Government announced the
implementation of its commitment to transition TPV subclass 785 and SHEV
subclass 790 holders to a permanent RoS subclass 851 visa.

If a person had held or applied for a TPV 785 or a SHEV 790 before 14
February 2023, they may be eligible for a permanent RoS (CD851) visa.

Initially the Department of Home Affairs will invite specific TPV 785
and SHEV 790 holders to apply for a RoS (CD851). This will include those
who hold a TPV/SHEV that is due to expire soon based on the announcement
date above. For more information, see the Department of Home Affairs
website.

All other TPV/SHEV holders could apply online from 23 March 2023 through
the Home Affairs website.

Department of Home Affairs will finalise the majority of the TPV/SHEV
holders within 12 months of the commencement of processing.

Direct all visa enquiries to the Department of Home Affairs.

Details on system

As the Centrelink system only recognises the subclass 851, the system is
able to distinguish the type of RoS visa 851 issued to the customer by
using the date of issue. If granted:

-   before 9 August 2008, 851 visa will be BL. These are not a refugee
    visa
-   after 9 August 2008, the 851 visa will be CD. These are a refugee
    visa

Income support payments

Once granted a RoS (CD 851) visa, customers on payment will have their
records reassessed including the transfer to another suitable payment.
Customers ceased to qualify for Special Benefit (SpB) once they qualify
and become payable for another income support payment.

Treat them as refugees while holding a RoS (CD 851) visa, see References
page for a link to the Social Security Guide for a definition of
refugee. No residency waiting periods or qualifying residence periods
apply to these customers, they are eligible to claim all available
Services Australia pensions, benefits and allowances once granted their
permanent resident visa. This includes JobSeeker Payment (JSP),
Parenting Payment (PP), Youth Allowance (YA), Disability Support Pension
(DSP), Carer Payment (CP), Carer Allowance (CA), Age Pension etc.

Employment services and approved activities

Previously, as holders of a Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) these
customers only had access to limited services from Employment Services
Providers. RoS (CD851) Visa holders are a Fully Eligible Participant
(FEP) and eligible for a full range of services and approved activities
such as Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP).

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

A refugee exemption from mutual obligation requirements is not
automatically applied to a customer's record on the grant of a RoS
(CD851) visa. This is because they usually have been in the community
for some time and an exemption from mutual obligation requirements would
unnecessarily delay their access to employment services. However,
consider if a temporary exemption up to 13 weeks from their mutual
obligation requirements should apply where it is appropriate to assist
with adjustment to their changed circumstances.

See Resources for the Department of Home Affairs website, contact
details and policy helpdesk.

Related links

Australian residence requirements for payment

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Refugee, Humanitarian and Permanent Protection Visa sub-classes

Initial contact with refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa
holders

Common types of Australian visas

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Employment Services Providers

Special Benefit (SpB) reviews

Afghan evacuees transitioning to a permanent refugee visa - benefit
transfer process

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
