
Specialised and Intensive Services (SIS) 005-05010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to Specialised and Intensive
Services (SIS). SIS is administered by the Department of Home Affairs
and is designed to provide specialised and intensive case management
support for recently arrived refugees and other humanitarian entrants
who have complex needs.

About Specialised and Intensive Services (SIS)

The Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP) provides SIS to humanitarian
entrants and other eligible visa holders who have complex needs.

SIS offers clients short-term needs-based support to help them access
appropriate mainstream services and develop the necessary skills to
manage their needs independently.

SIS are delivered by HSP service providers on behalf of the Department
of Home Affairs to people who demonstrate an inability to independently
engage with appropriate supports and are impacted by multiple or complex
barriers that may include:

-   Disability
-   Health needs that are severe, critical, long term and/or unmanaged
-   Mental health issues
-   Homelessness or housing instability
-   Family and domestic violence
-   Child and youth welfare concerns
-   Family and/or relationship breakdown
-   Social isolation
-   Financial hardship
-   Legal issues

Eligibility for SIS

Subject to the approval of the Department of Home Affairs, people
holding one of the following visas may be eligible to receive SIS under
the HSP:

-   Refugee (subclass 200, 201, 203 and 204) visa
-   Global Special Humanitarian (subclass 202) visa
-   Protection (subclass 866) visa
-   Temporary Protection (subclass 785), Temporary Humanitarian Concern
    (subclass 786), Temporary Humanitarian Stay (subclass 449), and Safe
    Haven Enterprise (subclass 790) visas

Holders of these visas may be eligible for SIS for up to 5 years after
their arrival in Australia or up to 5 years after the grant of their
onshore visa. In exceptional circumstances, flexibility may be shown to
this timeframe and holders of other visa subclasses. Australian Citizens
are not eligible for SIS.

How to refer a person for SIS

Any organisation or individual can refer a person for SIS, including
self-referral.

Services Australia staff interact with refugee and humanitarian
customers daily, and are well-positioned to identify where a person may
be encountering complex settlement needs and may benefit from referral
to SIS.

After the referral is submitted, the Department of Home Affairs will
assess the eligibility of the person/s referred and notify the referrer
of the outcome. If the person/s meets eligibility criteria, the
Department of Home Affairs will engage a HSP service provider to deliver
SIS.

The Resources page contains links to the Specialised and Intensive
Services Online Referral Form and Department of Home Affairs -
Humanitarian Settlement Program.

Related links

Refugee, humanitarian and permanent protection visa sub-classes

Temporary protection, humanitarian, safe haven and return pending visas

Identifying if a customer who is a migrant, refugee or visitor is
eligible for financial assistance

Referring newly arrived residents to external agencies and services

Referrals to specialist services for refugees

Migrant Resource Centres

Referral to services for the treatment of torture and trauma

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
