
Referral to services for the treatment of torture and trauma 005-01050030

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about agencies that assist newly
arrived customers who are survivors of torture or trauma.

Programme of Assistance for Survivors of Torture and Trauma (PASTT)

The Programme of Assistance for Survivors of Torture and Trauma (PASTT)
provides specialised support services to permanently resettled
humanitarian entrants and those on temporary substantive visas living in
the community who are experiencing psychological or psychosocial
difficulties associated with surviving torture and trauma before coming
to Australia.

PASTT is delivered by member agencies of the Forum of Australian
Services for Survivors of Torture and Trauma (FASTT), a network of
specialist rehabilitation agencies that work with survivors of torture
and trauma. There is one FASTT agency in each state and territory of
Australia.

Clients can be referred through a wide range of sources including the
Department of Home Affairs Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP), other
settlement services, general practitioners and other health services,
education providers, legal services, community services, family /
friends / community members and through self referral. The Resources
page contains a link to HSP.

To ensure that the programs offered by these organisations are
culturally appropriate, information and assistance is delivered by
professionals in the areas of health, psychology, social work and where
needed, interpreters and bilingual staff are also available.

Specialised and Intensive Services (SIS)

The Department of Home Affairs Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)
provides Specialised and Intensive Services (SIS) to humanitarian
entrants and other eligible visa holders who have complex needs. SIS
offer clients short-term support (generally, up to 6 months) to help
them access appropriate mainstream services and develop the necessary
skills to manage their needs independently. The Department of Home
Affairs must approve a referral for a person to receive SIS.

Multicultural Service Officer (MSO)

When a Service Officer is unsure of how to refer a customer to an
organisation that provides services to the victims of torture and
trauma, or the particular services offered, contact should be made with
a MSO to seek further clarification. When servicing customers with a
psychological illness, please consider the various impacts of the
condition on their ability to comply, including their capacity to attend
appointments.

The Resources page contains links to External agencies.

Related links

Communicating with victims of trauma and/or torture

Referrals to specialist services for refugees

Migrant Resource Centres

Multicultural Service Officers (MSO)

Specialised and Intensive Services (SIS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
