
Status Resolution Support Services payment 005-06000000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Status Resolution Support
Services (SRSS) payment.

Government intent

The SRSS payment provides temporary needs-based support to asylum
seekers who are unable to support themselves while resolving their
immigration status.

On this Page:

SRSS payment

The SRSS Payment is administered by Services Australia on behalf of the
Department of Home Affairs (Home Affairs). Home Affairs determines
eligibility for the SRSS payment.

Home Affairs contracted service providers deliver additional support,
via the SRSS Program to eligible asylum seekers. In some instances, a
person may be eligible for the SRSS Program but not eligible for the
SRSS payment from Services Australia. This is determined by Home
Affairs.

While the SRSS payment is not contained in social security law or family
assistance law, some of the policy for the administration of this
payment draws on elements of policy within those laws. The SRSS payments
is administered under the Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013.

SRSS background

Services Australia commenced the administration of the SRSS payment on 1
April 2014. Customers were transitioned to Services Australia in a
phased approach from all Home Affairs contracted service providers
across the country.

Home Affairs transferred the records of customers already receiving a
payment, including all information and details needed to commence
payment.

Depending on their circumstances, prior to transition these customers
may have been receiving payments from Home Affairs under the:

-   Asylum Seeker Assistance Scheme (ASAS) program
-   Community Assistance Support (CAS) program, or
-   Community Detention (CD) program

Included in the SRSS payment

Once Home Affairs have determined eligibility, a customer will receive a
base rate of Living Allowance. Depending on their circumstances, a
customer may also be eligible for:

-   Rental Assistance Allowance (if in private rental accommodation)
-   Dependent Child Allowance (if primary parent of a child)

Customers who receive the SRSS payment are not eligible for any other
Centrelink payments or services. Some SRSS customers may be eligible for
Medicare. See Ministerial orders and Medicare eligibility.

Services provided to SRSS customers

If an SRSS customer visits a service centre with a payment enquiry or
change in circumstances, at Check-in the Service Officer should stream
the SRSS customer for service.

Note: the Service Officer will be able to determine the person is an
SRSS customer by viewing their wallet card or benefit status (NRR/CUR).
There may be a Display on Access (DOA) DOC which will contain more
information about the customer.

The customer can be seen by any Service Officer who can make general
updates. If the Service Officer requires assistance, they can contact
the local Refugee and Asylum Seeker team who is their Level 1 support.

Where a customer contacts in crisis, such as Domestic Violence, Elder
Abuse or Suicide/Self harm, standard specialist referral processes must
be followed. Staff must also advise the SRSS Helpdesk immediately of the
situation.

SRSS customers should be directed to the Home Affairs for questions
about their immigration status. For all other questions, please direct
them to their Home Affairs contracted service provider.

Processing SRSS payments and changes

Payments and changes in circumstances must be processed and viewed using
Customer First. All updates must be DOC’d on the record if not using a
Guided Procedure (GP). The ‘Social Services Plan (SSP)’ in SAP must be
finalised when a payment affecting change is made. This ensures the SRSS
customer receives the correct rate of SRSS payment and will allocate in
Workload Manager to a suitably skilled staff member. See Status
Resolution Support Services (SRSS) Social Services Plan.

Change of circumstances relating to Income and Assets online updates
will create a work item as a Change of Circumstances (CoC) interaction
activity. This CoC interaction activity work item can be viewed and
processed see, Income and Assets test for Status Resolution Support
Services (SRSS) customers in Customer First. If more information is
required to process the customer's Income and Assets online updates. A
Service Officer can request additional documentation using the Request
for Information function in the CoC interaction activity in Customer
First.

If required details cannot be updated within Process Direct, the work
item will need to be cancelled in Process Direct. Code the CoC in
Customer First and DOC the record. All activities relating to the change
of circumstances must be finalised before the Social Services Plan
approval.

Assistance Services Australia cannot provide to SRSS customers

SRSS customers are not eligible for other agency services that are
currently available to income support customers including advance
payments, social work referrals (except where immediate crisis exists),
health care cards, concession cards and welfare referrals. See Status
Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment customer is in hardship.

New claims for SRSS payments

For new claims for SRSS payments, refer to Processing Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) payment claims.

SRSS customer advises they want to change their name

SRSS customers must be registered with Services Australia with the
details provided by Home Affairs. Under no circumstances should Services
Australia update customers’ identity details (name and date of birth)
without confirmation from Home Affairs. Supplying their identity
documents (for example, Immi Card) with the new details is not
sufficient to update the legal name. Where the Services Australia's
record does not reflect the name the customer claims as their legal
name, contact the SRSS Helpdesk immediately. To reduce the risk of fraud
and prevent the creation of multiple and intertwined records, a name
change can be coded in Customer First on the Customer Personal Detail
Summary (CPDS) screen as Also Known As (AKA). See Aliases and other
names (legal, preferred, sex and gender diverse customers, cultural
considerations etc.) for information relating to coding name(s) on the
system.

The SRSS customer will be required to request changes to their identity
via a formal process with Home Affairs. They need to present to their
nearest Home Affairs office to complete the required forms.

Home Affairs will make a determination regarding their request. If Home
Affairs determination is to change a customer’s name, this information
will be provided to Services Australia automatically via the electronic
datalink.

Contents

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment eligibility for Living
Allowance

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer eligibility for
Rental Assistance Allowance

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer eligibility for
Dependent Child Allowance

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) Social Service Plan

Change to the relationship status or dependent children for a Status
Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment customer

Processing Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment claims

Person permitted to enquire for Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payment customers

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment Reviews

Actioning Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment reviews

Deductions from Status Resolution Support Services payments to repay
money owing to Department of Home Affairs

Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment debt recovery

Cancellation, Suspension and Rejection codes for Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) payments

Suspending, cancelling, or restoring Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payments

Review of Decision for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment

Stakeholder responsibilities for Status Resolution Support Services
(SRSS) payment

Related links

Payment enquiries for Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) payment
customers

Death of a Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer or their
child

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
