
Australia's refugee and humanitarian program 005-02040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the refugee and humanitarian
program.

Government intent

Planning of the permanent Migration Program by the Department of Home
Affairs occurs annually with program settings announced as part of the
Federal Budget each year.

The refugee and humanitarian program is part of the overall Migration
Program.

Further information on the Migration Program and the refugee and
humanitarian program is available on the Department of Home Affairs
website:

-   Migration Program planning levels
-   Refugee and humanitarian program

The refugee and humanitarian program - offshore resettlement

This offers resettlement for people outside Australia who are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Specific visa subclasses are:

-   Refugee Visa (Subclass 200)
-   In-country Special Humanitarian Programme Visa (Subclass 201)
-   Global Special Humanitarian Programme Visa (Subclass 202) applicants
    for this visa are proposed for entry by an Australian citizen or
    permanent resident or an organisation and may be subject to an
    Assurance of Support under Community Support Program
-   Emergency Rescue Visa (Subclass 203)
-   Woman at Risk Visa (Subclass 204)

A person arriving in Australia on one of these visa subclasses is
referred to a Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP) service provider, or
Community Refugee Integration and Settlement Pilot (CRISP)
representative to access settlement support.

Individuals granted a subclass 202 visa under the Community Support
Program (CSP) are not eligible for settlement support under the HSP as
they receive settlement services from either an Approved Proposing
Organisation or assurer under Assurance of Support.

Note: holders of the above visa subclasses are eligible for all payments
upon entry to Australia (offshore). The procedure covering Refugee,
humanitarian and permanent protection visa sub-classes has a full list
of refugee visa sub-classes.

The refugee and humanitarian program - onshore protection

This offers protection to people who wish to apply for protection (or
asylum) after arrival in Australia.

The specific visa subclass is:

Protection Visa (Subclass 866)

-   holders of a visa subclass 866 are not eligible for the Humanitarian
    Settlement Program

Note: holders of the above visa subclasses are eligible for all payments
upon entry to Australia (offshore) or grant of the visa (onshore). The
procedure covering Refugee, humanitarian and permanent protection visa
sub-classes contains a full list of refugee visa sub-classes.

Specific Temporary visa subclasses are:

Temporary Protection Visa (Subclass 785) and Temporary Humanitarian Visa
(subclass 786)

-   holders of a visa subclass 785 & 786 are not eligible for the
    Humanitarian Settlement Program

Temporary Humanitarian Stay Visa (subclass 449)

-   holders of a visa subclass 449 are not eligible for the Humanitarian
    Settlement Program

Note: holders of the above visa subclasses are not subject to the NARWP
and are therefore eligible for limited payments once granted the visa
(onshore). See Common types of Australian visas for a full list of visa
sub-classes.

Notification to Services Australia

The customer or someone on their behalf (that is, Humanitarian
Settlement Program (HSP), CRISP representative or proposer) may contact
Services Australia about an intention to lodge a claim for a social
security payment.

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they submit a complete claim with all relevant
support documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances. See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

For most refugees and permanent protection visa holders, the HSP
provider or CRISP representative notifies arrival using the Notification
of refugee arrival (SS459) form.
This does not include 202 visa holders under the Community Support
Program.

Their Approved Proposing Organisation or assurer under the Assurance of
Support is expected to familiarise the entrant with services such as
Services Australia.

For more information, see Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer
and Assuree makes a claim for an Assurance of Support (AoS) recoverable
payment.

Contents

Identifying if a customer who is a migrant, refugee or visitor is
eligible for financial assistance

Refugees

Identity Confirmation and refugees

Processes specific for migrants, refugees and visitors

Citizenship Testing

Referring newly arrived residents to external agencies and services

Cultural considerations for customers coming from culturally and
linguistically diverse (CALD) backgrounds

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period Exemptions

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
