
Citizenship Testing 005-01040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Australian citizenship test
and the role of Services Australia in administering the test in a number
of remote and regional locations. The test is part of the citizenship
process.

Application options

There are a number of different application options. The right
application type depends on the applicant's circumstances.

Most people from 18-59 years of age applying for Australian citizenship
by conferral must successfully complete a citizenship test administered
by the Department of Home Affairs.

Purpose of citizenship test

The citizenship test encourages an applicant to gain an understanding of
Australia's values, traditions, history, national symbols, the English
language, and the responsibilities and privileges of citizenship. It is
an important part of making sure migrants have the capacity to fully
participate in the Australian community as citizens, and to maximise the
opportunities available to them in Australia. It promotes social
cohesion and successful integration into the community.

Information required to pass the citizenship test is available in the
citizenship test resource book titled 'Australian Citizenship: Our
Common Bond'. The Resources page contains a link to this book.

Eligibility to sit the citizenship test

Applicants of the citizenship test must:

-   have lodged an application for citizenship
-   be a permanent resident of Australia
-   satisfy the Department of Home Affairs’ confirmation of identity
    requirements during the process of registering for the test, and
-   allow Department of Home Affairs and Services Australia to take a
    photo (similar to a passport photo)

Citizenship test

The test is computer based and consists of 20 multiple choice questions.
It also contains 5 mandatory Australian 'values' questions which must be
answered correctly to pass the test. The minimum pass mark is 75%
including the 5 mandatory questions. If the applicant fails to answer
any of the 5 mandatory questions correctly, the applicant will not pass
the test regardless of their overall score. Applicants have 45 minutes
to complete the test. The test is only available in English. Special
arrangements are available to applicants who would have difficulty
completing the test, for example due to disabilities.

A test with assistance, where the questions and answers are read aloud
to the applicant may be offered at the test administrator's discretion
when:

-   the applicant is having difficulty using the ReadSpeak function (top
    right hand side of the test program)
-   the applicant appears to have literacy problems and may benefit from
    having the questions and options read to them

An Assisted Test will be booked for applicants that have met eligibility
requirements, such as applicants who have completed an AMEP English
course and have not attained sufficient English language proficiency. An
Assisted Test allows applicants up to 90 minutes to sit the test rather
than 45 minutes. The Daily Regional Attendees List will indicate if an
applicant has been booked for an Assisted Test and 2 appointment slots
will be allocated.

There is no fee for the citizenship test. However, there is a fee to
lodge the application for citizenship.

Role of Services Australia

The agency administers the citizenship test in 39 service centres in
remote and regional locations.

These service centres receive notification of appointments via email
from the Department of Home Affairs. Services Australia staff administer
the appointments but do not arrange them or make any decisions relating
to citizenship applications. Their main role is to verify the
applicant's original documents, take a photo of them and administer the
test for applicants from 18-59 years of age.

Applicants aged 16, 17 and 60 and over only need to attend the interview
part of the appointment. The Daily Regional Attendees List will indicate
if the appointment is an interview only, or a standard test appointment.

The Resources page contains links to the Australian citizenship website
and additional information for test administrators. It also contains a
list of Centrelink Service Centres that administer the citizenship
testing in remote and regional locations.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
