
Refugee Activities (RAC) as an approved activity 005-18101837

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a newly arrived refugee who will remain
Centrelink managed post the end of their ‘Refugee in first 13 Weeks’
(REF) mutual obligation exemption, may fully satisfy their mutual
obligation requirements by participating in Refugee Activities.

Refugee Activities (RAC) availability

The Refugee Activities approved activity is only available to newly
arrived refugees with mutual obligation requirements who are eligible
for the BTSR measure and so remain Centrelink managed after the end of
their Refugee exemption.

The Participation Summary screen will advise if the refugee is eligible
for the BTSR measure.

See, Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer for more
information.

Newly arrived refugees

Newly arrived refugees who are in receipt of an income support payment
with mutual obligations requirements (for example, JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Youth Allowance (Other), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) (with
mutual obligation requirements)) will receive the 'Refugee in first 13
weeks' (REF) mutual obligation requirement exemption for the first 13
weeks from their arrival in Australia. The exemption is an automatic
exemption for eligible refugees recorded on the Activities and
Exemptions Summary (AEX) screen.

The exemption period is adjusted to 11 weeks and 6 days at the new
claim. For more information on the changing of the exemption date, see
Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer.

During the exemption period, refugees are not required to look for work,
but must attend the following scheduled appointments:

-   Multicultural Service Officer (MSO) seminar, and
-   Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if required, and
-   'week-12 post exemption' review

Better Targeting of Support for Refugee (BTSR) measure

Refugees who are eligible for the Better Targeting of Support for
Refugees (BTSR) measure remain Centrelink managed until they have been
in Australia for 12 months. To cover the 12 month period, these refugees
required an appropriate activity to be recorded on the Activities and
Exemptions Summary (AEX) screen.

A Service Officer in the refugee's local service centre is responsible
for recording the activity on the AEX screen at the refugees week 12
post exemption review contact.

Most refugees who are eligible for the BTSR measure with have the
Refugee Activities (RAC) activity recorded on the AEX screen.

Note: as per normal processing, a Job Plan cannot be negotiated for a
customer who has a current exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements.

Suitable activities to satisfy mutual obligation requirements as 'Refugee Activities'

To be eligible for the Refugee Activities (RAC) activity the newly
arrived refugee must be participating in one or more of the following:

-   the Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)
-   the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
-   Workforce Australia on a voluntary placement

Note: the refugee does not need to provide evidence they are
participating in these activities when their Job Plan is being
negotiated.

If the refugee is not participating in HSP, AMEP or Workforce Australia,
discuss a possible referral to one of these. If the refugee requests a
referral to a Workforce Australia Provider as a volunteer, they must
only be referred if they have:

-   chosen to be referred, and
-   had an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) completed, and
-   negotiated a Job Plan with Services Australia

The refugee cannot be referred to Workforce Australia if they do not
have a current ESAt assessment. Instead, refer them for an ESAt to be
completed before referring to Workforce Australia.

If the refugee declines a referral to HSP, AMEP or Workforce Australia
then another appropriate compulsory requirement will need to be recorded
on the AEX screen.

For further information on determining appropriate AEX activities for
BTSR customers, see Negotiating Job Plans for newly arrived refugees
following the 'Refugee in Frist 13 Weeks' (REF) exemption.

Recording the Refugee Activities approved activity

Once Refugee Activities (RAC) has been determined as the appropriate
activity to add to the refugees Job Plan, a Service Officer in the
refugee's local service centre is responsible for recording the Refugee
Activities (RAC) activity at their week 12 post exemption review
contact.

Ensure Refugee Activities (RAC) is manually recorded as the compulsory
requirement on the refugee's record on the AEX screen.

Service Officers must ensure that the activity covers the full
Centrelink managed period (for example, until the refugee has been in
Australia for 12 months). This means setting the end date to be equal to
12 months from the refugee's date of arrival in Australia.

See Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer for more information
on how long the refugee will remain Centrelink managed.

See Negotiating Job Plans for newly arrived refugees following the
‘Refugee in First 13 Weeks’ (REF) exemption for further details.

The Resources page has a link to the Department of Home Affairs website.

Related links

Assessing concessional study loads for Youth Allowance (YA)

Negotiating Job Plans for newly arrived refugees following the ‘Refugee
in First 13 Weeks’ (REF) exemption

Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
