
Death of a Status Resolution Support Services (SRSS) customer or their child 005-06020060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to confirm the death of a Status Resolution
Support Services (SRSS) customer or a child. When a person advises
Services Australia of the death of an SRSS customer, the informant's
full name, address, phone number and their relationship to the deceased
needs to be recorded. A death must be confirmed before any action is
taken. Then immediately advise the Department of Home Affairs of the
death.

Payment cessation

When an SRSS customer or their child passes away, payment should always
be made up to the day before the date of death.

Multiple notifications

Where multiple notifications are received in relation to the death of
the same person do not create a new activity, instead, check the record
and annotate the original DOC to state details are correct and who
advised.

Confirmation required for the death of a SRSS customer

Confirmation of the death and identity of the deceased can be accepted
if the full name of the deceased plus at least 2 of the following can be
provided:

-   deceased's last address in full
-   date of birth
-   Customer Reference Number (CRN)
-   partner's name (if partnered at time of death)

If the informant cannot provide enough information, the funeral
director's name or the name of the hospital can be accepted and the
death confirmed with them.

Once the death has been confirmed and actioned, the case must be
referred immediately via a phone referral to the SRSS Helpdesk so advice
can be provided to the Department of Home Affairs.

Ongoing care of dependent children of a deceased SRSS customer or SRSS couple

All cases where a single deceased customer or deceased customer couple
had dependent child/ren in their care prior to their death must be
referred immediately via a phone referral to the SRSS Helpdesk. This
team will refer the case to the Department of Home Affairs urgently to
ensure someone is caring for the children.

Person notifying death to be advised information not shared with Medicare services

The person notifying of the death should be advised that information
used for SRSS payment and Medicare services is not routinely transferred
within Services Australia. The person may need to contact Medicare, to
update relevant information.

Specific date of death cannot be determined

Where the date of death on the death certificate covers a range of dates
(for example, 'died between 01/01/2007 and 26/01/2007'), the date of
death should be recorded as the last possible day on which death
occurred as written on the death certificate.

Person missing, presumed dead

If the person is missing, but presumed dead, they can be regarded as
deceased if:

-   there are no suspicious circumstances, and
-   there is evidence supporting their death

For example, the person is alleged to have met with a fatal accident
such as death by drowning, and the body has not been recovered. If a
police report supports the circumstances, the person can be regarded as
deceased.

The courts will generally not presume death until a period of 12 months
has elapsed.

If the person has simply disappeared, it cannot be accepted that the
person is deceased.

In all cases where the person is missing, presumed dead, it must be
referred immediately via a phone referral to the SRSS Helpdesk so advice
can be provided to the Department of Home Affairs.

Confirmation for the death of a child

All of the following details must be provided before the death of the
child can be recorded:

-   full name and address and contact number of the person notifying of
    the death
-   full name and address of the person receiving Dependent Child
    Allowance for the child, and
-   full name, date of birth and date of death of the child for whom
    Dependent Child Allowance is paid

Services Australia must be certain of the information before taking any
action. Where there is doubt or not enough information provided with the
initial advice of the death of a child for whom Dependent Child
Allowance is paid, immediate action on the same day must be taken to
confirm the identity of the deceased. In these cases the funeral
director or hospital should be contacted by phone to confirm the death
of a child.

Refer all cases involving the death of a child immediately via a phone
referral to the SRSS Helpdesk. This team will escalate and advise the
Department of Home Affairs of these cases.

Doubt about identity

Where there is any doubt, such as several possible matches, the identity
of the deceased should be confirmed with the funeral director concerned.
Where the death cannot be confirmed and the customer's whereabouts
cannot be established, payment should be suspended pending further
investigation.

Immediately refer all cases involving doubt about the identity of the
deceased via phone referral to the SRSS Helpdesk.

The Resources page contains text for the Q062 letter, a link to contact
details for the SRSS helpdesk as well as a link to the Multicultural and
Tailored Services Branch intranet page.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
