
Common types of Australian visas 005-02030010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the various visa subclasses, lists common types,
and outlines the assistance available to help identify what type of
residence status the visa holder has within Australia.

Types of visas held by non-Australian citizens and residence status

The type of visa held by a non-Australian citizen indicates their
residence status within Australia. Visas are broken down into a series
of classes and subclasses that identify the grounds of entry into
Australia and whether any conditions have been placed upon the holder.

Chapter 9 of the Social Security Guide

The References page contains links to Chapter 9 of the Social Security
Guide, which contains information about various visa subclasses. This is
the best way to determine whether the type of visa held by the customer
entitles the holder to any income support payments.

It lists each subclass which can provide an entitlement and advises:

-   if any conditions apply or may be imposed on the holder (such as
    Assurance of Support)
-   whether the holder is eligible for any income support payments, and
-   whether the subclass conveys any exemptions from residence
    requirements (qualifying residence exemptions) such as the Newly
    Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP)

Note: if a visa subclass is not listed, the Department of Social
Security (DSS) has determined it does not entitle a holder to any
payments or concessions.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the Immigration Datalink will automatically
record a customer's visa subclass details from 1 September 1994 and will
include any change in visa details. The datalink will also record
customer's movement information and grants of Australian citizenship
where available.

For further information, or if the datalink is unavailable, see
Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures

Recording visa subclasses

If a customer has citizenship of a country other than Australia, or an
Australian citizen needs a particular visa subclass to qualify for
payment (for example, when they are a former refugee claiming Age
Pension without 10 years Australian residence), the customer's visa
subclasses must be recorded on the Legal Residence Details (RSLEG)
screen during new claim processing. The immigration datalink will
automatically populate this information if a successful link has been
established.

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK) provides
information about determining who is an Australian resident, including
whether a visa subclass provides an exemption from residence
requirements.

The Resources page contains visa tables detailing visa numbers, types,
and their titles.

Related links

Refugee, Humanitarian and Permanent Protection Visa sub-classes

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Documents required for Centrelink new claims

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Special Benefit (SpB) customers with Temporary Protection Visa (TPV) due
to expire

Recording legal residence status

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Australian residence requirements for payment

Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and contingency
procedures if datalink is unavailable

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
