
Initial contact from refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa holders 005-01010010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to follow when refugees,
humanitarian entrants and protection visa holders make initial contact
with Services Australia.

Initial contact

A customer, or someone advocating on their behalf, may contact the
agency by telephone, mail, email or in person about lodging a claim for
a payment.

From 1 July 2018, eligible customers will receive payments or concession
cards from the date they submit a complete claim with all relevant
supporting documentation.

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances.
See Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

The Service Officer/Front of House/Multilingual Phone Service must:

-   check if the customer has an existing record or create a new one
-   record a DOC
-   book any required appointments including an interpreter if needed
-   record the customer's preferred spoken language

For any further assistance, contact Refugee and asylum seeker teams.

Community Support Program (CSP)

Since 1 April 2018, the CSP has enabled community members or
organisations to support a limited number of global special humanitarian
refugee entrants to come to Australia. Under the CSP, an Approved
Proposing Organisation (APO) proposes the assuree(s) and helps to locate
a suitable Australian assurer(s).

Migrants who apply for a visa under an AoS arrangement must find a
suitable assurer to make a legal commitment to support them for a period
of 12 months after they arrive in Australia. Assurers are required to:

-   demonstrate they can financially support entrants within their first
    12 months in Australia
-   help entrant(s) achieve financial self-sufficiency within their
    first 12 months in Australia
-   assist familiarise entrant(s) with government services, community
    and other support service providers
-   repay any AoS recoverable payments claimed by the entrant within
    their first 12 months in Australia

When an assuree contacts to advise they are not receiving adequate
support, see Assuree makes a claim for an Assurance of Support (AoS)
recoverable payment.

The Resources page contains links to the Refugee services intranet page,
contact information for Refugee and asylum seeker teams, Assurance of
Support (AoS), Special Benefit (SpB) and forms.

Related links

Common types of Australian visas

Australia's refugee and humanitarian Program

Refugee and humanitarian entrant service offer

Refugees

Refugee and special humanitarian visa sub-classes

Temporary protection, humanitarian, safe haven and return pending visas

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements for refugees

Referral services for the treatment of torture and trauma

Identity confirmation and refugees

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for newly arrived refugee customer

Eligibility for Crisis Payment (CrP)

New claim for Crisis Payment for humanitarian entrants newly arrived in
Australia

determining financial assistance for an unaccompanied humanitarian minor
(UHM)

Intent to claim and vulnerable customers

First Contact Service Offer workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
