
English programs for migrants 005-01050040

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about various learning programs
available to new migrants.

Special Preparatory Program (SPP)

SPP is an English language tuition program specifically tailored to suit
eligible humanitarian entrants who may have difficulty adapting to the
more formal environment offered by the Adult Migrant English Program
(AMEP). The SPP is part of AMEP, funded by the Department of Home
Affairs. The SPP tuition is given by qualified teachers experienced in
dealing with the special needs of humanitarian entrants.

Eligibility for SPP

SPP is offered to eligible humanitarian entrants who hold permanent
visas, and who have been assessed by an AMEP Service Provider as having
special needs.

Up to 100 hours of English language tuition may be provided to
humanitarian entrants 18 years and older, who have had difficult
pre-migration experiences, for example, torture and trauma.

Up to 400 hours of English language tuition may be provided to
humanitarian entrants aged between 16 and 24 years who have low levels
of schooling, that is between zero and seven years of formal schooling.

Access to the 400 hours of English language tuition for eligible clients
between the ages of 16 and 18 years will be subject to confirmation that
they are unable to be placed in an appropriate school program.

Services Australia cannot assess customers for the SPP. This assessment
is made by the AMEP provider. If a customer is participating is SPP
leading to AMEP, then they are able to be granted up to an additional 13
weeks exemption.

TAFE Digital

TAFE Digital is part of TAFE New South Wales (NSW) and is the largest
online education provider in Australia. TAFE Digital offers industry
relevant and nationally recognised qualifications and short courses.

TAFE Digital provides services and targeted courses to all non-English
speaking background people, including members of new and emerging
communities nationally.

These include:

-   English language courses designed to cater for a range of ability
    levels of non-English speaking background people
-   Special programs which are offered free of charge to unemployed
    non-English speaking background people who are permanent residents
-   Assessment of English language skills
-   Advice about obtaining recognition for overseas qualifications,
    training and work experience that relates to the TAFE Digital course
    being studied

Language courses run by Adult Migrant English Service (AMES)

The English language courses vary and can include:

-   AMEP
-   Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)
-   Skilled Professional Migrant Program (SPMP)
-   Skilled Designated Area Sponsored Scheme
-   General English
-   English for academic purposes

Language courses run by local community groups

There are also courses run at local community level by religious groups,
Churches and community centres. These courses are generally open to
anyone and often cover all levels of English proficiency from beginners
to advanced. The types of courses and availability also vary between
areas.

These types of courses are usually privately funded.

The Resources page contains links to various external English course
providers' websites.

Related links

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Participation in Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

Skills for Education and Employment (SEE)

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements for refugees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
