
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the negotiation of a Job Plan by a Service
Officer for newly arrived refugees with mutual obligation requirements
following the end of the 'Refugee in First 13 Weeks' (REF) exemption.

Newly arrived refugees

Newly arrived refugees who are in receipt of an income support payment
with mutual obligation requirements (for example, JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Youth Allowance (Other), Parenting Payment Single (PPS) (with
mutual obligation requirements)) receive the 'Refugee in first 13 Weeks'
(REF) mutual obligation requirement exemption for the first 13 weeks
from their arrival in Australia. The exemption is an automatic exemption
recorded on the Activities and Exemptions (AEX) screen for eligible
refugees.

The exemption period is manually adjusted to 11 weeks and 6 days at the
new claim. See Refugee entrant service offer for more information on
changing the exemption date.

During the exemption period, the newly arrived refugees are not required
to look for work, but must attend the following scheduled appointments:

-   Multicultural Service Officer (MSO) seminar, and
-   Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) if required, and
-   'week 12 post exemption review'

Better Targeting of Support for Refugee (BTSR) measure

Refugees who are eligible for the Better Targeting of Support for
Refugees (BTSR) measure remain Centrelink managed until they have been
in Australia for 12 months. Their Job Plan needs to last until they have
been in Australia for 12 months.

A Service Officer in the refugee's local service centre is responsible
for creating a Job Plan for them at their week 12 post exemption review
contact.

Note: as per normal processing, a Job Plan cannot be negotiated for a
customer that has a current exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements.

Determining eligibility for the BTSR measure and eligibility to remain Centrelink managed

The Participation Summary screen will advise if the refugee is eligible
for the BTSR measure. See Refugee entrant service offer for more
information.

Determining suitable activities

Refugee Activities

Most refugees who are eligible for the BTSR measure will have the
Refugee Activities (RAC) activity record on the Activities and
Exemptions (AEX) screen.

To be eligible for this activity, the newly arrived refugee will be
participating in one or more of the following:

-   the Humanitarian Settlement Program (HSP)
-   the Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)
-   Workforce Australia as a volunteer

Note: when the Job Plan is being negotiated, the refugee does not need
to provide evidence they are participating in these activities.

If the refugee is not participating in HSP, AMEP or Workforce Australia,
discuss a possible referral to one of these. If the refugee requests a
referral to a Workforce Australia Provider as a volunteer, they must
only be referred if they have:

-   chosen to be referred, and
-   had an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) completed, and
-   negotiated a Job Plan with Services Australia

If the refugee declines a referral to HSP, AMEP or Workforce Australia,
another appropriate compulsory requirement will need to be recorded on
the AEX screen (for example, the requirement referred by their ESAt
assessor, Skills for Education and Employment, part-time work or
voluntary work).

As per normal processing, Service Officers will need to consider the
work capacity of the job seeker when negotiating a Job Plan. This is
contained in the ESAt report. The system will determine the most
appropriate Job Plan Item to be added to the refugee's Job Plan.

For further information, see Refugee Activities (RAC) as an approved
activity.

Activity referrals by the Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Assessor

Newly arrived refugees will have an ESAt conducted before the end of
their REF exemption.

The Assessor can make referrals for the refugee but will not complete
the Job Plan with the refugee. Requirements that the refugee has been
referred to, will be identified in the ESAt report. These requirements
can be recorded on the Activities and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen on
the refugee's record by the refugee's local service centre.

Other Activities

Newly arrived refugees also have the option to participate in any other
approved activity to fully meet their requirements. For example:

participation in Skills for Education and Employment (SEE), where
eligible, or

if they are meeting suitable part-time work/voluntary work requirements
and are:

-   a principal carer
-   have been assessed as having a Partial Capacity to Work (PCW), or
-   are 60 or over

Negotiating the Job Plan

Refugees eligible for the BTSR measure must have an activity recorded on
the Activities and Exemptions (AEX) screen before their Job Plan is
negotiated.

Most newly arrived refugees will have the Refugee Activities (RAC)
activity record on the Activities and Exemptions (AEX) screen.

Once Refugee Activities (RAC) is coded on the AEX screen, a message
advising 'this customer is eligible for the BTSR measure' will present
on the Job Plan cover page and the Job Plan will auto-populate with the
following text 'I will meet my agreed mutual obligation by undertaking
approved activities and report my participation in them to Centrelink.'

To complete the Job Plan, See Step 4 in Table 3 of Negotiating
Centrelink Managed Job Plans.

Quarterly Participation Interviews (QTIs)

Customers who are eligible for QTIs are not eligible for the Better
Targeting of Support for Refugees measures. Service Officers must review
the customer's Activities and Exemptions details in line with QTI
arrangements. See Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial
Capacity to work and Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours
per week) job seekers, for more information.

TtW, CDP and DES

Refugees who require a referral to Workforce Australia - Transition to
Work (TtW), Community Development Program (CDP) or Disability Employment
Services (DES) are not eligible for the Better Targeting of Support for
Refugee measures. Service Officers must refer refugees to TtW/CDP/DES at
their Week 12 post exemption review contact. Service Officers do not
need to create a Job Plan for refugees who are referred to TtW, CDP or
DES.

The Participation Summary screen will display an Action Item if the
customer requires a referral to TtW, CDP or DES.

Refugees referred to Workforce Australian within the first 12 months

Refugees who choose to be referred to Workforce Australia within the
first 12 months remain eligible for the BTSR measure, and continue to be
Centrelink managed. If the refugee no longer wishes to participate with
a Workforce Australia provider, they need to contact their provider to
request to be exited. The Centrelink Job Plan must remain in place, and
the refugee must continue with the approved activity/ies as outlined in
their Job Plan.

See, Refugee humanitarian and protection visa holder service offer for
more information on the eligibility of newly arrived refugees to remain
Centrelink managed.

The Resources page contains links to the Refugee Services intranet page
and links to external websites.

Related links

Job Plans

Negotiating Centrelink Managed Job Plans

Refugee entrant service offer

Approved activities for customers assessed as having a partial capacity
to work (PCW)

Approved mutual obligation requirements for customers assessed as having
a temporary reduced work capacity (TRWC)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683)

Quarterly Participation Interviews for Partial Capacity to Work and
Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (0-7 or 8-14 hours per week) job seekers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
