
Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence Period Exemptions 005-02020020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains when customers may be exempt from the Newly
Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) or the qualifying residence
period when claiming a payment or concession card. It gives general
information about types of exemptions which may be available and how to
request manual exemption coding to be completed by Centrelink
International Services (CIS) where required.

Australian residence requirements for payment

New Australian residents who have been granted permanent residence are
generally subject to a NARWP or a period of qualifying residence before
they can access most products and services delivered by Services
Australia. The waiting period which applies depends on the payment or
concession claimed.

A Qualifying Residence Exemption (QRE) is a provision that exempts a
person from having to meet the accumulated qualifying residence period
or having to serve a NARWP for certain payments.

Note: a QRE does not exempt a person from any requirement to be residing
in Australia and be an Australian resident for lodgement or ongoing
residential qualification.

The rules governing the exemptions applicable to each payment or
concession card are complex and vary from payment to payment or card.

To assess whether a customer may qualify for any of the exemptions, use
the residence assessment procedure for the relevant payment. See Related
links for these procedures.

For more information see Australian residence requirements for payment.

General exemptions

A customer is exempt from the NARWP if any of the following apply:

-   they are an Australian citizen
-   they are the holder or former holder of a permanent
    refugee/humanitarian visa
-   they were a family member of a refugee/humanitarian entrant at the
    time that person arrived in Australia; and they are the family
    member of that person when the claim is made, or when that person
    died (if they have since died)
-   they are the holder of a visa subclass 852 - this applies for all
    social security benefits except Special Benefit (SpB)
-   they have been issued with a Resolution of Status Visa CD 851
    granted on or after 9 August 2008
-   they hold the 2017 NARWP Grandfathering exemption

A customer is exempt from the qualifying residence period if they are
the holder or former holder of a permanent refugee/humanitarian visa.

Family member of a refugee or former refugee

When a newly arrived resident applies for Services Australia support,
particular care must be exercised in establishing whether they have now,
or had previously, a family member who arrived in Australia as a
refugee.

Note: claim forms and online claims specifically ask this question.

It may not be immediately apparent that a person was a family member of
a refugee or humanitarian entrant at the time the refugee or
humanitarian entrant arrived in Australia. It may be that the other
person has since died.

The important consideration is that there was a family relationship at
the time the refugee or humanitarian entrant arrived in Australia.

Refugee status does not have to be granted at the time of their arrival
in Australia. Many refugees arrive on temporary visas or as illegal
entrants and are subsequently granted a refugee visa at a later time.
For social security purposes, if the refugee visa has been granted, they
are considered to have had refugee status on their initial arrival.

Any family relationship which commenced after the refugee or former
refugee arrived in Australia (partner or dependent child entering their
care) does not meet eligibility for this exemption provision.

To meet this exemption, the customer must have been the family member of
the refugee or humanitarian migrant at the time the refugee or
humanitarian migrant arrived in Australia; and a family member at one of
the following times:

-   For Family Tax Benefit (FTB) - on the earliest date they may be
    entitled to receive payment (generally this would be the date
    customer was both physically present and residing in Australia
    whilst the holder of a qualifying visa), or
-   For Paid Parent Leave (PPL) - on the child's date of birth or entry
    into care, or
-   For Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) - on the DAP period start date, or
-   For Youth Allowance (YA) (student) and Austudy - from date of claim,
    or date the customer became a family member of the refugee (if up to
    13 weeks after claim date)
-   For all other payments, on the date of claim

Exception: if the refugee or humanitarian migrant has died since arrival
in Australia, the customer must have been a family member of that person
when the person arrived and when the person died.

A family member in relation of a person for the purpose of the NARWP
exemption includes the following categories of people in accordance with
section 7(6D) of the Social Security Act 1991:

-   a partner of the person
-   a dependent child of the person
-   another person who, in the opinion of the Secretary, can be treated
    like a partner or dependent child of the person

If the refugee has become an Australian citizen, the person is no longer
considered a refugee but a former refugee. The customer can still be
covered by this exemption provision.

A person may have been granted this exemption in the past, which they
are not entitled to for a subsequent claim. For example, someone who was
assessed as a dependent child of a refugee previously, but is no longer
a dependent child for most recent claim. In this instance, exemption
coding must be ended before assessing the claim.

Payment or concession card specific exemptions

Apart from the general exemptions above, the following customers are
exempt from the NARWP if they meet any of the conditions listed below
for the relevant payment or concession card.

To assess whether a customer may qualify for any of these exemptions and
how to code, use the residence assessment procedure for the relevant
payment. See Related links for these procedures.

Carer Allowance (CDA)

-   hold visa 115, 116, 117, 835, 836, or 837
-   currently receiving a social security benefit or pension Dad and
    Partner Pay (DAP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Farm Household
    Allowance (FHA)

Carer Payment (CAR)

-   hold visa 116 or 836

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

At the start of DAP payment date:

-   currently receiving a social security benefit or pension, or Farm
    Household Allowance (FHA)
-   current or former holder of a Special Category Visa (SCV) subclass
    444
-   hold visa 115, ,117, 835, or 837
-   have a newborn or adopt a child before 1 July 2019, or
-   hold a certain temporary protection type visa (currently subclasses
    060, 070, 449, 785, 786, and 790)

Ex-Carer Allowance Health Care Card (EHC)

They have had a substantial change in circumstances beyond their control
since arriving in Australia to reside.

Family Tax Benefit Part A (FTB Part A)

Exempt for any day they meet one of the following:

-   currently receiving a social security benefit or pension, Dad and
    Partner Pay (DAP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Farm Household
    Allowance (FHA)
-   current or former holder of an SCV visa subclass 444
-   hold visa 115, 117, 835, or 837, or
-   hold a certain temporary protection type visa (currently subclasses
    060, 070, 449, 785, 786, and 790)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA-JSK) (job seeker only)

They are the principal carer of a dependent child and they become a lone
parent since the start of the current period as an Australian resident.
A lone parent is a person who was either:

-   partnered, with a child, and then separated
-   single, with no child, who then had a child

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA)

Under the New Zealand 10 years residence exemption a customer is exempt
from the NARWP if they are a holder of a non-protected SCV and they have
lived continuously in Australia for a period of at least 10 years
immediately before claiming. Time spent in Australia prior to 27
February 2001 cannot count towards these 10 years. A person can only
receive JSP or YA once under this exemption for a 6 month period.

Note: this exemption also applied to Newstart Allowance (NSA) and
Sickness Allowance (SA) however these payments were replaced by
JobSeeker payment on 20 March 2020. If customer previously received NSA
or SA as a non-protected SCV holder, they cannot also claim JSP or YA
under this exemption.

Low Income Card (LIC)

-   hold a certain temporary protection type visa (currently subclasses
    060, 070, 449,785, 786, and 790)
-   have had a substantial change in circumstances beyond their control
    since arriving in Australia to reside, or
-   have a dependent child meeting the definition of an FTB child

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

They became handicapped while in Australia.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

They meet one of the following from the date the child is born (or
enters care) until the day before payment start date:

-   currently receiving a social security benefit or pension, or FHA
-   current or former holder of an SCV visa subclass 444
-   hold visa 115, 117, 835, or 837
-   have a newborn or adopt a child before 1 July 2019, or
-   hold a certain temporary protection type visa (currently subclasses
    060, 070, 449, 785, 786, and 790)

Parenting Payment Single (PPS)

They are the principal carer of a dependent child and they became a lone
parent since the start of the current period as an Australian resident.
A lone parent is a person who was either:

-   partnered, with a child, and then separated
-   single, with no child, who then had a child

Special Benefit (SpB)

-   hold a certain temporary protection type visa (currently subclasses
    060, 070, 449, 785, 786, and 790), or
-   have had a substantial change in circumstances beyond their control
    since arriving in Australia to reside

Definition of a social security pension or benefit

For an exemption from the NARWP for FTB Part A, PPL, DAP or CDA, the
following payments are considered to be a social security benefit or
pension:

-   Age Pension
-   Austudy
-   Carer Payment
-   Disability Support Pension
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   Partner Allowance (new claims ceased 20 September 2003)
-   Parenting Payment (Partnered)
-   Parenting Payment (Single)
-   Special Benefit
-   Youth Allowance

The Resources page has a case study showing an example of how a newly
arrived resident was found to be eligible because a partner had arrived
in Australia as a refugee some years before the claimant. It also has
details on how the Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and
Qualifying Residence Period Exemptions was impacted by coronavirus
(COVID-19).

Related links

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident (CLK)

Australian residence requirements for payment

Exemptions from Mutual Obligations Requirements for refugees

Exempting a job seeker from Mutual Obligation Requirements due to
special circumstances

Newly Arrived Resident's Waiting Period (NARWP) and Qualifying Residence
Period

Refugees

Residence assessment for customers claiming Age Pension

Residence assessment for customers claiming Austudy

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Commonwealth Seniors Health
Card (CSHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Farm Household Allowance
(FHA)

Residence assessment for customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Residence assessment for adult customers claiming a Low Income Health
Care Card (LIC), Foster Child Health Care Card (FST HCC) or Ex-Carer
Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Pensioner Education
Supplement (PES)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Special Benefit (SpB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Youth Allowance (YA) and/or
Tertiary Access Payment (TAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
