
Identity confirmation and refugees 005-02010000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the identity confirmation requirements for
refugees/newly arrived refugees who lodge new claims with the Services
Australia upon first arrival.

Reasons identity confirmation documents may not be accessible

Refugees, newly arrived refugees often have difficulties in providing
enough identity confirmation to meet Services Australia requirements for
new claims.

Often, acceptable identity documentation may not be available due to the
following factors:

-   Personal documents were lost or destroyed when they were displaced
-   They came from countries with little or no government structure due
    to war or government instability and so may not have been issued
    documents such as birth and marriage certificates
-   Their documents are archived within their country of origin and
    there is little or no way of retrieving them

Identity confirmation documents that are often lodged by refugee customers

Often refugees are only able to offer identity documents that have been
issued by the Department of Home Affairs, Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT) or by other bodies such as the United Nations (UN).
These documents may take the form of:

-   a Document for travel to Australia
-   an overseas passport with a Visa label
-   a document issued by the United Nations High Commissioner for
    Refugees (UNHCR)

Insufficient identity documentation

The onus to provide sufficient identity documentation still applies to
these customers. It is recognised that many customers in this group may
not be able to provide sufficient identity documents at the initial
claim stage.

The Alternative Identity assessment is completed in the Identity
Confirmation Dashboard in Process Direct.

Use Alternative Identity processes when customers cannot confirm or
establish their identity.

Staff must code and verify all available documents within an Alternative
Identity assessment.

If the customer is being assisted by Department of Home Affairs or
another agency to settle in Australia, the details of the contact
person/agency may be completed in Question 8 as sufficient evidence (for
Alternative confirmation) of their identity.

Alternative identity confirmation

Refugees will generally be able to provide relevant travel documents to
meet the proof of arrival criteria, but may need extra time to obtain
enough identity documents to meet the Services Australia Identity
Confirmation requirements for new claims.

In these cases Alternative Identity should be implemented to help
customers attain the appropriate tier requirements.

Alternative identity confirmation allows for flexible review
arrangements to be put in place according to the customer's
circumstances and if an ongoing review is not warranted the reasons must
be documented.

When it is certain that the customer has the required identity documents
in their possession, but not at the time of claim, the Identity Review
Period could be applied if the claim needs to be finalised before the
identity documents are provided.

The holders of Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return
Pending Visas also experience difficulty meeting Service Australia’s
identity requirements as they often have less opportunity to obtain
identity documentation due to their residential status. These customers
should have the Alternative identity confirmation processes applied if
they do not have documents to meet identity requirements.

The Resources page has a link to Confirming your identity form (SS231)
and the Multicultural Guide.

Related links

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Resolution of Status Visa (Class CD)

Australia’s Refugee and Humanitarian Program

Sighting, recording and returning original documents

Translation of documents

Guidelines for using interpreters

Identity Review Period

Alternative Identity

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
