-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for grandparent carers
to receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB). There are general eligibility
criteria for FTB, and separate eligibility criteria and income tests
that apply for the various FTB components that can be paid depending on
the grandparent’s circumstances.

Grandparents and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is not payable to grandparents and non-parent
carers who are caring for a child in a child care capacity, for example
child attending child care (either child care centre/family day care or
care by a relative/friend) or staying overnight with a grandparent,
other relative or family friend. If the customer is the grandparent or
non-parent carer of the child, a determination should be made whether
the care is a change in care or child care while the parents are
working, studying or away.

A determination should be made whether the care is a change in care
(either formal or informal) or not. If a decision cannot be made based
on the information supplied by the customer then evidence may be
required to make the determination, see Evidence to support the actual
care arrangements.

Eligibility for FTB Part B for grandparent carers

From 1 July 2016, if a grandparent carer of an FTB child meets the
general eligibility criteria for FTB and satisfies the income test for
FTB Part B, they continue to be entitled to payment of FTB Part B up to
the end of the calendar year the child turns 18 years of age (if in
full-time secondary study). This recognises the important role
grandparents play by taking on the parenting role when parents are
unable to care for their children.

Grandparent carers

For FTB Part B purposes, a grandparent of a child is the:

-   natural, adoptive or step-grandparent of the child
-   natural, adoptive or step-great-grandparent of the child, or
-   parent or grandparent of a relationship parent of the child

Grandparent also includes the current or former partner of a natural,
adoptive or relationship grandparent or great-grandparent (it does not
include former partners of step-grandparents and
step-great-grandparents).

In order to work out who is a grandparent of a child, a determination of
who is the parent of the child must first be made.

A parent is the natural, adoptive, step or relationship parent of a
child.

A relationship parent is a person who is legally responsible for a child
born as a result of artificial conception procedures or born under a
surrogacy arrangement.

A step-parent is a person who is not a natural, adoptive or relationship
parent, but is the partner or former partner of a natural, adoptive or
relationship parent.

Note: the assessment will only look at the customer/child relationship,
it will not take into account the partner/child relationship. For
examples of eligible grandparent carers see the Resources page of
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications.

Verification of care arrangements (including care arrangements for grandparents)

If a grandparent or non-parent carer contacts to advise they have gained
care of a child and the following conditions are met:

-   the losing carer is the parent of the child, and
-   there are no Court Orders or Child Protection orders in place for
    the care of the child

Request further information, including the following questions to help
make a change of care decision:

-   What is the reason for the change of care?
-   Is the child going into the care of a grandparent or non-parent
    care? If so, do they live in the same residence as the parent?
-   What involvement will the parent continue to have with their
    child/ren whilst in the grandparent or non-parent's care?
-   Is the reason for the change of care due to work-related reasons
    and/or study?
-   Who will be providing financially for the child whilst in the
    grandparent or non-parent's care?
-   Is the child listed on your Medicare card?
-   Who will be making the major decisions for the child regarding
    health, education and discipline?

Any evidence relevant to the decision must be documented and scanned to
the record. For grandparent carers, see also Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent).

Note: if the Service Officer requires assistance in determining
eligibility where there has been a change of care of a child from the
parent to the grandparent or non-parent carer, seek assistance from
Technical Peer Support (TPS)/Access Support or a Service Support Officer
(SSO) using standard escalation protocols.

Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Advisers

Non parent carers who have taken on parental responsibilities for a
child may benefit from the services of a Grandparent, Foster and Kinship
Carer Adviser.

The Resources page contains links to the intranet and Services Australia
website for online estimators, information about Grandparent, Foster and
Kinship Carer Advisers and information for families.

Related links

Help for grandparents caring for children

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Child Relationships page

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and the reconciliation
process

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Adviser

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
