
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to work) approved activities and time limit 007-17103151

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines approved activities customers must be undertaking
to be eligible for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to
Work) and associated time limits.

ACCS (Transition to Work) activity requirements

To meet the ACCS (Transition to Work) activity requirements a customer
must meet at least one of the following:

-   study requirements;
-   job search requirements; or
-   work requirements; or
-   training requirements
-   vocational training
-   other non-vocational training programs

Activities that commence during a week are taken to have commenced from
the start of that week. For example, if a term starts on a Monday, but
classes are held on Tuesdays and Thursdays, the customer will be taken
to have commenced the activity on the Monday of the week their first
Tuesday class occurs. Similarly, if the customer starts a new job, and
their first shift is on a Wednesday, they will be taken to have started
their job from the Monday of that week. This means they may be entitled
to ACCS (Transition to Work) from the start of that week if that Monday
is the start of a CCS fortnight, or from the Monday of the next week at
the start of the next CCS fortnight

Study

Customers must undertake at least one approved course of education or
study that is higher than any level of study previously completed in the
last ten years, or at the same level as study previously commenced in
the last ten years, unless they are:

-   undertaking a Senior Secondary Certificate of Education course
-   undertaking a University Enabling course
-   eligible for Skill Shortage List - Australia exemption, or
-   subject to the 6 week rule

Customers must also be making satisfactory progress.

Full time and part time study may qualify, as long as it meets the study
levels for ACCS (Transition to Work) at the secondary or preparatory
level, or between levels 2 and 8 of the Australian Qualifications
Framework (AQF) study levels.

Work

To meet the work requirements, customers must be engaged in:

Paid Work, including self-employment

Unpaid Work, including:

-   work experience placement
-   internship
-   unpaid work in a family business, or
-   voluntary work which could reasonably be expected to improve a
    customer's work skills and/or employment prospects

Actively setting up a business

Training

To meet the training requirements for ACCS (Transition to Work), a
customer must undertake either:

-   vocational training, or
-   other non-vocational training programs which are likely to improve
    their employment prospects

The description of training for ACCS (Transition to Work) is the same as
CCS. That is, the customer must be enrolled in, and actively working
towards completing a training course for improving their work skills
and/or employment prospects.

To meet the activity requirements for other non-vocational training
programs, the customer is required to demonstrate that the program has a
reasonable likelihood of improving their employment prospects. This
includes programs run privately by registered organisations.

The Process page contains further details of training activities that
may be considered.

Adult Migrant English Program (AMEP)

ACCS (Transition to Work) is available to participants of the AMEP. ACCS
(transition to work) is not available to participants of the AMEP with
under school aged children, when the customer is:

-   using the AMEP provided free child care services for under school
    aged children, while
-   participanting in in AMEP classes

For more information see Participation in Adult Migrant English Program
(AMEP).

Job Search

To meet the job search requirements for ACCS (Transition to Work), a
customer must be actively looking for work and be able to provide
evidence of doing so.

Activities can include:

-   Looking for job vacancies
-   Preparing resumes and job applications;
-   Contacting potential employers;
-   Preparing for and attending job interviews

Job Plans/Participation Plans

Customers must have an active Job Plan or Participation Plan (where
applicable), in place to be eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work). The
exception is customers receiving Austudy or means-tested ABSTUDY,
because the participation requirements of those payments exceed the
activity requirements for ACCS (Transition to Work).

A customer may be obligated to enter into a Job Plan in order to meet
participation requirements for an income support payment, or they may
enter into a Job Plan voluntarily to qualify for ACCS (Transition to
Work).

Customers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP) must negotiate a
DSP Participation Plan to meet requirements for ACCS (Transition to
Work). If a DSP customer does not have mandatory participation
requirements, they will need to enter into a Voluntary Participation
Plan. Note: Job Plans do not meet ACCS (Transition to Work) requirements
for DSP customers.

Payment for ACCS (Transition to Work) can only be made once all
eligibility criteria are met including having an active Job Plan. As
such, if the Job Plan is not active, payments cannot be made until the
Monday of the CCS fortnight after the Job Plan is active, therefore ACCS
(Transition to Work) will not be backdated.

If a customer is exempt from mutual obligation or participation
requirements for their income support payment, they may still qualify
for ACCS (Transition to Work) if they continue to participate in their
approved activity.

Customers who are unable to undertake at least 8 hours of activity per
fortnight should not enter into a voluntary Job Plan to access ACCS
(Transition to Work). If the customer is unable to participate in 8
hours of activity per fortnight, then they are not eligible for ACCS
(Transition to Work).

Evidence

Customers are required to prove their participation in approved
activities at the time of claiming (where they have not previously
provided it) or claims will be made not effective.

This includes proof of:

-   Job search
-   Employment
-   Enrolment for Study or vocational training or other suitable
    training to improve employment prospects

See Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
eligibility and applications for more detailed information about
suitable evidence.

Time limits for activities

The approved activities for which customers can receive ACCS (Transition
to Work) are subject to time limits, depending on the type of activity
being undertaken.

The Process page contains detailed information about the time limits for
the different activity types. The Resources page contains a table
outlining ACCS (Transition to Work) approved activities and
corresponding time limits.

Time limits for multiple activities and the Most Beneficial Activity Principle

When a customer is participating in more than one activity at the same
time which meets the requirements for ACCS (Transition to Work), all
activities are recorded. The hours spent participating in these
activities should also be recorded as recognised activities for CCS.
This is because the hours of subsidised care a customer is entitled to
receive for ACCS (Transition to Work) is based on their Activity Test
result (or the lowest result where the customer is partnered).

When applying for ACCS (Transition to Work), customers should advise
details of all activities they are undertaking. The processing Service
Officer will determine which activity will be used for the purposes of
ACCS (Transition to Work), based on the Most Beneficial Activity
Principle. This is explained in more detail in the Process page

Once the time limit is reached for a particular ACCS (Transition to
Work) approved activity, or level of study, the customer will not
qualify for ACCS (Transition to Work) for the same activity type. If the
activity type is study and the customer is meeting all eligibility
criteria, including the step-up rules, they may undertake another level
of study and qualify for further periods ACCS (Transition to Work).

Progress of pending claims

Customers may contact querying the status of the application or
requesting their application be processed urgently. For more information
about managing progress of application enquiries, see Claiming Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

The Resources page contains links to the Skill Shortage List - Australia
and the Australian Qualification Framework; a summary of ACCS
(Transition to Work) time limits; Study activity and time limit
scenarios; a matrix of course studies and eligibility for ACCS
(Transition to Work); approved activity time limit scenarios; and Job
Plan examples.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
applications

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Negotiating Job Plans

Disability Support Pension (DSP) Participation Plan

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
