
Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Parenting Payment (PP) 007-02220080

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for
PP.

Payment status

Services Australia (the agency) uses codes when a decision to cancel or
suspend a payment, or to reject a claim, is recorded on the computer
system. A description of the code is used in correspondence with the
customer about their income support payment.

Payments may be rejected, cancelled or suspended in the PEN or PGA
system due to specific eligibility requirements not being met, and/or a
variety of other reasons.

Suspension or Cancellation

A payment cannot be manually suspended pending investigation (INV).
Before a payment is suspended or cancelled, the Decision Maker (DM) must
be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence that the customer is
either:

-   not qualified for the payment, or
-   the payment is not payable

If there is not, information must be requested from the customer via a
notice under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1.

If the customer fails to comply with the notice by not providing the
requested information, the DM may, after considering all the available
evidence, decide to suspend or cancel the payment.

The Resources page contains more information about the legislative basis
for suspending or cancelling payments.

If the decision to suspend payment is made, prompt action should be
taken to give the customer a notice of decision which details the reason
for the suspension and their rights to seek review.

If a decision is made to manually suspend a customer's payment in
conjunction with the above, a manual review should be coded by the
Service officer to follow up the suspension at a later date.

Unfavourable decision

When an unfavourable decision is to be made, a DM must provide the
customer with:

-   an explanation of the decision, and
-   an opportunity to provide further information or evidence relevant
    to the decision

The DM must also advise the customer of their review rights and if
required, record a request for a review of the decision. This includes
unfavourable decisions made by Service Officers in Smart Centres.

If a DM is not speaking with a customer at the time of making a
decision, they are required to make 2 genuine attempts to contact a
customer prior to finalising an unfavourable decision.

If a customer's claim is to be rejected either Failed to Respond to
Correspondence (FRC) or Failed to Supply Documents (FSD), and the
customer has been advised verbally or in writing of their requirement to
provide further information, there is no requirement to attempt to
contact the customer. This does not apply to vulnerable or at risk
customers.

Participation related cancellation or suspensions

Where Parenting Payment customers with compulsory participation
requirements, including compulsory ParentsNext participants, fail to
comply with their compulsory requirements, the participation payment may
be cancelled or suspended.

The Process page contains a list of cancellation, suspension and
rejection codes for PP.

Related links

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Restoration of Parenting Payment (PP)

Re-engaging job seekers - Targeting Compliance Framework

Targeted Compliance Framework financial penalties and payment
cancellations

Reclaiming a payment after a non-compliance cancellation

Cancellation of payment after a compliance related suspension

Using participation suspensions to engage Community Development Program
(CDP) job seekers with their requirements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
