
Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims 007-07030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess a claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL). Customers may have submitted a claim online for PPL, lodged a
claim form or provided information required to finalise an assessed or
pending PPL claim. Customers can claim PPL for a newborn or for a
recently adopted child aged under 16 years.

Claim requirements

For PPL to be paid, the customer must:

meet the eligibility requirements as a:

-   primary claimant, or
-   secondary/tertiary claimant

[] submit an online claim or lodge a paper claim before the child's
first birthday or anniversary of the date the child entered care if
adopted (early claims may be lodged within the family assistance, PPL
and DAP allowable early claim period)

provide acceptable proof of birth or adoption

provide all information and documentation required to assess the claim

In all cases, customers will be assessed initially as a primary
claimant. If primary claimant eligibility is not met, they will be
assessed as a secondary claimant and in some cases a tertiary claimant.

Payment of FTB

Customers may apply for PPL and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) at the same
time. Customers can choose to claim PPL or to have their entitlement to
Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) assessed with
their FTB Part A. Customers can also choose to claim PPL even after
NBS/NBU have been paid with FTB. See Claim choice for a newborn or
adopted child.

FTB Part B is not payable on days that the customer is receiving PPL
(including the PPL period and Flexible PPL days). To avoid an
overpayment of FTB Part B while their PPL claim status is assessed
awaiting employer acceptance or registration, the customer will not be
paid FTB Part B from the child's date of entry into care. Once the
employer acceptance is recorded, the customer will be granted PPL from
the date of entry into care or will be paid arrears of FTB Part B for
this period.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim or service is assessed
using criteria to identify if it is suitable for an automated grant
outcome.

The system may process pre-birth claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
automatically if they meet certain criteria.

If a claim meets the criteria for an automated assessment, DOCs or
Display Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created
these.

If it does not meet the business rules for an automatic assessment it
will be allocated to staff to manually process.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and the customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Processing PPL claims

Families Smart Centre Processing Services staff process claims. They
process:

-   PPL only claims in Process Direct
-   FTB/PPL combined claims in Customer First

For overseas customers or where it is indicated the customer will depart
overseas within 21 days of making the claim, claims are transferred to
Families International Claims (FIC) to be finalised

In Process Direct

In Inbox, search for the Claim ID or Customer Reference Number (CRN).
For paper claims, a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is
generated. This new claim SOA activity contains no claim information
apart from the CRN, personal details and the receipt date (date of
claim).

In Customer First

In Workspace, use Online Claims > Search Online Claims. For paper
claims, use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) first to record claim details
on the customer's record.

PPL rate and deductions

Once granted, PPL is paid at the national minimum wage rate for up to 18
weeks (90 payable days).

PPL is not subject to income management.

Centrepay deductions can be arranged from PPL delivered by Services
Australia. If delivered by the employer, the customer must negotiate
voluntary deductions with the employer. The Rent Deduction Scheme is not
available for PPL.

PPL ASSessed, CURrent and current zero rate (CZR) benefit status

Once a customer’s claim for PPL is granted, the claim status will be:

-   assessed (ASS), if initial eligibility criteria are met pending
    proof of birth/entry into care/placement, start date or further
    action from the employer
-   current (CUR), during the customer’s PPL period, connected Flexible
    PPL days or on a separate Flexible PPL day
-   current at zero rate (CZR), once payments have commenced and it is
    not a day that is during the customer’s PPL period, connected
    Flexible PPL days or a day that a remaining Flexible PPL day is
    payable

Note: CZR is only available for claims for children born or adopted on
or after 1 July 2020.

The Resources page contains example text for a Q999 letter, scenarios
and examples for applying the correct PPL start date and a link to the
guide to Australian Government Payments. It also contains keyword
explanations for PPL pre-birth claims excluded from automation. For
Processing staff, it also outlines claim signature requirements and
action to take if the requirements have not been met.

Related links

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Cancellation, rejection, not effective, assessed and current zero rate
codes for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Processing proof of a child's birth

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Paid Parental Leave scheme claims income test and previous financial
year income estimates

Process for when a Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim is processed with
incorrect nominated start date

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
