
Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-11010000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reconciliation process. This is the process
of comparing a customer's FTB entitlement after the end of the financial
year with the amount they were paid in FTB instalments, including zero
rate periods during that financial year. The reconciliation process also
applies to lump sum FTB claims when estimated income was used to assess
the claim and actual income is then received, or when new information
changes the customer's entitlement.

Lodgement of tax return

For customers and partners required to lodge an income tax return,
annual FTB entitlement is calculated using actual adjusted taxable
income (ATI) details transferred from the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO).

Customer advises they or their partner are not required to lodge a tax return

A completed and accepted non-lodgement advice provides the:

-   non-lodgement exemption reason, and
-   income details to be used to reconcile FTB

If on completion of the update, the non-lodgement advice is not
accepted, the income details will be stored. The income details may
later be used to reconcile FTB if the individual gets an exemption from
lodging a tax return from the ATO.

Payments included in FTB reconciliation

The following may be included during FTB reconciliation once adequate
income or not required to lodge details are available:

-   FTB Part A and Part B supplements based on ATI. From 1 July 2016,
    payment of FTB Part A supplement is subject to an income limit.
    There are no exemptions from the FTB Part A supplement income test
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) based on taxable income.
    Note: SIFS is not payable to new claimants for 2017-18 and later
    financial years. Grandfathering provisions apply to current
    customers

Deadline for meeting FTB reconciliation requirements

For customers to receive their full annual FTB entitlement, income
lodgement requirements must be met by the end of the lodgement year
(extended lodgement year for 2011-12 or earlier years).

Possible reconciliation results

Reconciliation can result in:

No adjustment

A top-up amount

-   This can be used to offset outstanding family assistance debts. A
    top-up amount can be used to repay family assistance, social
    security, student assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payment
    debts, whether or not the customer has a repayment arrangement in
    place
-   An FTB top-up (including supplements and SIFS if entitled) can only
    be paid if, by the end of the lodgement year (extended lodgement
    year for 2011-12 or earlier years), they lodge their tax return, or
    notify they are not required to lodge a tax return

An overpayment. This may be recovered from the customer's tax refund (or
their partner's if they have given consent). Any remaining overpayment
amount is raised as a debt

Timing of reconciliation

FTB reconciliation can automatically occur from 2 July of the lodgement
year once all information is available including adequate income details
or not required to lodge information for the customer and their current
partner.

Partial reconciliation will occur from 2 July of the lodgement year if
only ex-partner actual income details are needed for reconciliation to
occur. Special processing applies for customers with an ex-partner.

Reconciliation will remain pending until all required information is
available for reconciliation. Reconciliation may also remain pending if
the:

-   reconciliation outcome is a debt, and
-   the customer resides in an area where there is a pause on debt
    raising due to a declared major disaster or emergency event such as
    a pandemic

The non-lodger process applies if expected actual income details or not
required to lodge details are not available within the relevant time
frame.

Note: from 1 July 2018, if a child does not meet the immunisation
requirements and they are serving an FTB immunisation grace period at
the end of the financial year, FTB reconciliation will not occur until
the child meets immunisation requirements or the FTB immunisation grace
period ends (whichever occurs first). An FTB immunisation grace period
can last for up to 63 days from the date the child fails to meet
immunisation requirements. See Immunisation requirements for FTB Part A
from 1 July 2018.

Reconciliation calculation

Reconciliation is a two-step process that uses the actual dates of any
changes in the family's circumstances to work out their correct FTB
rate. The steps are:

-   Income reconciliation for income reconciliation periods where the
    customer's income estimate was used to work out their FTB rate
    during the relevant financial year. If available, actual adjusted
    taxable income details are used to work out correct FTB entitlement
-   Maintenance reconciliation for any periods the customer or their
    partner was entitled to claim child support. The system limits FTB
    Part A to base rate for the child for periods appropriate
    maintenance action was not taken. The Maintenance Income Test is
    applied using actual child support received for customers with a
    child support collect case and the deemed amount for private collect
    cases. Customers with a child support entitlement registered for
    collection by Child Support may benefit from the Maintenance Income
    Credit

Reconciliation is generally an automatic process but in some cases
manual intervention is needed to finalise the reconciliation process.

If income details or circumstances for the relevant financial year are
updated after FTB reconciliation has occurred, re-reconciliation will
occur automatically using the new details.

Privacy

There are restrictions with regard to disclosure and confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information. Privacy, Person Permitted
to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority provisions apply.

Shared care percentage system issues

There are 2 system issues that may impact a customer’s shared care
percentage:

-   P24845 - in some cases where FTB for a child is being paid to the
    step parent, care is not being applied correctly. For more
    information, see Notification and assessment of shared care
    arrangements for FTB
-   PM69793/PM72350 - resulted in shared care percentages being
    incorrectly applied for some FTB customers, causing incorrect
    re-reconciliation debts and arrears. For more information, see
    Explaining FTB reconciliation overpayments due to shared care

The Resources page contains contact details, a reconciliation timeline
and examples.

Contents

Assessing and recording exemptions from the non-payment of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) instalment payments to zero entitlement customers

Assessment of income cancellation periods in Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments due to 3 or more
non-lodger decisions (Sunset Clause)

Enquiries about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum
claim

Deferral of Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) bereavement payments and the reconciliation
process

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and the reconciliation
process

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements from 1 July 2018

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12
to 2017-18

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement
for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Non-payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalment payments to zero
entitlement customers

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Re-reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) information not received for family
assistance reconciliation or lump sum claim

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Managing recovery and non recovery of Centrelink debts

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) for family assistance

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Returned payments and their effect on family assistance reconciliation

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Using Centrelink self service

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

'Class of debt' waivers for national disasters between 2009 and 2011

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
