-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines information for birth mothers who are claiming
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and/or Family Tax Benefit (FTB) including
Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) for a child
leaving their care as part of the process of adoption or a surrogacy
arrangement.

Birth mother entitlements

Birth mothers may be eligible for PPL for the purposes of maternal
recovery when they relinquish the care of their child:

-   as part of the process of adoption
-   as part of a surrogacy arrangement, or
-   where the child has been removed from the customer's care by a state
    or territory child protection agency

Birth mothers may be eligible to FTB (which can also include NBS and NBU
if the customer is not eligible for PPL) for their newborn child if the
child remains in their care following the birth. The birth mother would
also need to be the primary carer of the child, for example the child
remains in their care for a specified time for breast feeding. Once the
child leaves their care her eligibility for FTB will cease.

General claim requirements

Early claims can be lodged up to 97 days before the child's expected
date of birth. Submitting an early claim before the child's birth allows
payment arrangements for PPL to be established, and lodging proof of
birth as soon as possible after the birth helps to avoid payment delays.

After the birth of the child, customers need to provide:

-   proof of the child's birth
-   confirmation the child has left the customer's care as part of the
    process of adoption or a surrogacy arrangement, and
-   any other information that was not required for the early claim
    assessment

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
relevant publications and forms, and the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk online
query form.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children born
or entering care on or after 1 July 2023

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
