
Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) applications 007-17103150

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for ACCS Processing Team staff about
how to process an application and assess evidence for Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work).

Eligibility for Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

To be eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work) customers need to:

be eligible for CCS

be receiving one of the following eligible Income Support payments:

-   Parenting Payment
-   JobSeeker Payment
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Youth Allowance
-   Carer Payment
-   Special Benefit (for those not qualified for Parenting Payment or
    JobSeeker Payment because they did not satisfy residence
    requirements)
-   Austudy
-   A means-tested payment under ABSTUDY
-   Farm Household Allowance

have a combined family income less than the lower CCS lower Income
threshold

have an active Job Plan or Participation Plan (where required)

be undertaking an ACCS (Transition to Work) activity

not exceed the relevant ACCS (Transition to Work) activity time limits

If the ACCS (Transition to Work) application is lodged as part of a CCS
claim, ACCS Processing Service Officers will also need to assess the CCS
component. This includes managing any exception processing for the
customer to be considered for ACCS (Transition to Work). If a customer
is not eligible for CCS, they cannot be considered for ACCS (Transition
to Work).

Lodging an application for ACCS (Transition to Work)

Customers can apply for ACCS (Transition to Work):

-   [] at the time of completing an online or staff assisted claim for
    Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   [] if CCS current, as a standalone application using their online
    account
-   in limited circumstances, using an offline (paper) FA085 Application
    for Additional Child Care Subsidy (Transition to Work) form - see
    the Resources page for a link to the FA085

Roles and responsibilities in applications for ACCS (Transition to Work)

Service Officers will:

assist customers to meet their Job Plan or Disability Support Pension
(DSP) Participation Plan requirements prior to lodging an application
for ACCS (Transition to Work)

[] direct new CCS customers to lodge a combined CCS/ACCS (Transition to
Work) claim online

complete a staff assisted claim for CCS/ACCS (Transition to Work) if
appropriate

[] direct current CCS customers to lodge an ACCS (Transition to Work)
application using their online account

issue a FA085 Application for Additional Child Care Subsidy (Transition
to Work) after confirming the customer meets all of the following:

-   is receiving an eligible income support payment
-   is undertaking in an approved activity
-   has an income below the lower income threshold, and
-   is unable to lodge a claim online or through the staff-assisted
    channel

escalate pending applications to the ACCS Processing Team where the
customer meets the hardship criteria. For more information see Claiming
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

The ACCS Processing Team will assess all ACCS (Transition to Work)
applications (including combined CCS/ACCS claims) using information
provided in the claim. They will advise the customer in writing of the
outcome.

Assessing evidence for ACCS (Transition to Work)

When processing ACCS (Transition to Work) applications, ACCS Processing
Service Officers must review the evidence provided to confirm the
customer is participating in the stated activity. This includes:

-   proof of job search activities, job interviews, or applications
-   proof of enrolment in a course of study or education
-   proof of progress of study where the customer started their course
    more than 6 months before applying for ACCS (Transition to Work)
-   evidence of employment
-   proof of enrolment in vocational training or other program to
    improve employment prospects

If evidence is not provided, the application will be made not effective
and considered not to have been made. The customer will need to make a
new application for ACCS (Transition to Work) if they wish to be
assessed again.

Job Plans/Participation Plans

Customers have 28 days from the date they apply for ACCS (Transition to
Work) to enter into a Job Plan or Participation Plan (if required). They
are required to contact the agency or an Employment Service Provider (if
they have one) and request to negotiate a Job Plan for the purposes of
ACCS (Transition to Work). Job Plans can be negotiated without a face to
face interview.

Customers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP) must negotiate a
DSP Participation Plan to meet requirements for ACCS (Transition to
Work). If a DSP customer does not have mandatory participation
requirements, they will need to enter into a Voluntary Participation
Plan. For ACCS (Transition to Work) only, verbal Voluntary Participation
Plans can be negotiated.

Note: Job Plans do not meet ACCS (Transition to Work) requirements for
DSP customers.

As ParentsNext participants are provider managed, ParentsNext
Participation Plans are developed and updated by ParentsNext providers
only. Service Officers are only able to view ParentsNext Participation
Plans. They cannot negotiate or update them. If a parent wishes to
update their Participation Plan for the purposes of ACCS (Transition to
Work), they will need to be referred to their ParentsNext provider.

Payment for ACCS (Transition to Work) can only be made once all
eligibility criteria are met including having an active Job Plan or
Participation Plan. If the Job Plan is not active, payments cannot be
made until the Monday of the CCS fortnight after the Job Plan is active.
The date of effect of ACCS (Transition to Work) will be the Monday of
the CCS fortnight, ACCS (Transition to Work) will not be backdated prior
to this date.

If a customer fails to enter into a Job Plan within 28 days of applying
for ACCS (Transition to Work), their application will be made not
effective and considered to have not been made. If a customer enters
into a Job Plan more than 28 days after date of lodgement of their
application, even if the application has not been processed, the
application will be Not Effective. The customer will need to lodge a new
application.

Start date for ACCS (Transition to Work)

For all activities where Job Plan requirements have been met, the
earliest start date for a period of ACCS (Transition to Work) is from
the date of application, where the date of lodgement is the first Monday
of a CCS fortnight. If the application is lodged mid-week, the start
date is the first Monday of the next CCS fortnight.

Note: due to Policy clarification for ACCS (Transition to Work),
applications assessed before 13 June 2022 where a customer commenced or
increased their hours for paid work the date of effect was the first
Monday of the CCS fortnight before the fortnight in which the change
occurred. This DOE was subject to the customer notifying as soon as
possible when they started or increased their hours of paid work. The
Resources page contains examples of how to assess the start date for
paid work activities.

When Job Plan requirements have not been met at the time of application:

-   but the customer enters into a Job Plan/Participation Plan within 28
    days of lodging their application
-   the earliest start date for ACCS (Transition to Work) is the first
    Monday of the CCS fortnight after Job Plan requirements have been
    met
-   ACCS (Transition to Work) cannot be backdated to the date that would
    have applied had the customer had an active Job Plan at lodgement

If further information is required to process an ACCS (Transition to
Work) application, customers will be asked to provide the information
within 14 days. If the information is not supplied, the application will
be not effective and considered not to have been made. The customer will
be required to make a new application for ACCS (Transition to Work).
There are no backdating provisions for this subsidy.

Note: where the application was combined with a CCS claim, the CCS
component of the claim will be assessed and the customer notified of the
outcome.

If a customer nominates a start date for ACCS (Transition to Work), but
no sessions of care occur in that CCS fortnight, the start date can be
changed to the CCS fortnight in which the first session of care will
occur.

Reassessments and changes in circumstances

Customers must let the agency know as soon as possible if their
circumstances change. This may affect their eligibility to ACCS or CCS.
Notifiable events may include:

-   an increase in family income estimate
-   expiry of an active job plan, or
-   no longer meeting the ACCS (Transition to Work) activity
    requirements

If the change of circumstances entitles the customer to another type of
ACCS payment, entitlement to ACCS (Transition to Work) will cease. The
period for which they receive the other ACCS will not count towards
their Transition to work time limit for that activity. If the customer
wants to continue receiving ACCS (Transition to Work) they will need to
re-apply.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website;
external links to support verification of educational institutions,
course providers and courses; links to Child Care Subsidy intranet
pages; links to the offline (paper) claim for Child Care Subsidy and
application for Additional Child Care Subsidy (Transition to Work);
matrix of study courses and eligibility for ACCS (Transition to Work),
and examples of start dates.

For matrix of time limits for ACCS (Transition to Work) activities,
study activity and time limit scenarios and approved activity time limit
scenarios, see the Resources page of Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS) (Transition to Work) approved activities and time limits.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) approved
activities and time limits

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
