[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the reviews and reminders for child immunisation
requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

On this Page:

Immunisation requirements

Immunisation requirements apply to the assessment of Family Tax Benefit:

-   From 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2018, immunisation requirements are
    linked to eligibility for the Family Tax Benefit Part A supplement
-   From 1 July 2018 onwards, immunisation requirements apply to the
    assessment of a customer’s rate of FTB Part A

A number of automatic immunisation reviews and reminders are in place so
that customers with children that do not meet immunisation requirements
are given the opportunity to take action before their payment is
impacted.

Provision of Medicare numbers for AIR linking

A child's immunisation status is provided by the Australian Immunisation
Register (AIR) using a link with the child's record. The link is
initiated using the child's Medicare details (card number and individual
reference number) which is provided by the customer when they claim FTB.
If the child is not eligible for Medicare enrolment, a name only match
can be used to attempt to establish a link with the AIR.

Customers are not required to provide evidence of their child's
immunisation status. The child's vaccination provider will update the
AIR when the child receives a vaccination or if a medical exemption has
been approved.

Customers can view the information held on the AIR for a child on their
Immunisation history statement. If the AIR needs to be updated,
customers must contact their vaccination provider who can update the
AIR. If a child has received vaccinations overseas customers will need
to take evidence to an Australian vaccination provider who can update
the AIR.

The Child Immunisation Summary Guided Procedure will show whether a
child's record is linked with the AIR. See Establish a Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink and the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) for more information.

FTB immunisation grace period letters

From 1 July 2018, customers who claim FTB as fortnightly instalments
(including those current on zero rate, or that have chosen to receive
all or part of their FTB at reconciliation), will have 63 days to take
the necessary action if a child does not meet immunisation requirements.
This 63 day period is referred to as the FTB immunisation grace period.
If at the end of the grace period the child still does not meet
immunisation requirements, then an FTB Part A rate reduction will be
applied.

The customer will receive a letter at the beginning of the FTB grace
period outlining what they need to do and by when. A reminder letter is
sent 35 days later if the child still does not meet immunisation
requirements.

If an FTB Part A rate reduction is applied to the rate of FTB Part A for
a child, information will be included on the FTB rate assessment notice.

FTB immunisation grace periods do not apply when FTB is claimed for a
past period, including lump sum claims. If a child does not meet the
immunisation requirements at the time that their lump sum claim is
assessed, the rate of FTB for that child will be reduced for the entire
lump sum period.

For a past period assessed within an instalment claim, FTB will be paid
at the reduced rate for any child not meeting immunisation requirements
at the time of claim assessment. Additionally, a 63 day immunisation
grace period will commence from the date that the instalment claim is
assessed.

Customer issues and tasks

There are a number of reminders about FTB immunisation requirements that
may be presented on the Customer Issues page.

[] An Immunisation Requirements task will appear in My Profile on the
customer’s Express Plus Centrelink mobile app or Customer Online Account
if the child is not linked with the AIR or if the child does not meet
the immunisation requirements. Customers can use the task to update the
child's Medicare details, or to view reminder text about the
immunisation requirements.

Formal review of decision

Customers can apply for a formal review of a decision to:

-   apply a reduction to the rate of FTB Part A (from 1 July 2018), or
-   to exclude the FTB Part A supplement from their reconciliation
    (financial years prior to 2018-19) due to a failure to meet the
    immunisation requirements

The customer may be asked to provide additional information for
consideration. Note: reviews should not be recorded due to the customer
being placed into an FTB immunisation grace period as a decision about
their payment has not yet been made.

May mail-out and reminder letters (financial years prior to 2018-19)

For financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18, reminder letters were sent in
May each year to FTB customers with children who did not meet the
immunisation requirements at the time that the reminder was issued. The
purpose of the letter was to remind customers of the immunisation
requirements and that action is required to receive the FTB Part A
supplement at reconciliation. Depending on the customer's circumstances
they may need to provide the child's Medicare details (to establish a
link with the AIR and obtain the child's immunisation status) or have
their child immunised.

Customers will also receive information about immunisation requirements
and the FTB Part A supplement in their FTB grant and reconciliation
letters. When the FTB Part A supplement is excluded from reconciliation,
the reconciliation letter will advise the customer why the supplement
has not been paid for that child.

Customers will not be notified of immunisation requirements after the
end of the allowable timeframe, when it is too late to comply and the
supplement would continue to be excluded regardless of immunisation
status.

Related links

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefits (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink
and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Management of immunisation evidence

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Child enrolments in Medicare

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
