
Relationship Status for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07030130

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a person's relationship status can affect
their eligibility for Family Tax Benefit.

On this Page:

Member of a couple assessment

Unless the person under the age of consent is legally married, they
cannot be considered a member of a couple. This means both the customer
and their 'partner' must be assessed under the single qualification and
payability conditions and should not be linked to their 'partner' until
the youngest member of the couple has reached the age of consent.

However, even though the customer is to be assessed under the single
qualification and payability conditions, they must not receive higher
than the partnered rate of the applicable payment. Ensure the
'partner's' income is taken into account, and a manual rate is paid.

The customer is treated as single under family assistance law as this
definition of a member of a couple applies. The rate of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part A (and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)) is based on the
adjusted taxable income circumstances of the customer only. FTB Part B
is not income tested if the customer is assessed as single and receiving
an income support payment. If the customer is not receiving an income
support payment, FTB Part B is only payable if the customer's adjusted
taxable income does not exceed the Part B primary earner income limit.

Child support/maintenance action

While there is no minimum age for claiming child support, if the
customer and/or their partner, is under the age of consent and living as
a member of a couple with the other parent of their child, they are not
required to take reasonable action to obtain child support against that
person. The customer must have their maintenance action for the
applicable child/ren manually coded to show they are passing the MAT.
Maintenance action must be reviewed when the youngest partner reaches
the age of consent, or when the parents separate if this occurs first.

Member of a couple income details

If a person is a member of a couple, then the person's income and the
partner's income are taken into account when working out the person's
rate of Family Tax Benefit. Tax File Numbers must be provided for both
the customer and partner (where applicable). This information must be
provided within 28 days. The rate of Family Tax Benefit must be greater
than nil after the income test has been applied for a person to be
eligible.

Income estimate

Whenever a Family Tax Benefit customer contacts, a check if the customer
needs to revise their current family assistance income estimate must be
conducted. The customer must also be advised of the choices available to
help reduce the chance of an overpayment during the reconciliation
process.

If there is doubt about whether a customer should be treated as a member
of a couple or not, an assessment of whether the customer is a member of
a couple must be undertaken.

Customer and/or partner who are under the age of consent

Any customer who is living in a domestic relationship but they, or their
partner, are under the age of consent, cannot be recognised as a member
of a couple and cannot be linked as a couple on the system.

These customers are treated as single. Their rate of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A (and Child Care Subsidy (CCS)) is based on the adjusted
taxable income circumstances of the customer only. FTB Part B is not
income tested if the customer is assessed as single and receiving an
income support payment. If the customer is not receiving an income
support payment, their FTB Part B is income tested.

If the customer and/or their partner is under the age of consent and
living as a member of a couple with the other parent of their child,
they are not required to take reasonable action to obtain child support
against that person. The circumstances will be reviewed when the
youngest member of the couple reaches the age of consent.

The Resources page contains information about relationship status for
Family Tax Benefit coding and description and a link to the Publication
Family Assistance Payment Rates.

Related links

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Member of a Couple (MoC) and Separated under one roof (SUOR) assessments

Change in relationship status from partnered to single

Change in relationship status from single to partnered

Maintenance Action test (MAT) from Family tax Benefit (FTB) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
