-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the In Home Care (IHC) program as an approved
child care service, and how Child Care Subsidy (CCS) entitlement is
applied to customers whose children use IHC.

In Home Care (IHC)

IHC is an approved child care service type for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Families unable to access centre-based day care, family day care and
outside school hours care because of their unique circumstances may be
able to access education and care provided in the family home through
IHC to support their workforce participation.

IHC is designed to support the provision of early childhood education
and care in the home particularly for families working non-standard or
variable hours, geographically isolated from other approved child care
services or those with complex and challenging needs.

No more than five children at a time may be in the care of each IHC
educator, and no more than four of the children can be preschool age or
under. All children must be from the same family.

If there are more than the maximum number of children in the family
requiring IHC, then a second educator may be engaged for another session
of care.

Eligibility

Basic eligibility criteria for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) must be met for
customers to access subsidised In Home Care (IHC).

Once granted CCS, customers wishing to be to be considered for in-home
care must contact an IHC Support Agency to determine their eligibility
for IHC services. Customers will need to provide and/or confirm their
circumstances to the IHC Support Agency to determine IHC suitability and
to develop a Family Management Plan. Services Australia does not have a
role in determining a customer’s eligibility for In Home Care.

Customers using IHC may also be eligible for Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) if they meet the relevant eligibility criteria.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education
website where a list of IHC agencies can be downloaded for each
location.

CCS entitlement

As applies to customers using other approved child care services, the
amount of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) a family using IHC is entitled to
receive will be determined by:

-   the family's estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI). See also
    Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS). The CCS
    percentage is applied to the IHC hourly rate cap.
-   the hours of recognised activity undertaken by the parents or
    carers.

Note: any IHC sessions of care will continue to be paid at the standard
income tested rate of CCS for the family. This is regardless if children
are considered a higher rate child under higher CCS (Multiple Child
Subsidy).

Unlike other types of approved child care, IHC is paid per family unit,
not per child. If a customer has more than one child attending IHC, they
should apply and be assessed for CCS or ACCS for all of the children
attending care.

If eligible for certain Additional Child Care Subsidy payments,
customers can access up to 120% of the IHC hourly rate cap. More than
120% can be approved in exceptional circumstances.

The Resources page has an example of how the CCS percentage is applied
to the IHC hourly rate cap.

IHC terms

There are three key IHC terms used in the system:

Family unit:

-   Family units are in context of a service
-   Parent and educator IDs on enrolments are used to identify IHC
    family units
-   The main purpose of family units are to identify family sessions

Family session:

-   A family session is defined as ‘one session of care’ for the family
    unit
-   Not all children under the family unit have to be present at the
    family session

Nominated child:

-   For each family session, only one child in the family unit can be
    the nominated child
-   The nominated child is identified by having the fee against the
    family session in their session report for the IHC service
-   A nominated child is the child that the determination (payment
    calculation) is performed against based on their eligibility and
    entitlement
-   If the child is not nominated, they can have either $0 fee (incl. $0
    fee absence) or no session recorded (i.e. no care provided to the
    child if they do not normally attend the session of care)

Enrolment and session information

Customers accessing care through IHC are required to enter into a
Complying Written Arrangement (CWA) with their IHC service.

The IHC service will then lodge an enrolment notice which the customer
will need to confirm.

If a customer has multiple children using IHC, one child in an IHC
family unit must be identified as the ‘IHC nominated child’ for each
session of care. This is because IHC is paid at the family level and has
a family CCS hourly rate cap.

An IHC family unit is determined where the Service CRN, Parent CRN, and
Educator ID on an enrolment are the same.

Note: though not common, there may be more than one IHC family unit for
sessions of care submitted. For example, Lewis, Jamie and Joe are in the
care of Elaine and attend the same IHC service where:

-   educator Alex provides care for Jamie and Joe, and
-   educator Mark provides care for Lewis

The Service CRN and Parent CRN on all the sessions of care are the same,
but there are two IHC family units as there are two different Educator
IDs on the combined sessions of care for that particular week.

An IHC family session is determined using the session day, start and end
times for each child in a family unit. For each family session, only one
child in the family unit can be the nominated child. The nominated child
on the enrolment will be:

-   as agreed between the family and the IHC service, and
-   the only child in the session of care against which the fee is
    recorded for the family session

When a session report is submitted, the system checks:

-   if a family session already exists, and
-   if there is a child already nominated (fee recorded) for that family
    session in the family unit

As long as the nominated child in the family unit is eligible, the
family session is eligible.

When a nominated child is present, their eligibility and entitlements
are used to determine CCS payment.

The fee charged by the service for the session of care must be reported:

-   in full against the nominated child, and
-   as a $0 rate against the other eligible children receiving care in
    that session

Hours of care will be recorded against both the IHC nominated child and
‘other children’ and all the children in the family session will have
their activity test hours reduced by the total hours for the session.

When a IHC session has no fees recorded or no session recorded for
either of the children in the family unit, that session does not have a
nominated child. This means:

-   there will be no usage draw down (no activity hours and absences are
    used), and
-   both children will have the 'session of care amt is $0' reason
    applied

In Process Direct, under the Weekly Subsidy table on the CCS Summary,
this displays as:

-   the full fee amount for the family session against the nominated
    child only
-   a zero ($0) fee against all other children (non-IHC nominated
    children) receiving care in that family session
-   hours of care amount under Hours Subsidised column, which will draw
    down the customer’s fortnightly CCS Eligible hours for all children,
    including non-IHC nominated children

If the nominated child's entitlement is zero (i.e. no remaining activity
test balance, annual cap or absences limit reached and no valid reason)
payment will not be made. The system does not use / drop back to the
other child’s entitlements.

Where other children have remaining activity test balance, their balance
will be reduced by the session duration regardless if payment is made
based on the nominated child’s entitlement.

Absences recorded for non-IHC nominated children will be counted as
unpaid absences and will not reduce the child’s allowable absence
balance.

For more information see Enrolment Requirements for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS).

Annual subsidy cap

The CCS annual subsidy cap applies to families using In Home Care (IHC).

When a customer has multiple children being supported by an IHC
arrangement and the nominated child reaches the annual cap, the IHC
service and the family should commence a new enrolment to change the
nominated child for the sessions of care. This will enable customers to
access the annual child care subsidy cap for each child.

From 10 December 2021, the CCS annual cap for the 2021-22 financial year
(1 July 2021 - 30 June 2022) onwards has been removed. Families who
reach the annual cap prior to 10 December 2021 were paid any CCS
entitlement owed to them in December 2021.

Note: families may still be subject to the annual cap for financial
years prior to the 2021/22 financial year.

The Resources page has an example of a customer with multiple children
in IHC.

Exceptional circumstances

If a customer requests an increased Activity Test result, the process
and criteria for applying for Exceptional Circumstances are the same for
In Home Care (IHC) as they are for other types of child care.

See Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for more information..

The Resources page contains Department of Education links to In Home
Care resources, entitlement scenarios for families using In Home Care,
and an example of applying the annual subsidy cap for families with
multiple children using In Home Care.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
