
Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the rate of FTB and FTB components. FTB is
calculated as an annual rate using an annual income test. The annual
rate is used to work out the daily rate of FTB that applies, based on
the family's circumstances during the financial year.

Online rate estimator

[] The online rate estimator can be used to estimate a customer's
potential FTB rate.

The online rate estimator will not provide information on the Newborn
Supplement (NBS) or Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU). The Resources page
contains a link to the NBS/NBU maximum rate matrix.

FTB rate and payment options

The rate for FTB instalment customers is worked out using their estimate
of adjusted taxable income (ATI) for the financial year and estimated
maintenance income.

Income support payment customers are paid FTB fortnightly and receive
FTB Part A free of the income test unless they are in an employment
income nil rate period. Single income support payment customers receive
FTB Part B free of the income test.

An individual's correct rate is worked out during the reconciliation
process, when FTB Part A and Part B supplements and Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS) are included in the calculation for eligible families.

Families can choose from a number of FTB payment options to reduce the
risk of an overpayment at reconciliation.

If a potential overpayment due to an increase of estimated income or
maintenance income is identified, the customer's ongoing FTB rate may be
reduced to offset the overpayment under mandatory continuous adjustment.

FTB will continue at a zero rate (CZR-ITH or CZR-IEU) for instalment
customers, where the customer has provided a revised family income
estimate that reduces the legislative rate of payment to nil. The
customer’s entitlement will be confirmed at reconciliation.

Cancellation (CAN-INC) will apply if the source of the estimate is an
uplift or the applicable income threshold has changed due to:

-   a change in circumstances, or
-   indexation to rates and threshold amounts

Customers will need to lodge a lump sum claim after the end of the
financial year to assess entitlement to these periods.

Note: to be initially granted FTB a customer must be eligible to a rate
above nil. New claim rejection due to income (REJ-INC) continues to
apply.

An individual's FTB rate can include:

FTB Part A

-   Part A child rate for each FTB child based on the child's age and
    circumstances (see the Resources page for more information)
-   Energy Supplement Part A (if the person is grandfathered for Energy
    Supplement)
-   Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Rent Assistance (RA) only if more than base rate Part A is payable
-   Part A supplement to eligible individuals after the end of the
    financial year

FTB Part B

-   Part B rate for the family based on the age of their youngest FTB
    child, if the person is single or a member of a couple or a
    grandparent carer
-   Energy Supplement Part B (if the person is grandfathered for Energy
    Supplement)
-   Part B supplement after the end of the financial year

SIFS after the end of the financial year to eligible customers

The FTB Part A child rate may be subject to an FTB Part A rate reduction
if the child fails to meet immunisation or Healthy Start for School
(HSFS) requirements. The Resources page contains more information

See Rates and thresholds for current FTB Part A (including the Part A
higher income free area) and Part B rates.

See the References page for a link to historical rates.

Approved Care Organisation (ACO)

The FTB rate for ACOs is not income tested. It includes:

-   base Part A child rate for each child in care (the References page
    contains a link to historical rates)
-   Energy Supplement Part A at base rate (if the person is
    grandfathered for Energy Supplement)

The References page contains links to historical rates and income
thresholds.

The Resources page contains links to the FTB rates, online estimators
and guides to payments, NBS/NBU maximum rate matrix, and information
about the FTB Part A child rate.

Contents

Annual income reviews for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers and their
partners who are not required to lodge a tax return

Mandatory continuous adjustment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Apportionment of income/maintenance reduction for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) Part A

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

Related links

Online estimator options

Payment rates and thresholds

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 2)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Advance payment options online

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1
July 2018

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements from 1 July 2018

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
