
How to process Rent Assistance (RA) in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims. 007-07030090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess a customer's entitlement to Rent
Assistance (RA) where the customer has lodged a lump sum claim for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a previous financial year.

RA payment

RA is an add-on payment that is payable to a qualifying customer (or
their partner) who is in receipt of more than the base rate of FTB Part
A or would have received FTB Part A except that they have care of a
Regular Care Child. Further information is available in Qualification
for payment of Rent Assistance (RA).

Claiming RA

Customers claiming RA for a past period also need to lodge a claim for
ongoing FTB instalments to be paid any RA entitlement unless they are
not eligible for instalment payments at the time of the claim.

If an instalment claim has not been lodged with the past period claim,
the customer must be contacted and invited to lodge an instalment claim
so that any entitlement to RA can be assessed. If the customer does not
lodge an instalment claim within the required timeframe, the lump sum
claim can be assessed without Rent Assistance.

Where it is clear that the customer is not eligible to receive ongoing
FTB instalments (based on the customer's advice or available evidence),
RA can be paid within the lump sum claim. Customers who indicate they
are not currently eligible for FTB (for example, because income is over
limit or there is no child in care) should not be compelled to claim FTB
by instalments.

If RA has already been paid with the customer's income support payment,
the arrears amount is reduced by the amount of RA already paid. This
will ensure that the customer does not receive duplicate payments of RA.
See Completing the Accommodation Details (AC) screen and assessing Rent
Assistance (RA).

The Resources page contains links to Centrelink online accounts and
forms and standard text for a Q999 letter requesting an instalment claim
be made for RA to be assessed.

Related links

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
