
Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave scheme payments 007-17100603

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how to process claims for family assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP), including online
claims, paper claims or forms, and claims using the Assisted Customer
Claims (ACC) workflow.

Claim types

This document is to be followed when processing claims for family
assistance, PPL and DAP. The appropriate pre-processing checks are to be
completed prior to processing the following payment types:

-   Family Tax Benefit (FTB), including Newborn Supplement (NBS) and
    Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU): pre-birth and post-birth/entry into
    care claims, instalment, combined FTB instalment and lump sum
    claims, and/or combined claims
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL), including pre-birth and post-birth/entry
    into care claims, and combined claims
-   Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined claims: Customers can claim FTB and PPL, FTB and CCS or FTB,
PPL and CCS at the same time as a combined claim. [] A single online
claim can be made to claim FTB for the current and previous financial
year.

Note: FTB claims for a previous financial year must be claimed
separately unless the customer is also claiming FTB for the current
year. See Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims.

Processing families claims and Add Newborn activities

Process the following claims and Add Newborn activities in Process
Direct:

-   DAP pre-birth
-   DAP post birth
-   PPL pre-birth
-   PPL post birth
-   PPL Add Newborns

Process the following claims and Add Newborn activities in Customer
First:

-   FTB
-   FTB/PPL combined
-   FTB Add Newborns
-   FTB/PPL combined Add Newborns

Add Newborn activities are created in Process Direct or Customer First
and can only be processed in the system they are created in:

-   Customer First Add Newborns have a 10-digit work item ID, and
-   Process Direct Add Newborns have an 8-digit work item ID

Note: Some processes may require pre-processing updates in a different
system.

Processing responsibility

Claims are processed by Smart Centre processing staff. All staff should
adhere to the Families and Child Care (FCC) processing principles.

For customers overseas, claims are transferred to Families International
Claims (FIC) to be processed.

Claims for deceased children are processed by the Bereavement Processing
Team (DOP).

Claim submitted online or verbally

When a claimant submits a claim for family assistance and/or Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) online (including combined claims), a new claim activity
is created on the claimant's record so the claim can be processed.

PPL, DAP claims and Process Direct initiated PPL Add Newborn activities
are processed in Process Direct using

-   Inbox

FTB, combined FTB/PPL claims and Customer First initiated Add Newborn
activities are processed in Customer First using:

-   Workspace
-   Search Online Claims under the Claims Online heading
-   Search Service request menu item in Customer First to locate 'Add
    newborn' service activities created using online accounts or the
    Centrelink Express Plus app

To access a quick link to an online claim from a customer's record in
Workspace, select:

-   CRN link beside the CRN in the status bar
-   Interaction History
-   ID number next to Claims for the relevant claim

Staff Workflows which require action will be presented in the workflow.
All workflows need to be actioned to upload online claim data onto the
customer's record and finalise the claim.

Claim choices for newborns or adopted children

Customers may claim Parental Leave Pay (PPL), PPL and Family Tax Benefit
(FTB), or just FTB. FTB claimants will have their entitlement to Newborn
Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) assessed with their
FTB claim.

PPL and NBS/NBU cannot be paid for the same child. For a multiple
birth/entry into care, the claimant may elect PPL to be paid for 1 child
and NBS/NBU for the other child, or both children to be paid NBS/NBU.

When claiming FTB for a newborn child, claimants are required to
indicate whether they (or their partner) intend to claim PPL. They will
be automatically assessed for NBS/NBU if they do not intend to claim for
PPL or if they have not lodged a claim for PPL within 26 weeks of the
FTB claim date of receipt.

If a customer claims PPL and their claim is withdrawn, not effective or
rejected, NBS/NBU entitlement is automatically assessed with FTB for the
child when FTB has been claimed.

PPL and DAP claims can be lodged up to 52 weeks after a child's date of
birth or entry into care.

Note: secondary claimants can claim PPL up to 104 weeks after a child's
birth or adoption.

However, to receive the full 18 weeks (90 payable days) of PPL,
customers need to claim within 40 weeks of the child’s birth/adoption

The PPL period can start from the child's date of birth or adoption if
claim requirements are met within 28 days of that date. Otherwise, the
earliest PPL period start date is the date of claim.

Customers can change their initial claim choice, and can choose to claim
PPL even after NBS/NBU have been paid with FTB. If this happens the
NBS/NBU will be raised as an overpayment. See Claim choice for a newborn
or adopted child.

If PPL entitlement is transferred, 1 customer can receive both Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP) and PPL for the same child. However, PPL and DAP
periods must be taken at different times and the individual can only
receive a maximum of 18 weeks of combined PPL and DAP.

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks DAP and PPL combined for the
same child.

DAP can be paid before, after, or at the same time as other family
assistance payments.

If a customer claims PPL or DAP for a newborn or adopted child and they
are FTB current (FTB/CUR or FTB/CZR) for other children, their
entitlement to FTB for the newborn or adopted child must also be
assessed.

See Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child.

Early claims

FTB, PPL and DAP claims can be lodged up to 97 days before a child's
expected date of birth or entrustment to care as part of an adoption
process. Secondary PPL claimants can also claim in this period if the
primary claimant is transferring some or all of their entitlement to
them.

An early claim assesses the customer's eligibility, and establishes the
employer registration and acceptance process for PPL claims.

If eligibility criteria are met, claims are assessed pending proof of
birth or entry into care.

Paper claims

When processing a paper claim for family assistance, PPL or DAP, Smart
Centre Service Officers must:

If using Customer First:

-   Record details from the paper claim form onto the customer's record
    using the ACC workflow. ACC cannot be utilised to process claims for
    persons granted a Humanitarian/Refugee visa (SS415). Service
    Officers can action these claims manually
-   Complete the Social Application (claim workflow) to process and
    assess entitlement once the ACC workflow has been used to record the
    claim details

If using Process Direct:

-   When a paper claim (FA100 for PPL only, or FA080) is scanned to the
    customer's record, a Social Application (SOA) shell Work Item is
    generated. This new claim activity contains no claim information
    apart from the CRN, personal details and the receipt date (date of
    claim)
-   Claim information will need to be manually updated within the Work
    Item using information from the scanned claim and associated
    documentation

Note: claims must always be coded and processed using the correct date
of receipt. This date can sometimes differ from the 'capture date' used
to confirm the date of a claim which has been scanned. Service Officers
must confirm the correct date in Document Tools in Customer First, or
the Documents icon in Process Direct. These screens display both the
'date of receipt' and the 'capture date'. The correct DOR is the first
date the customer's claim was received, if prior to the date it was
scanned (capture date).

PPL primary claimant transferring payment to another person

Initial primary carers can transfer some or all of their PPL period to
an eligible secondary claimant. They can also give permission for
another person to claim some or all of their Flexible Paid Parental
Leave (PPL) days.

For this to happen, both the initial primary claimant and secondary
claimant must lodge a claim for PPL and be found eligible.

A workaround for PPL secondary claimants may be required in full
transfer cases if the claimants' records are not linked or are in
different environments.

In full transfer cases only, where the birth mother has returned to work
before submitting the PPL claim, it is essential the secondary claimant
submits their PPL at the same time, before the primary claimant's claim
is assessed.

PPL claimant or their partner is receiving an income support payment

PPL is treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of income
support payments. This will automatically reduce the impacted customer’s
(and/or their partner’s) rate of income support payment while they are
receiving PPL payments. No additional coding is required.

If the rate of their or their partner’s income support payment is
reduced to nil as a result of PPL income, the income support payment
(and any associated concession cards etc.) will cancel (CAN-INC). The
customer (and/or their partner) will need to lodge a new claim for
income support after the PPL payment has ended. Note: if the customer
has chosen not to connect their Flexible PPL days to the end of their
PPL period, the customer (and/or their partner) may be eligible for an
income support payment before all of their Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
payments have been paid.

Customers (and/or their partners) may also incur an income support
overpayment if they are paid PPL for a period for which they have
already received an income support payment. Customers can minimise the
amount of the overpayment by choosing a nominated start date (NSD) in
the future.

Validation of serial numbers

The Newborn Child Declaration (FA081) and Claim for Bereavement Payment
(FA008) include a unique serial number that is used to assist Services
Australia in detecting potential fraudulent activity.

The serial number is recorded online by the customer, and is also
checked when staff are processing the customer's claim. The serial
number must be entered/loaded on the Change Child (CCH) screen if an
FA081 or FA008 has been provided.

Where a serial number is included within a customer's online claim and
there is a problem with the serial number provided, the Families Online
Claim will produce a data load error if the serial number entered from
an FA081 or FA008 form is identified as:

-   duplicate
-   invalid, or
-   outside issued number range

If any of these errors are presented, Service Officers need to check the
serial number that has been loaded/entered (on CCH screen) matches the
serial number on the FA081 or FA008 form.

When a Service Officer is processing a FA081 or FA008 form manually, the
serial number on the CCH screen for that child should be entered.

Note: the serial number field is not mandatory, such as when a birth
certificate is provided.

If the serial number has not been correctly entered when cross checked
between the CCH screen and the FA081 or FA008 form, the Service Officer
should re-enter the correct number (on CCH screen). If this number does
not return any error message, they can continue to action the
outstanding staff workflows or processing.

If it is confirmed that the serial number has been correctly entered and
the error is still displayed (on CCH screen), Service Officers are not
continue to process the claim, but refer the Customer Reference Number
(CRN) to Families and Child Care - Business Process Branch marked
'URGENT'.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment processing priorities

If the customer is claiming both FTB and an income support payment:

-   There is no requirement for FTB to be assessed before their income
    support claim can be finalised
-   Where practical the income support payment claim should be assessed
    first

An exception to this is if a care determination is required, and the
Service Officer is not suitably trained. See Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and income support payment new claim processing interactions

The Resources page contains links to contact information and intranet
links. It also contains examples of recording of care details, claim
indexing, effective claims, FMAD screen coding, PPL ACS coding, Q999
letter text and keywords, common data load messages and their meanings,
and user guides.

Related links

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Manual processing of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Partner of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer claims family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Raising ISP debts for customers granted PPL and DAP

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and income support payment new claim processing
interactions

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
