
Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations (ACO) 007-07040030

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for an Approved Care
Organisation (ACO) to receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for young persons
in their care. The organisation must be approved by the Service Centre
Manager in accordance with Department of Social Services (DSS)
guidelines.

On this Page:

ACO payment eligibility

ACOs are eligible for:

-   base FTB Part A child rate for each FTB child
-   Energy Supplement Part A if they are grandfathered for Energy
    Supplement Part A

ACOs are not entitled to any other FTB components.

The FTB rate for ACOs is not income tested.

To be eligible for FTB Part A, the ACO must be approved and have the
care of an FTB child.

Temporary care

An ACO can be eligible for payment in temporary care situations
(including less than 28 days) where the child is legally in their care
(court order), such as child has been placed in the care of a Juvenile
Justice Centre. Care must be taken to determine if the temporary change
in care is formal (legal/court order) or informal (customer has
delegated their care temporarily to an ACO).

The Resources page contains FTB examples of legal responsibility and
temporary care provisions.

Definition of FTB child for ACO purposes

A child is an FTB child of an ACO if all of the following apply:

-   The child is a client of the ACO
-   The child is an Australian resident
-   The child is aged under 16, or 16-19 and meets education/training
    requirements and is not receiving a disqualifying payment
-   No one else is entitled to FTB for the child. In cases where an
    individual and ACO share the care of a child and the individual has
    at least 35% actual care, the ACO has no entitlement to FTB. The
    individual can receive their entitlement based on their percentage
    of care

ACO Smart Centre Processing

All grants are handled by the ACO Smart Centre Processing.

ACO Smart Centre Processing will collect data on the system for only
those ACOs which are both approved and have children in care now or in
the last 12 months.

Where an ACO has not received FTB for a period of 12 months, a letter
should be sent to advise the ACO their ACO status has been withdrawn.
The organisation must reapply and become an Approved Care Organisation
prior to any further FTB claims being granted.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator.

Children leaving care

ACOs must advise if a child or young person is no longer a client of
their ACO. This can occur if the child or young person is transferred to
another ACO, if they are discharged or have absconded from the ACO. In
these cases FTB for the child should be cancelled.

The Resources page contains a link to the Approved Care Organisation -
admission, transfer or discharge of a young person (FA032), Office
Locator, Family Assistance Payment Rates and FTB examples of legal
responsibility and temporary care provisions.

Related links

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACOs)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Energy Supplement

Clean Energy Advance (CEA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
