
Resumption of JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment, Farm Household Allowance or Austudy after Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) 007-17042800

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for resuming JobSeeker Payment, Youth
Allowance, Parenting Payment, Farm Household Allowance or Austudy,
cancelled due to the customer (or their partner’s) income from Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

PPL and DAP payment periods

PPL and DAP are taxable payments paid under the Paid Parental Leave
scheme. They are paid at the national minimum wage.

DAP is paid to dads or partners caring for a child born or adopted on or
after 1 January 2013. It is paid for a maximum of 2 weeks (paid as a
lump sum)

PPL is paid to the primary carer caring for a child born or adopted on
or after 1 January 2011. It is paid for a maximum of 18 weeks (90
payable days)

PPL is made up of:

-   a PPL period which is paid as a continuous block of payment
-   up to 30 Flexible PPL days which can be accessed as single days or
    in a block

Note: Flexible PPL days are only available for children that are born or
adopted on or after 1 July 2020.

PPL and DAP are treated as ordinary income

For children born or adopted on or after 1 October 2016, PPL and DAP is
treated as ordinary income for determining eligibility and calculating
the rate of income support payment (ISP). This includes PPL/DAP that is
received by the ISP customer or their partner.

As a result of PPL or DAP that is paid to the customer and/or their
partner, the customer’s ISP can:

-   reduce in rate, or
-   enter a 6 fortnight nil rate period (only applicable where the
    customer and/or partner also has employment income), or
-   cancel

Note: an ISP may be cancelled under various reasons, for example;
CAN-INC - where cancellation has occurred immediately due to PPL/DAP
income, CAN-E6F - where cancellation has occurred at the end of the 6
fortnight nil rate period if customer also had other income.

Resumption of JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance, Parenting Payment, Farm Household Allowance or Austudy after cancellation of PPL or DAP payment

If it can be determined the customer has maintained continued
eligibility for the income support payment (ISP), the ISP may be able to
be resumed once their payment would not be reduced to zero. This may be:

-   at the end of the DAP period
-   at the end of the PPL period and any connected Flexible PPL days
-   while the customer still has untaken Flexible PPL days

In most circumstances there is no requirement for the customer to lodge
a new claim.

ABSTUDY customers will remain current after a 6 fortnight nil rate
period. ABSTUDY payments will automatically resume once the payment is
no longer reduced due to the customer or partner’s PPL/DAP payments.

Farm Household Allowance (FHA) customers who are entitled to receive FHA
during their PPL/DAP entitlement period will have this period included
in the cumulative 1,460 days a customer may receive FHA. Depending on
their circumstances, a customer may choose to preserve their entitlement
to FHA and request payment be cancelled.

If a customer asks for FHA to be cancelled, they will have to submit a
new claim to receive payments in the future. See Farm Household
Allowance (FHA) clock.

Affected customers can discuss their circumstances with their Farm
Household Case Officer (FHCO) or call the Farmers Assistance Hotline.

Related links

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims

Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
