
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and applications 007-17103155

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility requirements for Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) and how customers can apply for this
subsidy.

ACCS (Grandparent)

ACCS (Grandparent) provides financial assistance for eligible
grandparents on income support to cover the costs of child care for
their grandchild/ren.

ACCS (Grandparent) is second in the hierarchy of ACCS payments. See CCS
and Additional ACCS for more information.

Note: refer to Grandparents not eligible for ACCS (Grandparent) for
assistance provided for grandparents not on income support.

Eligibility for ACCS (Grandparent)

To be eligible for ACCS (Grandparent) the customer must be:

-   eligible for CCS
-   the grandparent or great-grandparent of the child they are claiming
    for
-   have all or at least 65% assessed care of the child
-   have substantial autonomy for the day to day decisions about the
    child’s care, welfare and development, and
-   receiving an income support payment, or their partner must be
    receiving an income support payment

Determining Shared care arrangements

When determining shared care and evidence required to support shared
care assessments follow the same process as outlined in Notification and
assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Applying for ACCS (Grandparent)

The ACCS (Grandparent) application is imbedded within the CCS online
claim and the Assisted Customer Claim. If, during the CCS claim question
set, the customer indicates they are a grandparent with 65% or more care
of a grandchild, they will be asked if they wish to apply for ACCS
(Grandparent).

[]Customers can also apply for ACCS (Grandparent) separately through
online services where they are already in receipt of CCS. There are no
standalone verbal applications for ACCS Grandparent. Eligible
grandparents are to be directed to online services and given the
necessary assistance when applying for ACCS (Grandparent) separately.

If a grandparent is making a claim for more than one grandchild, they
must meet the eligibility criteria for each of the children.

Where a customer has previously been assessed as eligible for ACCS
(Grandparent) and has lost eligibility due to a change in circumstances,
a new application is not required if they subsequently become eligible
again. For example, ACCS (Grandparent) cancels as a result of a change
in care arrangements of their grandchild below 65%. If the care changes
to more than 65% at a later date, the customer is not required to lodge
a new application but a flag will be generated for a Service Officer to
reassess eligibility for ACCS (Grandparent).

Rate of ACCS (Grandparent)

Grandparents eligible for ACCS (Grandparent) are entitled to:

-   100% of child care fees where the fees charged are equal to or below
    the hourly rate cap, or
-   up to 120% of the hourly rate cap where the fees charged are above
    the hourly rate cap, and
-   up to 100 hours of subsidised care per fortnight

For customers with other children in care, check the customer's income
and activity test details are up to date. ACCS Grandparent is paid at
the child level. If the customer has children who are not assessed as
grandchildren, the CCS percentage and subsidised hours for those
children will be based on their income and activity test.

Grandparents not eligible for ACCS (Grandparent)

Grandparent principal carers who are not on income support will be
supported through the CCS. These grandparents will be eligible for an
exemption from the CCS activity test and up to 100 hours of approved
child care each fortnight. The rate of subsidy will be based on the
family’s income. See Combined family income for CCS.

Grandparents who are not principal carers of their grandchildren, but
have between 14 and 64 per cent care, may be eligible for CCS, depending
on their income and hours of recognised activity. Grandparents who do
not meet the CCS activity test may be eligible for CCS for low income
families of 24 hours per fortnight at 85 per cent of the hourly rate
cap. See Eligibility for CCS.

Annual review of eligibility

There is no time limit for how long a customer can receive ACCS
(Grandparent), although generally customers receiving ACCS (Grandparent)
for a continuous period of 12 months will be subject to an annual review
of circumstances.

Note: no annual reviews are required until further notice. ACCS
(grandparent) entitlement will continue with no action needed by staff
or the grandparent carer.

Grandparent carers are still obliged to notify of changes to
circumstances, including where there may be changes of care.

Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Advisers

Non-parent carers who have taken on the parental responsibilities for a
child may also benefit from the services of a Grandparent, Foster and
Kinship Carer Adviser. The advisers:

-   provide tailored information about payments and support services
    specific to the circumstances of individual families
-   arrange appointments for non-parent carers with specialist staff,
    including social workers, Financial Information Service (FIS)
    Officers, and
-   arrange referrals to federal, state and community service providers

The Resources page contains links to the intranet and Services Australia
website for online estimators, information about Grandparent, Foster and
Kinship Carer Advisers and information for families.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
