
Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines information about Parental Leave Pay (PPL), which
is paid under the Paid Parental Leave scheme. The scheme enhances
maternal and child health development, facilitates workforce
participation and assists in promoting gender equity and work-life
balance. It allows eligible working parents to access paid leave from
employment. PPL can also be paid after a child bereavement.

Payment of PPL

PPL can be paid to eligible working parents who are the primary carer of
a child born or adopted on or after 1 January 2011. PPL is delivered to
the customer by the employer or by Services Australia.

Effect of PPL on other payments

PPL is taxable income and is included in a customer's adjusted taxable
income for family assistance payments.

PPL is treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment
for income support payments.

Customer choice

Customers may choose to claim PPL or receive Newborn Supplement (NBS)
and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) with their Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part A. See Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child.

After a stillbirth, customers can choose to claim PPL, or Stillborn Baby
Payment (SBP) if they are not eligible for PPL.

Timeframe for claims

Customers can lodge a claim for PPL:

-   no earlier than the family assistance, PPL and DAP allowable early
    claim period
-   up to 52 weeks after their child’s birth or adoption

Note: to receive the full amount of PPL, claims must be lodged within
the time limits for claiming the maximum PPL entitlement. Customers who
lodge after this will not be entitled to receive the maximum:

-   18 weeks (90 payable days) a child born or adopted 1 July 2023
-   20 weeks (100 payable days) for a child born or adopted on or after
    1 July 2023

Encourage customers to lodge an early claim for PPL. This will provide
them with an early indication of their eligibility, as they are assessed
pending proof of birth or entry into care. They will also have more
choice about how and when they can access their payments. Claims lodged
before the allowable early claim period cannot be assessed.

Once proof of birth or adoption is provided and the claim assessed,
customers with children that are born or adopted:

-   before 1 July 2023, can access Flexible PPL days up to 2 years after
    their child’s birth or adoption
-   on or after 1 July 2023, can access PPL days up to 2 years after the
    child’s birth or adoption however at least 1 PPL day must be taken
    before the child’s first birthday or anniversary of care

[] Claims for family assistance and PPL can be made by submitting an
online claim or lodging a paper claim.

Processing claims

When a claim is ready to be finalised, online claim data is uploaded
onto the customer's record before the claim activity is finalised.

Paper claims and any documentation received for online or paper claims
is scanned upon receipt.

The Digitalisation Support Unit (DSU) completes initial processing to
link the scanned image to the correct customer record and to record a
claim or additional child activity on the customer's record.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions and answers about
the effect of a PPL claim on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B.

Contents

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim processed with incorrect nominated start
date

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Employer registration for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Related links

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Reassessments for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellations, restorations and rejection codes for Parental Leave
Payment (PPL)

Enquiry, rate and assessment explanation screens for family assistance
and Paid Parental Leave

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
