
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) - Viewing attendance reports 007-17103147

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on viewing child care attendance
information and payments to child care providers an customers.

On this Page:

What are attendance reports?

Child care services are required to submit attendance reports (sometimes
known as a session report) for each week that a session of care has been
provided. CCS and ACCS cannot be paid until an attendance report has
been submitted by the child care service. Attendance reports also
include information where the child was supposed to attend a session of
care but was absent.

See Absences for CCS and ACCS for more information about absences.

Child care services have 14 days after the end of the week that care was
provided to submit an attendance report. If a service realises the
attendance report was incorrect or did not need to be submitted, they
can vary or withdraw attendance reports. Services generally have up to
28 days after the start of the week in which the report relates to vary
or withdraw the report.

Viewing attendance information

There is no requirement for customers to confirm attendance reports
submitted by child care services. [] Customers are able to view
attendance reports online (either through myGov or the Express Plus
App). Customers can view up to one year of their attendance records. If
the customer disagrees with information within the attendance report
they are able to lodge a dispute.

Disputing attendance reports

Customers can dispute details of an attendance report submitted by their
child care service. Once the customer disputes the information (via
MyGov or the Express Plus mobile app), a notice will be sent to the
child care service for them to review the disputed information.

Child care services can respond to the customer initiated dispute by
either varying or withdrawing the attendance report.

If the customer and child care service cannot resolve the disputed
attendance report after following the above process, the customer can
contact the Department of Education, Skills and Employment Tip-off line
to advise fraudulent or non-compliant activity by the child care
service.

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment Tip-off line contact information.

Related links

Apportioning hours of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments and adjustments

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
