
Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending 007-11020010

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to respond to customer enquiries about CCB
reconciliation, pending CCB lump sum claims, or why CCB has only been
assessed at the zero rate.

Timing of reconciliation

A CCB lump sum claim can be assessed and CCB reconciliation can occur
from the 4th Monday in July of the lodgement year. From this time a Bulk
Reconciliation action will be undertaken over a 2 week period and the
reconciliation will finalise when all required information is available.
Some customers will not have reconciliation completed during this bulk
reconciliation process and their status will display as pending.

Reconciliation pending reasons

CCB reconciliation may be pending because:

-   Timing: this will only appear before the 4^(th) Monday in July of
    the lodgement year as processing cannot occur before this date
-   Income: expected actual income details have not been received from
    the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) for the customer, and their
    current partner if applicable (partial reconciliation can occur if
    only ex-partner actual income details are required). Reconciliation
    can occur for some customers without actual income
-   Wait actual income: actual income details have been transferred from
    the ATO for one member of a couple and reconciliation is delayed for
    up to four days pending receipt of actual income details for the
    other member of the couple

CCB lump sum pending reasons

Child Care Benefit (CCB) lump sum claim may be pending for the following
reasons:

-   Immunisation: when immunisation details have not been received from
    the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)
-   Timing: this will only appear before the 4^(th) Monday in July of
    the lodgement year as processing cannot occur before this date
-   Waiting actual income: if actual adjusted taxable income is received
    for one member of a couple, reconciliation would complete using
    income (not actual) details without the actual income of the other
    member of the couple. A delay of up to 4 days occurs in case their
    actual income details become available

Note: if there are no child care attendance details for any child, the
customer's lump sum claim will be finalised and rejected, no dependents
eligible. Once child care attendance from the child care service has
been received and processed, the CCB lump sum claim will re-reconcile
and pay appropriately on the received child's attendance.

CCB lump sum assessed at zero rate

A CCB lump sum claim may be assessed at zero rate with the application
of the income test. Customers may also choose to be paid at the zero
rate.

Privacy warning: there are restrictions with regard to disclosure and
confidentiality of customer, partner and ex-partner information for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and CCB customers, for example, Privacy, Person
Permitted to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority.

Service Officers cannot discuss results of CCB reconciliation or lump
sum claims with a child care service. Child care services should advise
customers to contact Services Australia directly.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

Related links

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) results for family assistance
customer mismatches

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
