
Calculating the additional Double Orphan Pension (DOP) component 007-06010030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process of calculating the additional Double
Orphan Pension (DOP) component that may be paid to a person caring for a
child who has become a double orphan.

On this Page:

DOP additional component

The DOP additional component is the difference between the carer's
legislative rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for the DOP child
and the legislative rate of FTB Part A received for the DOP child
immediately before they became an orphan.

The DOP additional component is not payable where FTB Part A has been
cancelled because the child receives a payment under a prescribed
educational scheme.

All assessments for the DOP additional component are carried out by the
Bereavement/Double Orphan Pension Helpdesk. Customers can call the DOP
Helpdesk for assistance.

Shared care of a DOP child

In the case of a shared care child, the additional component of DOP is
the difference between applying the shared care percentage to the
legislative rate of FTB Part A previously received for the child and
applying the shared care percentage to the current carer's legislative
rate of FTB Part A.

DOP claimants who have shared care of 35% or more will be assessed under
the Family Assistance shared care rules. Customers who have actual care
of a child for less than 35% of the time are not entitled to either the
basic or additional component of DOP. Where the customer has actual care
of a child for 14-34% of the time, they will be assessed for ancillary
benefits.

The Resources page contains a link to contact details for the
Bereavement/Double Orphan Pension Helpdesk.

Related links

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
