-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure which helps Service Officers use
the Portability Script to decide whether Double Orphan Pension (DOP) is
payable to the customer while they are outside Australia and for how
long. It also explains the action to be taken by the Service Officer and
the customer on their departure.

On this Page:

Leaving to live in another country

DOP is not payable from departure if the customer/child leaves Australia
to live in another country. If a customer's circumstances change during
what began as a temporary absence, and they are found to be residing in
another country, then any family assistance or Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments stop from the date the customer is determined to have
stopped residing in Australia.

Note: if the customer and child are going to live in an agreement
country, DOP may be payable under that agreement.

Temporary absence overseas

An absence is considered to be temporary if the customer/child continues
to reside in Australia.

A customer leaving Australia temporarily will generally continue to be
entitled to DOP for the maximum portability period of up to 6 weeks from
the original date of departure from Australia.

If the customer or child is unable to return at the end of their maximum
portability period, Services Australia has the discretion to extend the
period of portability under certain circumstances.

Brief return to Australia - return rules for DOP

A person or child who is absent from Australia for more than 6 weeks,
who returns to Australia and leaves Australia again less than 6 weeks
later, is deemed not to have returned to Australia.

If a customer or their child leaves Australia temporarily within 6 weeks
of their last return to Australia and the previous absence was longer
than 6 weeks, their DOP is cancelled as soon as they leave Australia
again.

These return rules do not impact the customer's entitlement to DOP while
they, or their DOP child/ren, are physically in Australia between
overseas trips.

Approved absences for certain visas

Customers who hold a visa subclass 309, 785, 790 or 820 and leave
Australia temporarily, continue to satisfy the DOP residence test if
they are absent from Australia for no more than 6 weeks and their
absence is for an approved reason.

The approved reasons are:

-   eligible medical treatment not available in Australia
-   humanitarian reasons (such as custody or adoption proceedings)
-   an acute family crisis (such as the death of a family member or
    where a family member is suffering a serious illness)

DOP is not payable during any overseas absence for any reason for
customers who hold a visa subclass 070, 449, 786 and 785 (granted before
16 December 2014).

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer or child leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless whether the customer notified or not.

Note: Department of Home Affairs datalink activities should not be
cancelled.

In many cases customers do not need to advise they are leaving Australia
temporarily or have returned from a temporary absence.

However, there are particular situations when customers should advise of
a departure prior to leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In many cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. Where a customer's circumstances are more complex they
will be prompted to contact the agency. The Services Australia website
lists situations when customers must advise they are leaving Australia.

Portability period

A person's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a person returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day and
therefore no longer affected by portability.

The Resources page contains a link to the International Programme
intranet page for information about International Social Security
Agreements, contact details and links to the Services Australia website
for information about payments while outside Australia and travelling
overseas with Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) medicine.

Related links

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Discretion to extend portability period

Restricted portability for payment during overseas absences where
customer has special circumstances

View/update overseas travel online

Portability of payments paid under International Agreements

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
