
Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements from 1 July 2018 007-18043001

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements,
which are linked, to the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for
income support payment customers with a child turning 4 on or after 1
July 2018.

HSFS requirements

From 1 July 2018, the Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirement is
part of the assessment used to determine the rate of FTB Part A payable
for a child.

A customer is required to meet HSFS requirements if during a financial
year:

-   they have received FTB Part A for a child who has turned 4, and
-   they (or their partner) have received an income support payment
    (including nil rate periods) for at least one day

In limited circumstances, an exemption from HSFS requirements may be
granted.

To meet HSFS requirements, the child must have an acceptable health
check and the customer must notify the agency that this has taken place.

If HSFS requirements are not met before the child's fifth birthday, an
FTB Part A rate reduction is applied to the maximum rate of FTB Part A
that can be paid for that child.

The FTB Part A rate reduction due to HSFS will start on the child's
fifth birthday and will continue for the number of days the customer
and/or their partner received an income support payment (including nil
rate periods) during the financial year the child turned 4 years of age.

HSFS requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18 are linked to
payment of the FTB Part A Supplement.

Notification timeframes

Customers can notify that a health check has been completed (or request
an exemption) from the date they are sent the initial notification
letter up to the day before the child's fifth birthday.

If a customer contacts after the child's fifth birthday to advise that a
health check was completed before the child's fifth birthday, they will
need to advise the date that the health check was completed and may be
required to provide evidence. When this occurs the FTB Part A rate
reduction due to HSFS will cease and the rate of FTB Part A during the
reduction period will be reassessed. If the customer was underpaid FTB
Part A during the reduction period, they may be entitled to FTB Part A
arrears for this period.

If the health check was completed on or after the child’s fifth birthday
and an extension has not previously been recorded, the customer has not
met HSFS requirements. The customer’s FTB A rate reduction period will
continue and no arrears will be paid.

If special circumstances apply, a customer may be eligible for an
extension to meet the health check requirements after the child's fifth
birthday. Extensions can be granted up to no later than the day before
the child's sixth birthday.

Acceptable health checks for HSFS

An acceptable health check is an assessment of the child's physical
health and general well-being conducted by a recognised health
professional. Customers are not generally required to provide evidence
of the health check being completed if notification is received before
the child's fifth birthday.

An acceptable health check can be completed from when the child turns 3
years of age.

The Resources page contains a guide for which health checks meet HSFS
requirements in each state.

For more information about the health check, customers should consult a
health professional or health clinic.

Shared care

HSFS requirements apply for each customer who shares the care of the
child and has received FTB and an income support payment (customer or
partner) during the financial year the child turned 4.

If one customer notifies that requirements have been met, this will meet
the notification requirements for all of the carers.

For 2011-12 to 2017-18 financial years, see Healthy Start for School
(HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18.

Exemptions

A Healthy Start for School (HSFS) automatic exemption may apply for the
child if the criteria is met anytime during the financial year the child
turns 4, up to the child's fifth birthday (or the extension period end
date, if applicable). A manual exemption can only be granted before the
child's fifth birthday or during an extension period.

A manual exemption can be granted if:

-   the child turning 4 has a severe disability or medical condition and
    has already undergone a medical assessment appropriate to the
    child's needs by a recognised health professional
-   no other customer or their partner is in receipt of Carer Payment
    (CP), Carer Allowance (CA) or a Health Care Card (HCC) specifically
    for this child, and
-   the customer requests an exemption and lodges evidence (if required)
    on or before the child's fifth birthday (unless an extension is
    granted)

A special circumstance exemption may be granted if there are unusual and
unexpected circumstances. These generally relate to the customer's
circumstances rather than the child's. Requests must be considered on a
case by case basis. A special circumstances exemption can only be
granted before the child's fifth birthday and cannot be granted during
an extension period.

The Resources page contains examples of the assessment of a customer's
circumstances for special circumstances exemptions.

For 2011-12 to 2017-18 financial years, see Healthy Start for School
(HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18.

Extensions

A customer may be granted an extension of time to meet health check
requirements due to special circumstances if there are unusual and
unexpected circumstances that prevented the child from having the health
check completed before their child's fifth birthday. Requests for an
extension must be considered on a case by case basis. Extensions cannot
be applied for until the child's fifth birthday.

The Resources page contains examples of the assessment of a customer's
circumstances for extensions.

When an extension has been recorded the FTB Part A reduction due to HSFS
will be in place during the extension period until the health check has
been updated. If the customer notifies that the child has met health
check requirements before the end of the extension period, the FTB Part
A rate reduction due to HSFS will cease and the rate of FTB Part A
during the extension period will be reassessed. If the customer was
underpaid FTB Part A during the extension period, they may be entitled
to FTB Part A arrears for this period.

How customers can advise details

Customers can:

[] advise the details online:

-   with their One Time Access Code (OTAC) advised in their initial or
    reminder letter, or
-   using the Update Healthy Start for School Review option online

provide the information by:

-   using the HSFS IVR service, or
-   talking to a Service Officer by phone or in person

Letters/reminders

For children turning 4 on or after 1 July 2018, customers with HSFS
requirements will receive letters and notifications during the financial
year the HSFS child turns 4.

-   An initial letter is sent in August (or when the customer later
    becomes impacted by HSFS due to a change in circumstance)
-   If they have not yet met HSFS requirements, an SMS/email reminder is
    sent in early January of the financial year the child turns 4
-   A reminder letter is sent in May of the financial year the child
    turns 4 if the customer has not yet met HSFS requirements
-   An additional reminder letter is sent 8 weeks before the child's
    fifth birthday if the customer has not yet met HSFS requirements

For 2011-12 to 2017-18 financial years, see Healthy Start for School
(HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18.

Backdating ISP/FTB eligibility

If a child turned 4 in the financial year and an income support payment
(customer or partner) or FTB is retrospectively granted, the customer
will be impacted by HSFS if the retrospective granting occurred before
the relevant child's fifth birthday and the customer received
notification of their HSFS requirements.

If the retrospective granting of the FTB and/or income support payment
occurs after the child's fifth birthday, HSFS requirements do not apply.

Lump sum claims

HSFS requirements do not apply to FTB lump sum claims for financial
years from 2018-19 onwards. If the customer has received FTB as
instalments for part of the financial year, the instalment periods may
be subject to a HSFS rate reduction.

See the Resources page for more information .

Reviews and appeals

For children turning 4 on or after 1 July 2018, customers who want to
apply for a formal review of HSFS must do so within 52 weeks for
decisions about their rate of FTB Part A.

Favourable decisions are recorded using an override, which can only be
coded by Families Override Contacts with ICT Security Portal access.

For 2011-12 to 2017-18 financial years, see Healthy Start for School
(HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18.

Contact from a health professional

If a health professional (for example, practice nurse, doctor,
registered Aboriginal health worker) contacts about health checks (for
example, what checks are appropriate for the initiative), refer them to
the Services Australia website. See the Resources page for a link.

Note: if the contact is made by a staff member from a Community Health
Clinic, refer them to their local state or territory department.

The Resources page contains relevant links, example letters and
reminders, customer questions and answers, and information about
assessing special circumstance exemptions and extensions. It also
contains example Q888 letter texts.

Related links

Healthy Start for School (HSFS) requirements for financial years 2011-12
to 2017-18

Child Relationships page

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
