
Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant 007-09020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria to receive Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant under the Paid Parental Leave
scheme. PPL is paid at a rate based on the national minimum wage and can
be paid after a stillbirth or after the death of a child.

PPL as a primary claimant

A primary claimant may receive up to 18 weeks of PPL. Any unused PPL may
be payable to an eligible secondary/tertiary claimant, for example,
their partner.

It can be taken before, after or at the same time as:

-   employer-provided paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave, or
-   other leave entitlements (such as annual leave or long service
    leave)

For children that are born or entrusted to the customers care:

before 1 July 2020, it is made up a PPL period of up to 18 weeks (90
payable days)

on or after 1 July 2020, it is made up of:

-   a PPL period of up to 12 weeks (60 payable days), plus
-   30 Flexible PPL days

Exceptional circumstances

The primary claimant will most often be the birth mother, or the primary
carer of an adopted or surrogate child. If exceptional circumstances
criteria are met, their partner, other legal parent or another person
may be eligible as a primary claimant.

In some instances, PPL may be payable to a new primary claimant after
the birth mother/primary carer has received PPL payments.

PPL eligibility criteria

To receive PPL as a primary claimant, a person must:

-   be the primary carer of a Parental Leave Pay (PPL) child. Exception:
    This does not apply after a child has died or was stillborn, or if
    care of the child is lost without legal authority
-   meet the PPL work test
-   meet the PPL income test. For the PPL income test threshold, see
    Paid Parental Leave - income limits
-   notify that they have applied to register the child's birth.
    Exception: This does not apply if the child is adopted, stillborn or
    born outside Australia
-   meet Australian residence requirements

Additionally, the primary claimant must:

-   not have returned to work since becoming the primary carer of the
    child to be eligible for the PPL period
-   not be working on days that they want to claim Flexible PPL for a
    child born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020

Exceptions apply in some circumstances.

Note: surrogate birth mothers and birth mothers adopting out children or
legally losing custody may not return to work and continue to receive
PPL.

PPL may be payable in an informal foster care relationship where the
child has entered care in exceptional circumstances, but is not payable
for a formal foster care arrangement.

Primary claimant has returned to work

PPL can be taken before, after or at the same time as employer-provided
paid or unpaid maternity or parental leave, or other leave entitlements
(such as annual leave or long service leave).

If the customer has returned to work since becoming the primary carer of
the child, they:

-   will not be eligible for the PPL period after the return to work
    date, but may be able to transfer some or all of their PPL period to
    a secondary claimant
-   may be eligible for 30 Flexible PPL days, if the child’s birth or
    adoption is on or after 1 July 2020
-   may be eligible for some or all of the PPL period if they meet the
    PPL extended work test and the nominated start date is before their
    return to work date

Note: customers may participate in up to 10 'keeping in touch' days
prior to returning to work, but not within 14 days after the day the
child was born.

Return to work exceptions apply in some circumstances, including
bereavement. See Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work.

Flexible PPL can be paid after the customer has returned to work.
However, it cannot be paid on a day that the customer is performing paid
work unless an exception applies.

Limited PPL eligibility criteria for transfer of full PPL period to secondary claimant

If a primary claimant is transferring their full PPL period to a
secondary claimant from the date the child is born (or enters care), the
primary claimant only needs to meet the limited PPL eligibility criteria
of the:

-   work test and income test, and
-   residence test on the date the child is born (or enters care)

In cases where the primary claimant has returned to work before
submitting their PPL claim:

-   the return to work does not prevent the primary/secondary claimants
    eligibility; however,
-   it is essential that the secondary claimant submits their claim for
    PPL before the primary claimant's PPL claim is assessed - this means
    the claims are deemed to be lodged 'at the same time'

In this scenario, there is no change to the secondary claimant's PPL
eligibility criteria.

A primary claimant can transfer their full PPL period to a secondary
claimant from a date after the child is born (or enters care). The
primary claimant must meet the full PPL eligibility criteria for each
day from the date the child is born (or enters care) until the day
before primary care is transferred to the secondary claimant.

Claim choice

Customers can claim PPL or have their entitlement to Newborn Supplement
(NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) assessed with their Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) claim.

Customers cannot receive PPL and NBS/NBU for the same child.

Customers may change their claim choice and claim PPL after NBS/NBU have
been paid with FTB. See Changing claim choice for a newborn or adopted
child.

After a stillbirth, customers not eligible for PPL may claim Stillborn
Baby Payment (SBP).

Timeframe for claims

Customers are encouraged to lodge an early claim for family assistance
and Parental Leave Pay (PPL). It is important they are aware of the time
limits for claiming the maximum PPL period.

For primary claimants, PPL claims must be lodged before the:

child's first birthday, or

first anniversary of the day:

-   the primary claimant became the primary carer for exceptional
    circumstances
-   the child becomes entrusted to the customer's care for adoptions, or
-   the child enters care for a surrogacy arrangement

The PPL period is only payable for days before:

-   the child’s first birthday, or
-   the first anniversary of the child’s adoption/entry into care for a
    surrogacy arrangement

Flexible PPL is only paid on days after the end of the PPL period and
before the child's:

-   second birthday, or
-   second anniversary of the day the child is entrusted into care for
    adoption/a surrogacy arrangement

Start date of the PPL period

When claiming PPL, primary claimants must nominate a start date for
their PPL period.

The PPL period start date:

can be no earlier than the child’s date of birth or the date the child
entered care

is determined once the customer provides the child's proof of birth or
proof of entry into care

can be backdated to the child’s date of birth/adoption if:

-   the customer claims and provides proof of birth within 28 days of
    the child’s birth/adoption, or
-   if they meet the PPL extended work test due to coronavirus
    (COVID-19)

See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

A customer's nominated start date or PPL period start date is not the
date that the customer will receive their first payment. However, the
customer's first PPL period instalment will be backdated to their PPL
period start date.

See Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start
date.

Note: for customers that are not eligible for the PPL period, their PPL
will start on the first Flexible PPL day.

Effect of PPL on other payments

Multiple birth

For a multiple birth, PPL can only be paid for one child and the higher
rate of NBS/NBU may be paid for the other children. However if there was
a significant delay between the births of the children from the same
pregnancy, for example twins delivered 5+ days apart, the births may be
considered separate birthing events and not part of a multiple birth. If
approved these cases may qualify to be payable for each child. Cases
with evidence of multiple birth with significant delay should be
forwarded to the Families level 2 helpdesk for assessment.

Where multiple children are adopted as part of the same adoption
process, PPL is only payable for one child.

Assessable income

Parental Leave Pay Scheme payments are:

-   taxable income and are included in a customer's adjusted taxable
    income for family assistance payments
-   treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment for
    income support payments

Note: Service Officers do not code the PPL and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)
income on the customer’s record. It will be automatically included for
assessment when the PPL or DAP claim is actioned. See Coding income and
assets for Centrelink payments and services for more information.

Any PPL and DAP payments are taken into consideration as income for
customers claiming or renewing a Low Income Health Care Card.

Eligibility for other payments

Customers (and/or their partner) cannot receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
Part B at the same time as PPL.

One customer can receive PPL and DAP for the same child, however:

-   the PPL and DAP periods must be taken at different times, and
-   a maximum of 18 weeks can be paid to the one person

Note: usually only the secondary claimant can claim PPL and DAP as the
primary claimant is generally not eligible for DAP.

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks PPL and DAP combined for the
same child. For example; the primary claimant receives 18 weeks of PPL
and their partner receives 2 weeks of DAP.

A customer can receive PPL for one child and DAP for another child at
the same time.

Customers cannot receive JobKeeper Payment for the same period they
receive PPL.

The Resources page contains Q999 letter text, PPL eligibility scenarios,
links to Services Australia Website, and a user guide for comparison of
PPL eligibility for primary and secondary/tertiary claimants. It also
contains links to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query form, and the
Direct Referral to Service Support Officer (SSO) webform (via the
Quality and Technical Support homepage).

Related links

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Changing claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant

Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) income test

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Payment rates and thresholds

Paid Parental Leave scheme claims income test and previous financial
year income estimates

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
