
Reassessment of Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims 007-07030110

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines reassessments of lump sum FTB claims for periods
before 1 July 2009 that were lodged with the ATO.

Claims lodged with the ATO before 1 July 2009

Since 1 July 2009, customers are no longer able to claim FTB via the
ATO. Claims lodged with the ATO before 1 July 2009 may be reassessed if
details used to calculate the customer's FTB lump sum claim entitlement
are updated.

The reassessment may be triggered by information received electronically
from the ATO or by a Service Officer recording information received from
the customer. Customers may correct information used to assess the claim
or give extra information for the relevant financial year. However, time
restrictions will apply on whether full or partial arrears can be paid
as the result of a reassessment.

Updating details for the claim on the customer's record

This procedure explains how to check and update details for the claim on
the customer's record, including:

-   adding partner or child details
-   shared care or blended family percentage
-   income details
-   maintenance details
-   rejection of the claim due to a previous FTB claim for the same
    financial year

FTB customers may also wish to advise or update return to work details.

Qualification debt

If a qualification debt is identified, the debt must be manually raised
before claim details on the customer's record are updated.

All updates must be made on the applicable ATO FTB claim screens for the
relevant financial year, not the screens used for FTB instalment
customers for the current financial year.

Generally, support documents are not needed unless the change appears
unreasonable. If the customer wishes to include an additional child,
they will need to request this in writing. If it has not already been
provided to Services Australia, proof of the child's birth is required.
Changes to other details such as estimated income and rent details may
be provided by phone or []online if a claim has already been lodged.

Privacy

There are restrictions with regard to Privacy, Person Permitted to
Enquire (PPE) and implied authority in relation to confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information for FTB customers.

ATO FTB lump sum claim process prior to 1 July 2009

If an FTB lump sum claim was lodged with the ATO, they would complete an
interim tax return assessment and send the claim details, including
actual income, to Services Australia for a lump sum claim calculation.
The result, including any outstanding FTB or Child Care Benefit (CCB)
reconciliation debt (on or after July 2006) was returned to the ATO to
include in the final tax assessment.

If possible, the ATO advised the customer on the Notice of Assessment
(NOA) of the:

-   tax assessment
-   FTB lump sum claim entitlement, and
-   any amounts recovered from tax refunds

For the result to be included in the NOA, the agency needed to return
the calculation result within 48 hours. The ATO would advise if they had
been able to include the lump sum claim entitlement on the NA, and also
if they had been able to withhold any tax refund (including an ATO lump
sum claim amount) to offset outstanding FTB and/or CCB reconciliation
debts.

If the lump sum claim entitlement was not included in the customer's
NOA, the agency would offset any outstanding FTB and/or CCB
reconciliation debts prior to issuing any payment to the customer, and
advised the customer by letter.

Related links

Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Dates of effect for review of decision outcomes

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
