
Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments 007-07070000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines how a customer's adjusted taxable income (ATI)
can affect their rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy
(CCS), and their entitlement to Parental Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP) and Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP). There is no assets
test for these payments. [] A customer's potential rate can be
calculated using the online estimator options.

On this Page:

FTB/CCS rate assessment

For customers receiving FTB instalments, their annual income estimate is
used to work out their rate during the financial year. For CCS
customers, their annual income estimate is used to determine their
percentage of CCS entitlement. Actual entitlement for FTB/CCS is worked
out during the reconciliation process once their actual income is known.

FTB Part A

The maximum rate is payable if the customer or their partner receives
income support payments (excluding employment income nil rate periods
from 1 July 2018 and waiting periods) or if ATI is not above the Part A
lower income free area

If ATI is not above the Part A higher income free area, using the Method
1 calculation the customer's maximum rate reduces by 20 cents per dollar
above the lower income free area until the base rate is reached

If ATI is above the Part A higher income free area, the system
automatically applies the most favourable outcome for the customer by
calculating the FTB Part A entitlement using:

-   the Method 2 calculation the customer's base rate reduces by 30
    cents per dollar above the higher income free area amount until the
    rate is nil, and
-   an above higher income free area Method 1 calculation

FTB Part A supplement is subject to an income limit from the 2016-17
financial year. It was also subject to immunisation requirements for
financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18 and Healthy Start for School (HSFS)
requirements for financial years 2011-12 to 2017-18

For the 2015-16 and earlier years, income above the Part A higher income
free area (HIFA) may reduce the customer's Part A supplement
entitlement. For more information, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
and Part B supplements

The customer's rate may also be reduced to the base rate by the
Maintenance Action Test and the Maintenance Income Test

An FTB Part A rate reduction may be applied to the maximum rate payable
for a child if the child does not meet immunisation or Healthy Start for
School requirements

See Rates and thresholds for current FTB Part A income thresholds.

The References page contains links to historical income test
information.

FTB Part B

FTB Part B will not be paid throughout any period that PPL is being
received.

Single customers

-   For single customers receiving an income support payment, FTB Part B
    is not income tested
-   For single customers not receiving an income support payment, FTB
    Part B is only payable if the customer's adjusted taxable income
    does not exceed the Part B primary earner income limit

Partnered customers

From 1 July 2016, FTB Part B is not payable to a member of a couple if
their youngest child is aged 13 years or over, unless the customer is a
grandparent carer.

Primary earner income test

FTB Part B is only payable if the adjusted taxable income of the primary
earner does not exceed the Part B primary earner income limit, except
for periods when the customer or their partner receives an income
support payment

Secondary earner income test

This income test applies whether or not the customer or their partner
receives an income support payment.

If the income of the primary earner does not exceed the limit (or if the
customer or their partner receives an income support payment), the
maximum FTB Part B rate is reduced by 20 cents for each dollar of ATI of
the secondary earner above the Part B secondary earner income free area.
Customers may be quarantined from the secondary earner income test for a
period if they or their partner returned to work after caring for a
child during the relevant financial year.

Income above the Part B secondary earner income free area may also
reduce the customer's Part B supplement entitlement. For more
information, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements.

See Rates and thresholds for current FTB Part B income thresholds.

The References page contains links to historical income test
information.

CCS

CCS is income tested. A family's CCS % is based on their estimated ATI.
The Resources page of Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) has a table showing the different CCS percentages based on a
family’s combined income. The CCS percentage is then applied to the
maximum hourly rate cap.

SBP

Customers claiming SBP for a stillborn child delivered on or after 1
March 2014 may be eligible if:

-   the customer's (and their partner's) combined estimate of adjusted
    taxable income (ATI) for the 6 month period beginning on the day of
    delivery of the stillborn child does not exceed $64,311, or
-   the income estimate does not meet the above criterion, but they are
    eligible for FTB Part A at a rate greater than nil for another child
    within 52 weeks of the stillbirth

PPL and DAP

-   To be eligible for PPL, a customer must meet the PPL income test.
    Updates to income details are a change in circumstances for PPL
-   To be eligible for DAP, a customer must meet the DAP income test.
    Updates to income details are a change of circumstances for DAP

If a customer is determined to be eligible for PPL and they then claim
DAP, they meet the DAP income test.

If a customer is determined to be eligible for DAP and they then claim
PPL, they meet the PPL income test.

If the customer's ATI is above the limit for PPL their entitlement to
Newborn Supplement and Newborn Upfront Payment can be assessed as part
of their FTB claim.

See Rates and thresholds > PPL income limits

The References page contains links to historical income test
information.

Indexation

From 1 July 2019, the FTB Part A higher income free area (HIFA) will
increase from $94,316 to $98,988. This is a one-off increase (not an
indexation increase). The HIFA is paused up to and including the 2020-21
financial year.

From 1 July 2021, indexation of the following thresholds recommenced:

-   FTB Part B primary earner income limit
-   PPL income limit
-   DAP income limit

The Resources page contains links to current and historical versions of
'A guide to Australian Government payments' on the Services Australia
website.

Contents

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 2)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) dates of effect

Related links

Online estimator options

Payment rates and thresholds

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation for Family Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
