
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) change in circumstances and reviews 007-19070952

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about how to process a change in
circumstances and reviews for ACCS (Transition to Work).

Reassessments and changes in circumstances

Customers must let the Services Australia know as soon as possible if
their circumstances change as this may affect their eligibility or
entitlement to ACCS or Child Care Subsidy (CCS). Notifiable events
include:

-   an increase in family income estimate
-   a change to their course of study (extension or cessation)
-   a change in their study load
-   a change in the number of hours they’re participating in their ACCS
    (Transition to Work) activity and/or other CCS activity

If the change of circumstances entitles the customer to another type of
ACCS payment, entitlement to ACCS (Transition to Work) will cease. Also
the period for which they receive the other ACCS will not count towards
their TTW time limit for that activity. If the customer wants to
continue receiving ACCS (Transition to Work) when the other ACCS payment
expires, they will need to lodge a new application.

Extension of ACCS (Transition to Work) activity

Customers can advise prior to their current course end date if their
course has been extended and they have not already reached their
allowable activity time limit. In these cases, the customer is not
required to make a new application for ACCS (Transition to Work).

Subject to evidence of the new course dates, and proof of progress
(where appropriate), the existing ACCS (Transition to Work) information
can be updated to reflect the new course end date and their weeks of
entitlement reassessed.

For all other activities where the customer has not already reached
their allowable activity time limit, the evidence relevant to that
activity will need to be provided to confirm the activity will be
ongoing (for example a letter from employer where customer is
undertaking unpaid internship). whether the remaining activity time
limit has already been exhausted. If the customer has been granted the
full time limit for the activity, evidence of continuation of the
activity should not be requested. The customer will not attract further
ACCS (Transition to Work).

If the activity original end date has passed at the time of
notification, and customer is seeking a retrospective extension, the
customer needs to re-apply for ACCS (Transition to Work).There are no
backdating provisions for ACCS (Transition to Work).

Cessation of ACCS (Transition to Work) activity

If a customer has ceased a CCS activity for which they were receiving
ACCS (Transition to Work), their ACCS eligibility must also be reviewed
and cancelled, if appropriate.

Service Officers are to update the activity details then forward an
ACTDOC to the ACCS Processing Team to reassess ACCS (Transition to Work)
entitlement. See the Process page for further details.

If this was the only activity for which ACCS (Transition to Work) was
being paid, their eligibility will end from the end of the CCS fortnight
when the activity ended. If the customer has delayed notifying of this
change, this may result in an overpayment.

The customer will continue to be eligible for CCS, subject to meeting
eligibility requirements.

Change of ACCS (Transition to Work) activity type

Where a customer contacts to advise they are no longer participating in
the activity for which they are receiving ACCS (Transition to Work), but
are now undertaking a different activity, they are required to lodge a
new application.

Their current ACCS (Transition to Work) should be ended as per the
cessation of activity via ACTDOC notification to the ACCS Processing
Team. See the Process page for further details.

Change to study load

Customers undertaking study or training as their ACCS (Transition to
Work) are required to notify if they have a change in their study load
from part time to full time, or vice versa.

Service Officers are to update the customer’s CCS activity details with
the new hours of study or training per fortnight, then forward an ACTDOC
to the ACCS Processing Team to reassess ongoing entitlement to ACCS
(Transition to Work) entitlement. See the Process page for further
details.

Change in income estimate

One of the eligibility criteria for ACCS (Transition to Work) is to have
a combined family income less than the CCS lower Income threshold.

If a customer increases their income estimate above the CCS lower income
threshold, the customer’s ACCS (Transition to Work) will automatically
cancel effective on the last Sunday of the CCS fortnight when the change
is notified.

Reviews of ACCS (Transition to Work) activities

When granting ACCS (Transition to Work), a review date may be set to
assess progress of study. In these cases, customers will be required to
provide evidence that they are still undertaking their study activity
within 28 days of the review being initiated.

If the customer had included multiple activities in their original ACCS
(Transition to Work) application, and now wish to use a different
activity to continue receiving payment, they will be required to lodge a
new application and provide evidence they are still undertaking that
activity.

Pending system functionality, no review action is required at this time.

Roles and responsibilities

Service Officers are responsible for:

-   accepting evidence to support an extension to an existing ACCS
    (Transition to Work) activity, including progress of study
-   accepting evidence to support a change in study load
-   updating CCS Activity Test details. Where the activity relates to an
    ACCS (Transition to Work) activity, Service Officers will refer the
    record to the ACCS Processing Team for reassessment of ACCS
    (Transition to Work)

ACCS Processing Team are responsible for assessing all scheduled reviews
(including progress of study), and all ACCS (Transition to Work)
reassessments due to activity or study load changes to determine the
impact on eligibility and entitlement.

The Resources page contains the intranet links to the offline (paper)
claim for Child Care Subsidy and application for Additional Child Care
Subsidy (Transition to Work) and the Q888 letters requesting additional
information.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) approved
activities and time limits

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
applications

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
