
Baby Bonus (BBY) 007-02000000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Baby Bonus (BBY) for children
who were born or entrusted to care as part of the adoption process
before 1 March 2014.

Government intent

BBY was a payment to help families with the costs of caring for a
newborn child or adopted child aged under 16 years.

1 March 2014 changes

On 1 March 2014, BBY was replaced by:

-   Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) paid with
    Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for a newborn or adopted child
-   Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) for a stillborn child

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) can be claimed for a child instead of the above
payments.

BBY claims and assessments

In normal circumstances, BBY had to be claimed within 52 weeks of the
child's date of birth or entry into care. In limited circumstances, this
period could be extended in special circumstances.

Retrospective BBY assessments can no longer be completed on a customer's
record as all BBY assessment screens are view only.

For any claims or for reassessment as a result of a review, forward
details including the Customer Reference Number (CRN) to Families and
Child Care - Business Process Branch via email. See the Resources page
for a link to contact details.

Paying BBY entitlement

Service Officers are to refer to a Smart Centre Families and Child Care
Service Support Officer (SSO) for final checks and referral to a
National ICT Referral Officer (NIRO).

NIRO action:

Refer details to the ICT Service Desk by submitting mySupport Support
Request.

Then send an email request to Helpdesk.Payments, including:

-   Subject line - Referral for one-off lump sum BBY payment for
    {child's name}
-   Details - Service Desk number, Customer Reference Number (CRN),
    Amount $, Brief description of case, Approved by (for example,
    Authorised Review Officer (ARO), Administrative Appeals Tribunal
    (AAT)

Payments Level 2 Service eDesk

-   Complete the request to pay BBY within 2 business days
-   Check if the customer is income managed via the PIMI group
    (IS1DEDN0)
-   If the customer is not income managed, BBY is to be paid into the
    customer's discretionary account
-   Code payment on the PBRPAL Trigger Creat (PALTRIG) screen
-   Send email to NIRO to advise that payment has been made

Smart Centre Service Officer to advise customer

-   NIRO to refer claim back to the referring Service Officer
-   The BBY payment will display on the Payment Summary (PS) and Payment
    Details (PD) screens
-   Issue a manual letter (Q999) to advise the customer of the outcome
    of their BBY claim

The Resources page contains intranet links, contact details, rate
information and letter text.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
