
Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B 007-07070040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines how the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B
is calculated. FTB Part B is automatically included in an individual's
FTB entitlement if FTB Part B eligibility requirements are met.

FTB Part B

FTB Part B is not paid to Approved Care Organisations (ACO).

FTB Part B includes:

-   Standard Part B rate per family, based on the age of the youngest
    eligible FTB child and whether or not the customer is a grandparent
    carer. Shared care can affect the rate. The Part B supplement is
    payable after the end of the financial year
-   Energy Supplement Part B where the customer is grandfathered

Income test

Single customers

-   For single customers receiving an income support payment, FTB Part B
    is not income tested
-   For single customers not receiving an income support payment, FTB
    Part B is only payable if the customer's adjusted taxable income
    (ATI) does not exceed Part B primary earner income limit

Partnered customers

Except for periods when the customer or their partner receives an income
support payment, FTB Part B is only payable if the ATI of the primary
earner does not exceed the Part B primary earner income limit.

If the primary earner's income exceeds this amount, FTB Part B is not
payable.

If the income of the primary earner does not exceed the limit, the
maximum FTB Part B rate reduces if the lower earner's income is above
the Part B secondary earner income free area.

Return to work assistance

Return to work assistance is available for eligible FTB Part B customers
if they or their partner started or returned to work for the first time
after caring for a child. FTB Part B may be paid free of the secondary
earner income test for the quarantine period. Eligibility is assessed at
FTB reconciliation based on return to work details recorded.

Effect of Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

FTB Part B is not payable on days the customer or partner receive
Parental Leave Pay (PPL). This includes the PPL period and any connected
or not connected Flexible PPL days.

If the customer claims PPL in a pre-birth claim, they may ask to pause
the FTB Part B from the expected date of birth or entry into care, to
avoid the risk of an overpayment. FTB Part B is adjusted once proof of
birth is processed in the PPL post birth claim.

When the customer claims PPL as a post birth claim, FTB Part B will not
be payable for any days the customer or partner receive PPL. This
includes the PPL period and any connected and not-connected Flexible PPL
days.

FTB Part B is payable during the period where a customer (or their
partner) is receiving Dad and Partner Pay (DAP). If 1 member of a couple
is receiving PPL at the same time the other is receiving DAP, FTB Part B
will not be payable as the PPL precludes entitlement.

Customers should include PPL and DAP as part of their estimated taxable
income used for calculating family assistance rates, including FTB Part
B.

The References page contains a link to historical rates.

The Resources page contains examples of calculating the FTB Part B rate.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Online estimator options

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Payment rates and thresholds

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and the reconciliation
process

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
