
Residence assessment for customers claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-17103111

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Australian residence requirements for CCS and
how to record residence exemptions for a new claim.

Residence requirements

To meet residence requirements for CCS, the customer or their partner
must:

-   be an Australian resident, or
-   be a Special Category Visa (SCV) holder residing in Australia, or
-   a Commonwealth sponsored foreign student who is undertaking a course
    of study in Australia for which they receive financial assistance
    from the Commonwealth directly, or
-   hold a certain temporary visa that qualify customers for some
    payments (there is no need for the customer to claim or otherwise
    qualify for Special Benefit (SpB)), or
-   meet requirements for an exemption because they are suffering
    temporary hardship, or special circumstances exist

The child attracting child care must be an Australian resident, or SCV
holder residing in Australia or living with the customer, and not in
receipt of a precluding payment such as SpB.

Assessing residence requirements

In most cases, a Service Officer using information provided by the
customer and confirmed via the Immigration Datalink with the Department
of Home Affairs will determine the residence assessment.

Refer the following residence assessments to the Level 2 Policy Help
Desk who are responsible for determining eligibility:

-   A Commonwealth sponsored foreign student who is undertaking a course
    of study in Australia for which they receive financial assistance
    from the Commonwealth directly
-   A customer who is suffering temporary hardship, or special
    circumstances exist

Note: when considering a residence decision, all parts of the
requirement are to be satisfied. A customer cannot be considered
eligible if they meet only part of one of the above requirements. For
example, a Commonwealth sponsored foreign student studying in Australia
who is not receiving financial assistance from the Commonwealth will not
meet the specific requirements for qualification. However if the same
person is a temporary visa holder who is suffering temporary hardship,
requirements for a residence exemption may be met.

Claiming CCS while overseas

A customer can generally claim CCS and be granted while they are
temporarily outside Australia. However, as child care must be provided
in Australia, CCS will not be payable unless the service has submitted
attendance for an allowable or approved additional absence. The customer
will lose entitlement for CCS if they are overseas and:

are overseas for more than 6 weeks since their date of departure, and no
exceptional circumstances have been granted, or

are the holder of a:

-   temporary protection-type visa (subclasses 060, 070, 449, 786, ZB951
    (Criminal Justice Stay Visa (CJSV))
-   partner provisional type visa, subclasses 309, 820, or temporary
    protection-type visa, subclasses 785, 790, and is not overseas for
    an approved reason (for example, acute family crisis)

The non-CCS partner can be overseas indefinitely without affecting a
customer’s eligibility for CCS, even if CCS was granted to the customer
on the basis of the partner’s residence.

Immigration Datalink

The new claim process will attempt a datalink with the Department of
Home Affairs. If successful, the Immigration Datalink will automatically
record a customer and child's visa and movement information. Data from
the Immigration Datalink takes precedence over any conflicting
information provided by the customer. Once the Department of Home
Affairs record matches with Centrelink, the system records ongoing
updates to movement information and visa changes on the customer and/or
child's record.

The Service Officer assesses and records the decision about whether a
customer is or was residing in Australia. The Immigration Datalink does
not provide this information. See Assessing if a customer is an
Australian resident for more information.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Enquiry referral form.

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Common types of Australian visas

Temporary Protection, Humanitarian, Safe Haven and Return Pending Visas

Eligibility and new claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Recording legal residence status

Proof of Australian citizenship

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
