
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation screens 007-11070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the various screens used in
calculating reconciliation and lump sum claims for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB).

Reconciliation screens

The FTB reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation screens show
details of how a customer's FTB entitlement was calculated for a
financial year. Reconciliation applies to FTB paid as fortnightly
payments during the year.

For reconciliation, the screens show the difference between the amount
the customer was paid during the financial year based on their income
estimate and their actual entitlement based on their actual income and
circumstance changes throughout the financial year. If details have been
updated since reconciliation was finalised, the screens will show the
difference between the previous reconciliation result and the new
result.

FTB Part A and Part B supplements and Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS) for eligible customers are included in the reconciliation or lump
sum claim calculation once adequate income or not required to lodge
information is available.

Lump sum screens

For an FTB lump sum claim, the screens will show how the customer's FTB
entitlement was calculated. If details have been updated since the claim
was finalised, the screens will show the difference between the previous
calculation and the latest calculation.

The screens show any amounts used to offset debts.

The reconciliation or lump sum claim calculation results can be viewed
in:

-   Process Direct - manually via the FAO Reconciliation and Claim
    Summary (FRCS) screen
-   Customer First - from the FTB and Child Care Benefit (CCB)
    Reconciliation workflow from 1 July 2010 onwards

The Resources page contains a summary of FTB financial year assessment
screens, and examples of the information on the child support screens.

Related links

Customer enquires about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump
sum claim

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Maintenance Income Credit (MIC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
