-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines the arrangements and responsibilities for the
resolution of customer enquiries about child care information provided
by Approved Service Providers (ASP) under the Child Care Management
System (CCMS) for legacy child care payments CCB and CCR; it does not
apply to Child Care Subsidy (CCS) attendance.

The CCMS

The CCMS is a national child care computer system used to simplify the
administration of payments to ASPs. Child care information is lodged
fortnightly/weekly by ASPs via specialised software via the internet. It
is then transferred between Services Australia and the Department of
Education and used to calculate child care payment entitlements for
customers to ASPs, depending on customer choice.

Viewing attendance information

[] Customers who are registered for Online Services can view the
attendance information that is transferred using CCMS using the View
Child Care Details option. Staff can access this via the staff portal,
or on the customer's record.

Customer responsibility

In general, the customer is responsible for confirming details with the
child care service. Customers who disagree with the information provided
by their ASP via CCMS are required to contact their ASP to discuss in
the first instance.

Families and Parenting Service Officers do not have authorisation to
contact ASPs directly.

If the customer is unsuccessful in rectifying the issue with their
provider, a referral must be made to the CCMS Support Team.

CCMS Support Team

The CCMS Support Team is a Services Australia and Department of
Education initiative that deals with customer CCMS enquiries. The CCMS
Support Team will deal with issues regarding incorrect or missing CCMS
data after the customer has attempted to resolve the issue with the ASP.

The CCMS Support Team does not assist with:

-   general CCB reconciliation enquiries
-   calculating a customer's CCB percentage or entitlement
-   issues relating to granting or eligibility for CCB
-   CCS/ACCS attendance or CCS/ACCS related enquiries

Incorrect referrals to the CCMS Support Team will be returned to the
initiating Service Officer to follow-up.

Enquiries from ASPs

CCMS enquiries from ASPs are to be directed to the Department of
Education CCMS Helpdesk, who will then contact Services Australia if
necessary.

The Resources page contains a table outlining Services Australia and the
Department of Education responsibilities regarding CCMS enquiry
resolutions.

Related links

The Child Care Management System (CCMS)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
