-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the notification obligations for Double Orphan
Pension (DOP) customers and reviews of DOP entitlement.

DOP reassessments and reviews processing

These reassessments and reviews are completed by DOP and Bereavement
Smart Centre Processing staff.

Service Centre and Smart Centre staff can only process updates that do
not affect DOP rates, for example, change of bank details. A warning
appears when a customer's other entitlements are being reassessed. These
cases must be referred to the DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre
Processing Team for reassessment and review of the customer's rate.

The DOP and Bereavement Smart Centre Processing Team will periodically
review DOP payments when there is a change in the customer or child
circumstances. Formal reviews are conducted at least every two years.

Reviews are carried out when a change in DOP eligibility criteria is
notified or anticipated. DOP customers are obliged to notify the agency
of changes to their circumstances within 14 days. Reviews should also be
set if the case history requires a scheduled review.

A two yearly review is set at grant when the circumstances causing DOP
eligibility may change. If payment is to continue after a review,
another review must be set for two years' time, or sooner if
appropriate.

The Resources page contains links to DOP new claim or review QSS32
questions, and DOP new claim or view QSS41 questions for gathering
information from hospitals, corrective services etc.

Related links

Eligibility and coding claims for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) overseas absences

Calculating the additional Double Orphan Pension (DOP) component

Viewing child eligibility details on the Assessment Explanation (AX) and
Assessment Details (ASDT) screens

Cancellation and rejection codes for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
