
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments and adjustments 007-17103124

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about payments of and adjustments to
CCS.

Payment of CCS

In most circumstances CCS is generally paid directly to the provider and
applied as a fee reduction to customer's fees. The customer (or their
partner) needs to meet eligibility requirements for CCS for their
entitlement to be determined.

In some circumstances CCS arrears will be paid directly to the
customer's nominated bank account.

See the Resources page for examples on how CCS can be paid.

Payment of ACCS

In most circumstances, ACCS is paid directly to the childcare provider
as fee reduction on behalf of the customer. From 12 July 2021, where a
customer is eligible for any ACCS payments, all entitlement including
their CCS entitlement will be paid directly to the child care provider
when:

-   reconciliation has not occurred for the customer for the relevant
    CCS year, and the first or second deadline has not passed, and
-   the customer had a current complying written arrangement (CWA) for
    the period of payment, and
-   ACCS entitlement has been approved

If a customer's ACCS is granted for a backdated period and they have met
reconciliation conditions for that period, any arrears will be paid
directly to the customer.

See the Resources page for examples on how ACCS can be paid.

Attendance reports

Payment of CCS to the child care service is triggered by the lodgement
of an attendance report.

Payment lock for CCS arrears

In certain circumstances, ICT will place a payment lock on CCS arrears
payable to a customer to prevent payments being made to a customer's
nominated bank account. If a payment lock is:

-   in place, it will display on the Payment Destination Summary (PAS)
    screen in Process Direct
-   lifted, it will no longer display on the PAS screen

CCS arrears will have a payment lock applied if:

-   a change circumstances (CoC) reassessment for a customer results in
    arrears over $10,000 (before debt offsetting has occurred), or
-   a system update/issue requires ICT to place a payment lock on a
    customer's record to investigate arrears less than $10,000

The payment lock process allows the arrears payable to be checked before
being released to the customer's nominated bank account.

The Resources page contains scenarios for when payment is made to
providers or directly to customers.

Contents

Apportioning hours of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) -
Viewing Attendance reports

Related links

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Replacing direct credit, New Payments Platform (NPP) or Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS) payments at a customer's request

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
