
Recording ex-partner details 007-07030100

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone,or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines information on how to record ex-partner details
to assess entitlement for the period a customer was partnered. All
CCB/CCR references relate to financial years prior to 2018/2019.

Partnered period

For Family Tax Benefit (FTB),Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care
Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and FTB/CCB lump sum claims, where
ex-partner details are needed to assess the customer's entitlement for
the period they were partnered during the relevant financial year.

FTB and CCB

The annual income of an ex-partner is added to the customer's annual
income to work out the FTB/CCB rate only for the period(s) they were
partnered.

For separated customers, special reconciliation processing applies.

Customers who are separated as at 30 June of the relevant financial year
will not be disadvantaged due to actual taxable income for an ex-partner
period if their ex-partner has not lodged their income tax return or if
they lodge late.

CCS

Different reconciliation processing applies if the customer was not
partnered for the full CCS year.

Where a customer was partnered for part of the relevant year, only the
applicable proportion of the partner’s/ex-partner’s/deceased partner’s
income, based on the period they were partnered is included in the
actual income used. See Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Australian Tax Office lodgements

From 1 July 2009, customers are no longer able to claim Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) via the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). ATO FTB lump sum
claim assessments do not recognise separations coded on the MS screen.
Therefore, some claimants who separated after the lodgement year may be
included in the non-lodger process if the previous partner has not
lodged their tax return. If the customer advises they have separated,
code details on the ATO Non-lodger Partner Exemption (ATONLPE) screen.

The Resources page contains an example of recording previous changes in
relationship status for a customer.

Related links

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit
(CCB) reconciliation

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Reassessment of Australian Taxation Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) claims

Updating previous financial year incomes for Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Family and domestic violence

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
