-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the assessment of a customer as a principal carer
of a child in foster care. This applies for Parenting Payment (PP)
single or partnered, JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Youth Allowance (YA job
seeker) and Special Benefit (SpB). It applies to both formal and
informal foster care arrangements.

Dependent child

For a PP, JSP, YA job seeker or SpB customer to be assessed as the
principal carer of a foster child, the child must be their dependent
child.

General qualification rules apply:

-   The child is to be under 6 years of age for Parenting Payment
    Partnered (PPP), or under 8 years of age for Parenting Payment
    Single (PPS)
-   For JSP, YA and SpB customers, the child is to be a dependent child
    under 16 years
-   Only one person can be assessed as the principal carer of a child at
    any time

A foster carer is subject to the same qualification and payability
requirements that apply to all customers claiming PP, JSP, YA and SpB.

Formal registered and active foster carer

Formal foster care arrangements are mediated by state or territory
welfare authorities or approved agencies appointed by state/territory
governments. For example, Barnados, Anglicare, Life Without Barriers.

Customers seeking to be recognised as a foster carer must provide
evidence from the foster agency, or the state/territory appointed
agency. The evidence needs to show the legality of the change of care,
such as:

-   court orders
-   documentation from state welfare authorities stating the customer is
    a 'registered' foster carer
-   documentation from recognised foster care agencies stating the
    customer is a 'registered' foster carer

Job seekers may be granted an exemption from mutual obligation
requirements if they are registered or recognised as a foster carer.
Only formally registered foster carers can be granted this exemption.
The exemption can be granted for up to 12 months at a time. It can be
extended for another 12 months if evidence is provided. Closely examine
any documentation to make sure it states the customer is a 'formal',
'active' or 'registered' foster carer. Make sure there are enough
details of the arrangements and they can be validated.

Foster Care Allowance is exempt from the income test under social
security law, in the same way that family assistance payments are
exempt. It is not exempt child income and it can reduce the customer's
additional income free area if they are paid under the pension
transitional rules.

Formal foster carer - family or community members caring for a child

This care is also known as kinship care and allows individuals who are
not the parent of the child to be considered as a principal carer of the
child as they provide care under a formal state/ territory protections
case plan/care plan.

This type of care is different from formal registered and active foster
care as the person caring for the child would otherwise not be a foster
carer if the child were not a relative or community member.

The customer will need to provide verification of the plan from the
state/territory authority and this will be considered evidence of the
customer's kinship status (family or community).

An automatic exemption from their mutual obligation requirements should
be applied to the principal carers who provide kinship care on income
support. See Principal carer - family or community members caring for a
child (reason CNC) in Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation
requirements due to special circumstances.

An exemption may be granted for up to 12 months, but this depends on the
period the customer will be providing the care as indicated by the
documentation from the state/territory authority. The kinship carer may
ask for a review for a new period of exemption.

Principal carers who are exempt for this reason are not paid the higher
rate of JSP, YA or SpB as this exemption type does not attract that
rate.

Informal foster care - relative caring for a child

Informal foster care arrangements refer to private care arrangements,
including care in an extended family, care in inter-family units, care
within or arranged by community groups and care outside family or
community groups not arranged by a formal agency.

Customers seeking to be recognised as the carer for a child who is not
their natural child must provide evidence to prove the legality of the
change of care, such as confirmation from the child's natural/adoptive
parent or the previous carer.

Customers providing informal foster care are not eligible for the formal
foster carer exemptions from mutual obligation requirements. However,
certain exemption types can be granted on a case by case basis for up to
16 weeks at a time where the customer is providing informal foster care.
For the correct exemption coding for informal caring arrangements see
Principal carer -relative caring for a child (reason CNP) in Exempting a
job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to special
circumstances.

Child at risk

Care needs to be taken to identify cases where a young person may be
living with someone who is not a relative, or is at risk of harm. Cases
where the child is considered to be at risk are to be referred to a
social worker immediately.

Contacting carers

In most cases it is mandatory to attempt to contact the other carer.

Exceptions:

-   If care arrangements have changed because of an order by a state
    welfare authority, there may be sensitivities involved and Service
    Officer's should exercise their judgement on a case by case basis to
    determine if it is appropriate to make contact
-   Consider relevant privacy issues when sending a letter to the other
    carer. Service Offices must consider inhibiting the office name of
    the other carer and using the term 'other carer' instead of their
    name
-   If there is a family and domestic violence situation and there is
    concern if the other carer is contacted the customer or child will
    be placed at risk, the Service Officer must be satisfied based on
    the available evidence a decision can be made without contact

Note: where family and domestic violence concerns are identified, the
Family and Domestic Violence Support Model (FDVSM) must be followed.
Consideration must be given to the involvement of a social worker where
a child may be at risk of harm, or where a customer's circumstances
indicate vulnerability or risk to the customer's safety. See Social work
service referral.

Family assistance

Foster carers may also be entitled to family assistance including Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Customers not automatically entitled to a Health Care Card (HCC) through
their FTB may claim a HCC for their foster child. HCC for foster
children are not means tested.

State based foster carer allowance payments that are tax exempt are not
assessable income for family assistance purposes. This means these
payments do not need to be included in the family income estimate.

The Resources page contains a link to the Reference Updates 1998 which
explains the procedure for Family Allowance applications with changes in
care for 'At risk' under 16 year olds. It also has information about the
letters produced with the Child - Change in Care Arrangements script.

Related links

Principal carer of a dependent child

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Special Benefit (SpB)

Claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

New claim procedures for Special Benefit (SpB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Child enters customer's care/custody

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Parenting Payment Single (PPS) income and assets test

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

Referral

Social Work Service Referral

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
