
Reassessment of claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) due to Flexible Paid Parental Leave changes 007-20030331

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the transitional process for the reassessment of
claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) due to the Flexible PPL changes from
14 September 2020.

Flexible PPL changes

These changes affect PPL claims for children born or adopted on or after
1 July 2020.

From 14 September 2020, these customers will get their 18 week PPL
entitlement as:

-   a PPL period of up to 12 weeks (60 payable days), plus
-   30 Flexible PPL days

PPL claims lodged and processed before 14 September 2020 will be
retrospectively reassessed with an event date of 1 July 2020.

In most cases the retrospective reassessment will be automatic and will
not impact the customer’s payments.

PPL claims lodged before 12 September 2020

All PPL claims lodged before 12 September 2020 will not include the
customer’s Flexible PPL payment choice.

Claims processed before 14 September 2020 were:

-   assessed using the PPL rules for children born or adopted before 1
    July 2020 for a single PPL period of up to 18 weeks
-   retrospectively reassessed on 14 September and the last 30 days of
    the customers PPL period has been converted to Flexible PPL days

Claims processed on or after 14 September 2020 are:

-   assessed using the PPL rules for children that are born or adopted
    on or after 1 July 2020. In most cases this will provide the
    customer with a 12 week PPL period plus 30 connected Flexible PPL
    days
-   Note: some customers may need to be contacted to provide more
    information about how and when they want to receive their Flexible
    PPL days

Reassessment and conversion of claims from 14 September 2020

Claims that were assessed before 12 September 2020 were automatically
selected for reassessment if the PPL claim status was:

current (CUR)

assessed (ASS), or

cancelled (CAN) or rejected (REJ) due to:

-   return to work (reason: REJ-RWP or CAN-RTW)
-   transfer PPL period to another person (reason: REJ-TFR or CAN-TTP)
-   child left customer care (reason: REJ/CAN-PPC)
-   residency requirements not met since becoming primary carer
    (REJ/CAN-NRQ)

Current or assessed claims:

-   The last 30 days of their PPL period were converted to Flexible PPL
    days giving them a PPL period of up to 12 weeks plus 30 connected
    Flexible PPL days
-   The customer can change how and when they get their Flexible PPL
    days using self service or by contacting Services Australia

Rejected claims:

-   If it was found that the customer is eligible for Flexible PPL days,
    the overall PPL claim status will be granted
-   The PPL period will be rejected
-   30 Flexible PPL days will be available in their unclaimed Flexible
    PPL days balance. The customer will need to use self service or
    contact Services Australia to claim these days

Cancelled claims:

-   If the customer ceased to be eligible for PPL during the PPL period,
    the payment will be restored under the new PPL rules
-   Their PPL period will be converted to a 12 week PPL period. However
    it will not be payable for any days after their initial loss of
    eligibility
-   30 Flexible PPL days will be available in their unclaimed Flexible
    PPL days balance. The customer will need to use self service or
    Services Australia to claim these days.

All affected customers will be sent an updated PPL reassessment letter
which includes information about how they can claim their Flexible PPL
days. If their employer is delivering PPL, they will be sent information
if this results in a change to the amount of PPL they need to provide
their employee.

PPL claims lodged on or after 14 September 2020

The online and paper claim for PPL will include Flexible PPL information
from 14 September 2020.

If a customer lodges a paper claim using an old claim form, they will
need to be contacted to provide more information about how and when they
want to receive their Flexible PPL days.

The Resources page contains the Flexible PPL declaration script and
examples of recording transfer arrangements.

Related links

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work

Determining a customer’s Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant

Processing standalone and combined claims for family assistance and/or
Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Claiming and managing Flexible Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
