-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines an option customers have to apportion their CCS
hours between services if their child attends more than one child care
service.

Eligibility

Customers can choose how many hours of their CCS each service receives
if:

-   the child is eligible for CCS
-   the child is enrolled at 2 or more services at the same time, and
-   their eligible hours more than zero

How it works

This option lets customers allocate their hours to maximise the amount
of subsidy they receive.

They must apportion their total eligible hours between services in whole
hours.

It takes effect from the start of the next CCS fortnight.

See the Resources page for an example.

How customers choose this option

Customers need to contact the Families line if they want to apportion
their CCS hours. This option is not available online.

Staff do not currently have access to vary or end current apportion
details. See Table 3 on the Process page for details on how to refer
customer requests through Roxy Digital Assistant, if the customer:

has an existing apportionment on the Child Care Service Apportionment
(APP) screen, and

they want to:

-   End their current apportionment arrangement, or
-   Vary their apportionment

If customers do not choose to apportion hours

This is the default option and processing of CCS entitlement will occur
in the order that Attendance Reports are received from the child care
service. This happens until all the eligible hours of subsidy are used.

What customers need to know if they choose to apportion hours

Unused hours apportioned at a service are not 'transferrable' to another
child care service. They will not be 'reallocated’ when CCS is balanced
at the end of the year.

The arrangement will stop if there are changes to their eligible CCS
hours or enrolment.

To cancel or vary an arrangement, customers need to contact straight
away. It cannot be backdated.

A retrospective change in eligible CCS hours could result in arrears or
a debt. CCS for the period will be reassessed as if the customer did not
choose to apportion hours.

The Resources page contains an example, and links to the Centrelink
Calendar and mySupport.

Related links

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) payments and adjustments

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) -
Viewing attendance reports

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
