-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how total net investment losses are included as
part of a customer's adjusted taxable income (ATI) from 2009-10 for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), Stillborn Baby
Payment (SBP), Parental Leave Pay (PPL), and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).
Before 2009-10, ATI used for family assistance included a net rental
property loss only.

Total net investment losses

This is the amount (if any) by which the customer's deductions for the
income year that are attributable to:

-   financial investments exceed the customer's gross income for that
    year for those investments and
-   rental property exceed the customer's gross income for that year
    from rental property

If a person's taxable income is less than zero (a loss), it is counted
as nil before adding the Total Net Investment Loss.

A customer cannot offset income from financial investment against a loss
from a rental property and vice versa. However, if the customer has
multiple financial investments or multiple rental properties, they can
offset income from one investment or property against a loss from
another investment or property.

Resources contains examples.

If the customer receives a profit from a financial investment or rental
property, the amount should be included in their estimate of taxable
income.

Net financial investment loss

If a customer and/or their partner has a financial investment, they will
have a net financial investment loss if the expenses in relation to the
financial investment are greater than the income.

The amount of a net financial investment loss is as assessed by the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO). People with these types of losses are
able to reduce their taxable income assessed by the ATO by the amount of
the loss. For Family Assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme purposes,
these losses are added back to the person’s income as part of their
Adjusted Taxable Income.

The Total Net Investment Losses component is made up of the existing Net
Rental Property Losses component and losses from financial investments.

Financial investments considered

Financial investments that will be considered for family assistance
purposes may include investments in shares, term deposits or managed
funds. Consequently, examples of a 'net financial investment loss' may
include the following:

-   Borrowing costs (interest expenses, establishment fees, legal
    expenses, stamp duty) on a loan that is taken out to invest in
    shares where those borrowing costs exceed the return on the shares
-   Management or fund fees, including ongoing trailing commissions
    associated with a share investment or managed fund investment where
    those fees exceed any return on the investment
-   Travel expenses or the costs of an industry publication concerning
    investment or investment strategies. Individuals may claim the costs
    of travel to meetings with a share broker or the costs of an
    industry publication relied on in managing a share portfolio as an
    allowable deduction provided the necessary connection with the
    earning of income from the investments is established. Where such
    expenses exceed the investment return, then it is likely the
    individual will be deemed to have incurred a 'net financial
    investment loss'

Net rental property loss

If a customer and/or their partner has a rental property, they will have
a net rental property loss if their expenses in relation to the property
are greater than the income for the property.

Partnerships

The individual's share of the partnership net investment loss that is
included in the personal income tax return is included in the customer's
adjusted taxable income. Net investment loss made by a trust is not
included in the customer's adjusted taxable income.

FTB/CCS reconciliation

If the customer is required to lodge a tax return, the ATO will advise
the net investment loss amount as part of their actual adjusted taxable
income which is used to reconcile their FTB/CCS after the end of the
financial year.

Net Rental Property Loss (NRPL) before 2009-10

For 2008-09 and earlier financial years, NRPLs were included in ATI used
for family assistance. This did not include losses from financial
investments.

Customers only had an NRPL if they received income from real estate and
their expenses in relation to the property were greater than the income.

The NRPL amount is assessed by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO).
People with NRPLs can reduce their taxable income assessed by the ATO by
the amount of the loss. For family assistance, the amount of the loss is
recorded separately and is added to their taxable income to work out
their ATI.

If a person's taxable income was less than zero (a loss), it was counted
as nil before adding the NRPL.

If a customer had more than one rental property, the losses and/or
profits needed to be added together to work out the overall loss or
profit.

If the customer received a profit from the property, the amount should
be included in their estimate of taxable income.

If the NRPL was included in the income tax return for:

-   a partnership or trust, it was not included in the customer's ATI
-   an individual (in relation to a partnership), it was included in the
    customer's ATI

Related links

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Recording or updating income estimates for previous years

Paid Parental Leave income test and previous financial year income
estimate

Australian Tax Office (ATO) lump sum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim
screens

Reportable superannuation contributions from 2009-10 for family
assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Processing claims for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
