
Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to shared care 007-11090030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to work out why a Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation overpayment occurred, once it has been identified that
the overpayment was partly or entirely due to a shared care assessment.

On this Page:

FTB overpayments due to shared care

An overpayment could occur if there was a period of time during the
relevant financial year where the care of a child was shared but 100%
FTB was paid for that child. It could also happen if the shared care
percentage changed and the previous percentage was paid for a period of
time before the new percentage was assessed.

Part A and Part B supplements and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)
are included in the reconciliation calculation for eligible customers
once adequate income/ not required to lodge details are available. FTB
top-ups, including supplement and SIFS entitlement, are automatically
used for debt offsetting.

FTB reconciliation debts for previous financial years raised due to the incorrect deletion of care information

A system problem, PM69793/PM72350, resulted in shared care percentages
being incorrectly applied for some FTB customers, causing
re-reconciliation. In affected cases, the re-reconciliation result
incorrectly reflects the customer has less than 10 percent care of one
or more children.

System enhancements were implemented in March 2016 to ensure no new
instances of the issue occurs, however existing impacted records need to
be reassessed for the system to reapply the correct shared care details.

Where a customer queries a previous year re-reconciliation debt, Service
Officers will need to identify if the record has been impacted by this
problem. Refer to the Resources page for more information about this
problem, including how to identify it and resolution.

The Resources page contains a link to the mySupport and information
regarding 2 shared care percentage system issues - P24845 and
PM69793/PM72350.

Related links

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
estimated income

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child support issues

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
blended family percentage

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child income

Explaining Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation overpayments due to
child leaving care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
