
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines reassessment of a customer's Child Care Benefit
(CCB) lump sum claim entitlement. This is an automatic process when
information used to assess the claim is updated.

Automatic recalculation

Recalculation of a customer's CCB lump sum claim entitlement occurs
automatically if:

actual income details are transferred electronically from the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO) at any time

-   The ATO is legally required to end the link with Centrelink after 3
    years (for example 1 July 2009 for the 2005-06 financial year)
    unless the customer has an outstanding Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
    non-lodger debt in which case the link stays open until the debt is
    finalised. If the link has closed, the customer will need to provide
    proof of their actual income

child immunisation details are received electronically through the link
with the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR) if the customer has
given permission to use their Medicare number details

child care attendance details are received at any time from the Approved
Service Provider (ASP)

the customer's record is updated by a Service Officer after the customer
advises new information

Recalculation of CCB lump sum

Recalculation of the lump sum claim will only be triggered if the
customer has claimed more than zero rate.

The recalculation is a similar process to the initial CCB lump sum claim
calculation. The result of the recalculation is compared to the most
recent lump sum calculation for the relevant financial year. The result
can be a top up, an overpayment or nil adjustment.

Child Care Rebate (CCR)

A customer's eligibility for the Child Care Rebate (CCR) will be
recalculated when their CCB lump sum entitlement is recalculated for the
same financial year. This may result in an extra CCR payment, nil
adjustment or calculation of a CCR overpayment.

The automatic debt offsetting process means that CCB/CCR entitlement
will be used to offset an outstanding CCB reconciliation debt, or a CCR
debt.

Related links

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation and lump sum claim calculation
screens

Child Care Benefit (CCB) overpayments arising from reconciliation and
lump sum claims

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Customer initiated review of decision

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
