-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer's entitlement for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) is determined after establishing their eligibility.

Entitlement for CCS

While a customer may have been assessed as eligible for CCS, they will
not be entitled to receive CCS as reduced fees unless they:

-   meet reconciliation conditions, and
-   have confirmed their child’s enrolment details provided by the child
    care service.

The child care service must lodge a session/attendance report before
payments can be made.

Calculating the rate of CCS

The rate of CCS a customer is entitled to receive is determined by a
number of factors:

-   The combined family income
-   If the family have more than one child aged 5 or under
-   The level of activity of the customer (and partner, if they have
    one) and any exemptions in place
-   The age of the child and the type of child care service they attend

CCS reduces the gap fee, also known as the out of pocket cost a family
pays to their child care service. The CCS percentage applies to either
the hourly fee or the relevant hourly rate cap, whichever is lower. Out
of pocket costs will be different for each family depending on their
child care fees and CCS entitlement.

Family income and CCS percentage

CCS is income tested, families need to provide an income estimate each
financial year. A family's CCS % is based on their estimated Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI). After the end of the financial year, the family's
CCS rate is balanced (reconciled) using their actual (ATI).

The Resources page has a table showing the different CCS percentages
based on a family’s combined income. For more information, see Combined
family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS). The CCS percentage is
applied to the maximum hourly rate cap.

Standard CCS rates

From 10 July 2023, there are changes to the standard CCS rates known as
Cheaper Child Care. The changes increased the amount of child care
subsidy for most families.

Families with income close to the CCS Higher Income Threshold (HIT)
should be encouraged to lodge a claim for CCS to ensure they don’t miss
out on entitlement when actual income is known at reconciliation.

See the Resources page for the income test for Standard CCS.

Families with more than one child aged 5 or under - Higher CCS

Families with more than one child aged 5 or under may get higher CCS
(Multiple Child Subsidy) for one or more of their children.

This means customers will now be eligible for the higher subsidy if all
of these apply:

-   they are eligible for CCS
-   their family’s combined income is equal to or below the Higher CCS
    Higher Income Threshold (HCCS HIT)
-   the family has more than one CCS eligible child aged 5, or under

The ‘standard rate child’ is usually the eldest CCS eligible child aged
5 or under. This child will get the standard CCS rate.

The ‘higher rate child’ is any CCS eligible child in the family younger
than the standard rate child. This child will get the Higher CCS rate
(Multiple Child Subsidy)

Note:

-   Sessions of In Home Care do not attract a higher subsidy for younger
    children. This is because In Home Care is subsidised on a family
    rather than per child basis. However, children aged 5 or under in In
    Home Care are included in the family unit when determining access to
    the higher Child Care Subsidy rate for other service types
-   If a customer has multiple children with the same date of birth
    (e.g. multiple births such as twins or triplets), the system will
    determine the Standard Rate Child as the child with the lowest
    number CRN. A customer can ask to change which child is determined
    as the Standard Rate Child for multiple birth children. For more
    information see. Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy
    (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)
-   The system will use all children in the family, when calculating the
    standard rate child and any Higher rate child/ren. This includes all
    CCS eligible children aged 5 or under in the care of the customer
    and partner (if they have one)

Higher CCS (Multiple Child Subsidy)

CCS rates for higher rate children:

-   For the period 7 March 2022 - 9 July 2023, Higher rate children CCS
    rates were 30% on top of a child’s standard CCS rate up to a maximum
    of 95%
-   From 10 July 2023 onwards, CCS rates for standard and higher rate
    child/ren are calculated using two separate income tests. As a
    result, any income estimate updates will impact standard and higher
    rate child/ren differently. CCS for higher rate children is up to a
    maximum of 95%

See the Resources page for the income test for Higher Rate Child/ren.

CCS Activity test

The number of subsidised hours of child care a family can access in a
fortnight will be determined by an activity test. The customer (and
their partner) need to:

-   be participating in recognised activity/ies for a specific amount of
    hours, or
-   have an exemption

The Resources page has a table outlining the number of subsidised hours
a customer may be entitled to access based on their (and their
partner’s) level of activity. For more information, see Activity Test
for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

The age of the child and the type of child care service they attend The
type of child care service used will determine the maximum hourly rate
cap to which a customer’s CCS percentage will be applied.

Types of child care include:

-   centre based day care service
-   family day care service
-   outside school hours care service
-   in home care

When a child attends centre-based day care or outside school hours care,
the hourly rate cap used will depend on whether the child/ren attends
school.

In some cases the child’s school level will mean a different hourly rate
cap is used.

If the child is:

-   school aged and in centre-based care the outside school hours care
    rate cap will be used
-   below school age and in outside school hours care the centre-based
    day care rate cap will be used

A school aged child is a child who is:

-   in school, including being home schooled, or
-   6 or older

Withholding of CCS

Most customers will have a set rate of 5% of their CCS payments withheld
until reconciliation. A customer can change their withholding rate.

Absences

CCS and ACCS is payable up to a cap of 42 absences per financial year.
Additional absences are payable if appropriate evidence is provided to
the child care service.

CCS fortnights and CCS years

Throughout a CCS year, a customer’s entitlement to CCS applies for a two
week period known as a CCS fortnight.

A CCS fortnight is a period of 2 weeks beginning on Monday 2 July 2018,
and every second Monday after that. A CCS year is not the same as a
financial year. This is because CCS is assessed in fortnightly periods
which:

-   start on a CCS Monday, and
-   end on a Sunday

The exception being where the customer loses eligibility to payment
within the fortnight and entitlement ceases from date of event. The CCS
year ends on the Sunday of the fortnight containing 30 June.

See Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for more information
around CCS fortnights and date of effect rules.

See the Resources page for calendars to identify the start and end of a
CCS fortnight throughout the year.

The Resources page contains tables showing the CCS percentages
applicable based on family income for both standard and higher rates,
scenarios for higher CSS rates, and the eligible hours of subsidised
care based on the number of hours engaged in a recognised activity.
There are also links to the Centrelink Calendars, which show the start
of each CSS fortnight, and a link to the Department of Education
website.

Contents

Absences for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy

Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

In Home Care (IHC) for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Explaining the Child Care Subsidy (CCS) rate and entitlement

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
