
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) eligibility and applications 007-17103158

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility for Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship) and how customers can apply for
this subsidy.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) Temporary Financial Hardship
provides short-term support to families experiencing significant
financial stress due to circumstances beyond their control. This
additional financial assistance will help ensure continuity of care for
the child and support families when they need it most.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) may also apply on the Secretary's
own initiative, such as in the case of a natural disaster.

Eligibility for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

To be eligible for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship), customers must:

-   be eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS), and
-   be assessed as experiencing temporary financial hardship for an
    event that occurred no more than six months before the application
    is made, and
-   have had a substantial reduction in their ability to pay child care
    fees as a direct result of the temporary financial hardship

Supporting vulnerable customers

Some of the prescribed ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) events may be
of a sensitive nature, death of a partner or child, or domestic violence
situation. If staff become aware of a particular vulnerability for a
customer, a referral to the social work service may be appropriate.

Applying for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Customers can apply for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship):

-   [] at the time of completing an online or staff assisted claim for
    Child Care Subsidy (CCS).The ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
    application is imbedded within the CCS claim. This means the ACCS
    (Temporary Financial Hardship) question set will present if the
    customer indicates they are experiencing financial hardship
-   (if already on CCS) at any time via a change of circumstances, using
    their [] online account or contacting Services Australia

In limited circumstances, an offline (paper) FA086 Application for
Additional Child Care Subsidy (Temporary Financial Hardship) form can be
issued. See the Resources page for a link to the FA086.

Note: pending publication of this form, Service Officers are to assist
customers complete an online application.

When a customer with multiple children makes an application for ACCS
(Temporary Financial Hardship), they are required to indicate which
children they wish the subsidy to be applied.

Events which can result in Temporary Financial Hardship

The events which lead to a customer experiencing temporary financial
hardship are generally outside of their control and result in a
substantial reduction in the customer's ability to pay child care fees.

In all circumstances, the customer must be experiencing financial stress
due to a Temporary Financial Hardship event that occurred within six
months of making an application.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) evidence requirements

To support an application for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
customers must:

-   provide evidence that the event(s) occurred less than six months
    prior to the application, and
-   demonstrate a causal link between the event(s) and their financial
    hardship

The evidence provided must clearly show that the customer has
experienced a substantial reduction in their ability to pay child care
fees as a result of the Temporary Financial Hardship event.

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) reduced evidence requirements

In some circumstances, the Australian government may approve periods of
reduced evidence requirements for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
applications. During these periods staff do not need to request further
evidence of how these events have reduced a customer's ability to pay
child care fees.

Where a natural disaster is declared, reduced evidence requirements may
also be approved in some circumstances. Where the customer or their
partner receive an applicable payment for an approved event, further
evidence to demonstrate financial hardship is not required.

The Resources page contains a list of approved events and payments.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) fee relief

The Government announced no session fees were charged to families
between 6 April 2020 and 12 July 2020.

During this period, families were not charged child care fees, unless
there was a fee not included in their standard child care fee, for
example a:

-   service charge, or
-   administration fee

ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) determinations were not necessary
during this period as Child Care Providers received Business Continuity
Payments in lieu of CCS.

All ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) claims lodged with a start date:

-   before 5 April 2020 and an outcome of grant, had the assessment end
    dated from 5 April 2020, regardless of the start date
-   between 6 April 2020 and 12 July 2020 had the start date changed to
    13 July 2020

Note: Victorian families that were directed to stay at home during
period 13 July 2020 to 8 November 2020 could request the start date to
be changed. Policy stipulated that an ACCS (Temporary Financial
Hardship) start date cannot be amended without a new claim. However the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment provided approval for an
exception to this rule for Victorian families for this period only.

The Resources page contains links to the FA086 form and information
about acceptable forms of evidence to support a customer's claim for
ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship).

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial
Hardship) applications

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Upload documents service

Attaching electronic documents to a customer's record using Document
Tools in Customer First

Multilingual Phone Service (MPS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
