
Annual income reviews for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers and their partners who are not required to lodge a tax return 007-07060010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Electronic Messaging User Guidelines

The following Electronic Messaging Rules and Boundaries should be
considered prior to use, and implemented where appropriate:

Electronic messaging must not be used in known or suspected cases of
Family and Domestic Violence

Electronic messages must not contain the following:

-   Personal, confidential or protected information
-   Links or texts that can be converted to or interpreted as a link
-   Be more than 160 characters in length unless there is a demonstrated
    business case. In this instance, messages can be up to 306
    characters

Please note that use of free text should be limited to a phone number to
contact the agency, not as a means of conveying a whole message.

Electronic messages must contain the following;

-   Agency identification, such as a reference to the Australian
    Government agency Services Australia
-   SMS must include the text: Do not reply by SMS
-   Emails must include the text: Please DO NOT REPLY by email as this
    mailbox is not monitored

Discussion points

Customer : Part of the process of the agency accepting your declaration
is that we may review data held by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
such as payment summaries lodged by employers against the information
you have provided to us.

You have been selected for a review as there was a difference between
your income you provided and information provided to us by the
Australian Taxation Office. We will review the information provided by
the Australian Taxation Office to see if there are any changes or
updates that are required and I will then advise you if there is
anything else you need to do.

If you are unsure if you should lodge, you should contact the ATO.
Services Australia is only responsible for accepting the non-lodger
declaration, not to provide tax advice. The customer should be advised
to visit the ATO website for more information.

Staff: We compare information provided by the ATO and cross check
against the non-lodgement declaration and income declared. Where they
are discrepancies, contact is made with the customer to discuss.

Contact details

Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

ATO Liaison Team (TAP)

Families Income Review Team

Workload Management Team

Services Australia Website

For enquiries about Family Payments, see Phone us, Centrelink phone
numbers, and scroll down to 'Families'

mySupport

mySupport - Search for How to send emails from a shared mailbox in the
search field for information about how to send emails from a Shared
(Positional) Mailbox.

IVR Operational Hours message

'Welcome to Services Australia. This line is available Monday to Friday
from 8:30 am to 4:30 pm Australian Eastern Daylight Savings Time. Please
call back during business hours. Thank you for calling. Goodbye.'

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
