
Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) 007-18041200

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines details about transferring a Parenting Payment
Single (PPS) customer to Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP). The
objective of Parenting Payment (PP) is to provide income support to
principal carers of young children and opportunities for financial
independence.

PPS customer changes relationship status

When a current PPS customer becomes partnered, they can be transferred
to PPP (if eligible). To initiate this transfer process, or Benefit
Transfer (BTR), a customer should submit a 'claim' for Parenting Payment
online or an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) should be run to collect
information from the customer. Either the PP customer or their new
partner may also provide certain forms in some cases. If a customer has
provided a Partner Details (MOD P) form to advise they have become
partnered, they should not be told to claim PP online. This is because
they are already a PP customer and have met notification requirements to
advise of a change in circumstances.

Do not update the Marital Status (MS) screen outside the BTR activity
(for example, upon receipt of a Partner details (MOD P) form submitted
by a PPS customer or their new partner) unless the customer is no longer
the principal carer of a child under 6. Linking records outside a BTR
activity will cancel PPS and prevent a benefit transfer to the partnered
rate of PP).

The Resources page contains examples of date of effect (DOE)
determinations.

Remote PPS customers

PPS customers advising of a change in relationship status (single to
partnered) who are unable to lodge a PP claim online and ACC is not
available, do not have a phone and are unable to attend a service
centre, can complete a Partner Details (MOD P) form for assessment of
benefit transfer.

The Resources page contains links to the form.

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

When a current or suspended PPS customer submits an online claim or ACC
is run to initiate a transfer to the partnered rate of PP, they will not
be required to provide documents before submitting their claim (as
required for all new PP customers). This is because it is not a new
claim scenario but a change of circumstance and assessment of
eligibility to transfer to the partnered rate of PP. See Circumstance
Change Monitor (CCM).

Qualification

To qualify for a transfer to the partnered rate of PP a person must:

-   be the principal carer of a PP child aged under 6
-   meet residence requirements. If PPS customer was granted PPS under a
    lone parent residency exemption and they are now partnered, they may
    no longer qualify for Parenting Payment

Customers who are not eligible for PP due to the age of their youngest
child or if they are not the principal carer of the child/ren, will need
to test their eligibility for another income support payment such as
JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

Note: grandparents or non-parent carers of children living in the same
house as a parent may not be eligible for PP. Unless exceptional
circumstances exist, a grandparent or non-parent carer will not be
considered the primary carer of a child if they reside in the same home
as the biological parent. A principal carer determination must be made.
See Help for grandparents caring for children and the Resources page for
a link to the Services Australia website for payments and services to
help non-parent carers.

Employment income nil rate period

When a PPS customer transfers to PPP and their or their partner's income
reduces their PP to a zero rate, an employment income nil rate period
can continue for 6 fortnights. This result can only be achieved if the
PP transfer is undertaken within a benefit transfer activity.

If basic qualification is still met and the customer's income reduces
during the 6 fortnights following the zero payment, they may recommence
receiving a more than zero payment without having to reclaim.

However, if the customer's income remains over the income threshold for
PPP after the 6 fortnights, their payment will cancel.

Note: this provision does not apply to PPP customers of Age Pension age.

Section 24

If it appears that a PP customer may be placed in unfair hardship by
being assessed as partnered, then payment under Section 24 can be
considered.

If a customer was already in receipt of PPS due to a Section 24
assessment, and a Section 24 review determined the customer is no longer
eligible to be treated as single under these provisions. The customer
will need to have their eligibility for PPP tested. If eligible, they
will need to be transferred to PPP. If the customer is not eligible for
PPP their PPS will cancel once the linking of partner is completed. See
the Process page.

Participation

PPS customers whose youngest child is 6 years or over are subject to
mutual obligation requirements. PPP customers are generally not subject
to mutual obligation requirements, they may volunteer to look for work,
access employment assistance or undertake activities that will improve
their chances of finding suitable work. They may be eligible for, or
required to participate in ParentsNext.

ParentsNext

Parents participating in ParentsNext may be subject to certain
participation requirements to retain eligibility for PP.

Targeted Compliance Framework

A compulsory ParentsNext participant who does not attend an appointment
with their ParentsNext provider or comply with their participation
requirements may be subject to compliance action under the Targeted
Compliance Framework (TCF). If a current PPS customer transfers to PPP
during a penalty period imposed under the TCF, the remaining penalty
period will generally apply when the partnered rate. Any enquiries
relating to TCF for ParentsNext customers should be directed to the
Level 2 Compliance and Participation Helpdesk. The Resources page
contains a link to the Level 2 Compliance and Participation Helpdesk.

Family assistance

Customers may also be eligible to claim family assistance for children
in their care. Customers caring for a child from a previous relationship
may need to take action to obtain child support to receive more than
base rate Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for a child. Customers may
claim Child Care Subsidy (CCS) to help with the costs of child care if
they are eligible. Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) Transition to
Work provides additional help with the cost of child care while the
customer is undertaking an approved activity.

If the customer is already in receipt of family assistance, they may
need to update their family income estimate as a result of the new
relationship. For more information see Family assistance customer
becomes partnered.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information on Parenting Payment, forms, user guides, Payment and
Service Finder, information about a shared care system problem (P24845)
and tables for determining the date of effect (DOE) for the transfer
from PPS to PPP, a DOE manual workaround and workflows.

Related links

Claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Confirming a customer's identity

Family and domestic violence

Family assistance customer becomes partnered

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

ParentsNext appointments and processing

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Principal carer of a dependent child

Qualification for payment of Rent Assistance (RA)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Start day for Parenting Payment (PP)

Transfers from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Treatment of a partnered person as single under Section 24 new
determinations

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
