-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the cancellation process for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS). CCS payments may be
cancelled automatically by the system or manually by a Service Officer.

Automatic cancellation

Automatic cancellation of CCS occurs following reassessments where no
continuing entitlement exists, for example, when a child leaves care. If
a change in circumstance is recorded and the customer is no longer
entitled to CCS, payment will be automatically cancelled from the date
of effect of the change in circumstance.

Cancellation due to no session of care for at least 26 weeks

From 11 July 2022, if a child has not used child care (including
allowable absences) at least once in the previous 26 week period, they
will not be eligible for CCS. This is known as the ’26 week rule’.

Where a child’s CCS is cancelled due to the 26 week rule, the
cancellation will apply from the CCS Monday following the 26th week. In
some circumstances, it may be more than 26 weeks. The cancellation
cannot be retrospectively applied before 11 July 2022. Where a child is
the last CCS eligible child of a customer, the customers CCS will
cancel.

If a family is entitled to Higher CCS for one or more of their children
and one of their children is cancelled because of the 26 week rule:

-   their CCS entitlement will be reassessed, and
-   any higher CCS rate changes will apply from the next CCS Monday

Customers will need to lodge a new claim for CCS if their child starts
attending child care again.

See the Resources page for:

-   examples of the 26 week rule, and
-   how the 26 weeks are calculated

Manual cancellation

Manual cancellation occurs when a Service Officer makes a decision to
cancel a customer's payment based on the applicable section of Family
Assistance Law and codes the cancellation.

Customer requests cancellation

CCS customers may ask to cancel their CCS and/or ACCS payments, at the
child level or customer level. Tell them:

-   once cancelled, CCS/ACCS cannot be restored and a new claim must be
    made
-   a lump sum claim of CCS is not available
-   if the customer is requesting a cancellation as they are concerned
    about an overpayment, they may want to increase their withholdings
-   cancelling CCS for the eldest child aged 5 or under may impact their
    CCS % for any younger children

The process for ceasing ACCS is included in the relevant ACCS
Operational Blueprint file. Links are included in the Related links
section below.

Reassessment after an incorrect cancellation

Where it is determined that CCS was incorrectly cancelled, it will not
automatically reassess after the appropriate corrective action has been
taken. For example if a:

-   child is incorrectly coded out of the customer’s care, or
-   primary school aged child is incorrectly recorded as attending
    secondary school

A Social Online Application (SOA) is required to reassess the customer’s
entitlement from the appropriate date. See Processing Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) claims for indexing a SOA and assessing the claim.

Note: the customer will be required to lodge a new claim if:

-   the cancellation was correct based on the information provided, and
-   the customer had a change of circumstances to regain eligibility,
    e.g. child left the customer’s care and re-enters the customer’s
    care

The Resources page contains cancellation scenarios.

Contents

Cancellation, rejection and not effective codes for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Related links

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) change in
circumstances and reviews

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial
Hardship) applications

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)
applications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
