
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation 007-19022134

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when CCS reconciliation results in a
negative adjustment. This is generally an automatic procedure. From 4
August 2021, debt pause arrangements were introduced for customers in
locked down Local Government Areas (LGAs) to help ease financial
pressure during the COVID-19 pandemic. From 10 January 2022, debt
raising will gradually recommence including CCS reconciliation and
re-reconciliation, however debt recovery remains paused until 1 July
2022.

Customers subject to the CCS reconciliation process

CCS reconciliation determines a customer’s correct CCS entitlement for
the relevant income year (i.e. the year they received CCS payments). CCS
reconciliation can commence from the 29th day after the end of the CCS
year. Reconciliation will only occur for a customer once all the
reconciliation requirements are met.

Customers cannot claim CCS as a lump sum.

CCS is paid directly to the child care provider on behalf of the
customer in the form of reduced fees. The rate of CCS is based on an
estimate of family income provided by the customer.

Each CCS customer (including partner and ex-partners relevant to the
year being reconciled) must confirm their family income with Services
Australia by 30 June of the year after the subsidy was paid. They can
confirm their income either by:

-   lodging their Income Tax Return/s (ITR) with the Australian Taxation
    Office (ATO), or
-   advising the agency that they are Not Required To Lodge (NRTL) an
    ITR and, advise of their actual income

There is no bulk reconciliation process for CCS customers. All customers
are required to meet the reconciliation requirements in order for
reconciliation to occur.

Working out the CCS entitlement for a relevant financial year

At reconciliation, the customer's CCS entitlement for a relevant year is
worked out by comparing:

-   the amount of CCS a person received based on their estimate of their
    family's income, to
-   the amount of CCS a person is actually entitled to, based on their
    family’s actual income and child care attendance for the relevant
    CCS year

ACCS qualification debts (that occurred throughout the 2018-19 financial
year) will be included in the reconciliation result. However, ACCS
periods are exempt from reconciliation i.e. income changes will not
affect these periods

The result can be a top-up, overpayment or nil adjustment. If an
overpayment is calculated, the amount is:

-   raised as a debt in the Debt Application in Process Direct, and
-   displays in the Debt Management and Information System (DMIS) on the
    OPDL screen

Where Services Australia applies a pause to debt raising, do not
complete debts for customers unless it is necessary for one of the
following reasons:

-   The customer asks the Service Officer to raise the debt immediately
-   To enable another activity or update to complete, for example a new
    claim activity, or to make sure the customer’s ongoing rate is
    correct, or
-   The debt pause period has expired

The customer is sent a reconciliation outcome letter advising the debt
amount. They can also view their reconciliation outcome via Online
Services or the Express Plus app. To view and/or take action on a CCS
debt raised in Process Direct see CCS debts.

Note: CCS reconciliation will take into account additional changes
(qualification changes) made throughout the year that impact customer
eligibility (such as retrospective changes to the Activity Test). These
changes will be included in the reconciliation outcome and could impact
the final assessment.

Retrospective updates to reconciled information

If information used in a previous CCS reconciliation is corrected,
updated or removed, the customer's CCS reconciliation will automatically
be recalculated by comparing the previous result to the new information.
This is called re-reconciliation. The result of a re-reconciliation can
also be a:

-   top-up,
-   overpayment,
-   or nil adjustment

Differences between FTB and CCS debts

There are some important differences between Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and CCS reconciliation debts.

-   CCS and FTB debts will be raised separately, even if they occur at
    the same time
-   CCS, CCB and CCR debts (if not paid in full) may be recovered from
    ongoing CCS fee reductions
-   Only CCS and CCB/CCR debts can be recovered from CCS top-up payments
-   If CCS reconciliation cannot occur by the 1^(st) deadline (30 June
    of the year following the CCS relevant year. For the 2018/19 year
    only, the 1st deadline has been extended for until 31 March 2021),
    because family income is not confirmed, an undetermined debt will be
    automatically calculated. The debt will be for the total amount of
    any CCS paid during the relevant income year (any periods of ACCS
    will not be included). However, recovery of the debt will only
    commence once the 2nd deadline (30 June of the second year following
    the CCS relevant income year) has been reached. The undetermined
    debt at the 1^(st) deadline will not prevent the customer from
    applying for FTB or income support advances
-   If after the 2nd deadline, reconciliation conditions are met for the
    relevant CCS year but the non-lodger debt has been determined,
    reconciliation will not occur and the non-lodger debt will continue
    to be recoverable
-   Both FTB and CCS debts can be recovered from tax refunds

See Reconciliation of CCS for more information about deadlines and the
reconciliation process.

The Resources page has contact details for the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).

Related links

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Debt recovery for Centrelink

Refunding debt payments

Storing documents

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
