
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income 007-07060040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the child income limit that applied before 1 May
2014 to certain Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children and Regular Care
Children to determine a customer's eligibility for FTB or ancillary
benefits for a child. The child income limit was abolished from 1 May
2014.

On this Page:

For the 2013-2014 financial year

If the child's income is equal to or above the child income limit for
the 2013-2014 financial year and the child's income limit applied to the
child during the period 1 July 2013 - 30 April 2014, they are not a
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child for the period it applied.

If a customer advised after 1 May 2014 that their child's income will be
over the limit, any qualification debt is to be raised immediately, but
FTB will not be cancelled.

If FTB for the customer has cancelled due to child income, the customer
must lodge a new claim to receive FTB for the child. For current FTB
customers, an 'Add Child' activity will be appropriate.

Customers who have deferred FTB for the child during the year must
confirm the child's income after the financial year for FTB entitlement
for the child to be included in the reconciliation calculation.

Application of the child limit before 1 May 2014

The child income limit applied to children aged:

-   5-15 years who were not studying full-time
-   16 or 17 years who were not in full-time secondary study, for
    example, they have completed Year 12 or equivalent qualification
-   16-19 years with an exemption from the education/training
    requirements

A child with an adjusted study load was considered to be in full-time
secondary study and therefore the child income limit did not apply.

For the 2011-2012 financial year the child income limit applies to all
16-19 year olds (even if in full-time secondary study) from 1 July - 31
December 2011.

Income earned in the whole financial year affects Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) for the period the child income limit applied.

If the child's adjusted taxable income is equal to or above the child
income limit in the relevant financial year, they are not an FTB child
or Regular Care Child for any period in the financial year the child
income limit applied to them. For any period in the financial year where
the child income limit did not apply to the child, that period is
quarantined and not included in the child income limit debt as part of
the reconciliation process.

FTB payment choice

To reduce the risk of overpayment, customers could choose to receive
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child with income after the end of the
financial year when the child's actual income is known. The customer
then needed to advise whether or not the child's income was under the
child income limit to be paid any extra FTB for the child.

If the child had received income by way of compensation or
superannuation, and any of the amount received was considered by the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) to be taxable income, the taxable
portion was treated as taxable income of the child.

If the child is a member of a couple, the child's adjusted taxable
income includes their partner's adjusted taxable income.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for children aged 16 - 19 years

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Child Student/Income Circumstances (CHSI) screen

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Identifying the most beneficial payment for trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Customer initiated review of decision

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
