
Annual income reviews for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers and their partners who are not required to lodge a tax return 007-07060010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process income reviews for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) customers and/or their partners who estimated their income
to be between $6,000 and $18,201 for the target year and have advised
they are not required to lodge a tax return. This is an annual process
that commences in January/early February. FTB income reviews were not
undertaken in 2022.

The FTB Income Review Team phone line

The FTB Income Review Team phone line opens in February and closes
mid-August each year. Note: there may be delays when responding to
significant events such as an emergency response. Customers calling the
line after closure receive a message to call the Families and Parenting
Line (136 150).

Criteria for review

To be selected for review, FTB customers and/or their partners must meet
the following criteria:

-   the customer must have received FTB for at least 183 days of the
    relevant financial year, or if claiming via lump sum, the customer
    must have received payment of FTB for at least 183 days of the
    financial year
-   reconciliation or lump sum claim must have completed for the
    customer and partner (if applicable) for the financial year being
    reviewed
-   the reconciliation or lump sum claim determination must have been
    based on a declaration from the customer that they and/or their
    partner were not required to lodge a tax return
-   the reconciliation must have been completed based on the customer
    and/or their partner providing an end of year income estimate at the
    time they notified they were not required to lodge a tax return
-   the customer's and/or their partner's income must be between $6,000
    and $18,201

Customers in the following circumstances are excluded from selection:

-   single and received an income support payment for the full financial
    year
-   deceased
-   partner has died on or after 1 July of the target financial year
-   child/ren has died on or after 1 July of the target financial year
-   separated or divorced on or after 1 July of the target financial
    year
-   blended families

When customers are identified as excluded from selection (such as if the
customer is deceased), complete review '689 - Customer unable to be
contacted'.

Note: FTB Income Reviews were not undertaken in 2022.

Previous partners

A previous partner refers to a person who was partnered to the customer
at some point during the relevant financial year but separated from the
customer after 30 June of that year.

In cases where the customer separated from the partner after June 30 of
the target year the review can be completed. If the customer separated
from the partner prior to June 30 of the target year, the review can
also be completed 'No action taken (NAT)'.

ATO Liaison Team (TAP)

In some cases where an income discrepancy occurs we need to verify which
income is correct. These cases are referred to the TAP team to verify
all income components reported to the ATO for the target financial year.

The Resources page contains user guidelines for Desktop Messaging,
discussion points for customers and staff, a link to mySupport, contact
details for the ATO, ATO Liaison Team (TAP) and Workload Management Team
and a link to Services Australia Website 'Phone us' page.

Related links

Service Profiling

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
