-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for completing the Claim for
Bereavement Payment (FA008). The FA008 is used to claim Parental Leave
Pay (PPL), Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) and Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

Overview

The Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008) is issued to customers by the
hospital or birthing centre after a stillbirth or neo-natal death. There
is also a version of the FA008 which can be issued directly to customers
after a child bereavement event.

-   A bereavement payment of FTB is available if the customer was
    eligible for FTB for the child at the time of their death. If the
    customer is not eligible for PPL, FTB can include Newborn Supplement
    (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU)
-   FTB is not payable for a stillborn child. See Eligibility for
    Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) for more information
-   PPL is payable for a stillborn child or for a child who has died
    since birth
-   SBP may be payable for a stillborn child if the customer is not
    eligible for PPL for the child

In most cases, for a stillborn child the hospital or birthing centre
will give the customer the FA008 which will contain confirmation the
child was stillborn.

Payment rates

The bereavement payment is equivalent to 14 weeks of FTB from the date
of the child's death. It can be paid as fortnightly payments over 14
weeks or as a lump sum.

If a customer is eligible for NBS, it will be paid for the relevant NBS
period (up to 13 weeks) per the customer's FTB payment choice.

If a second or subsequent child dies on or after 1 January 2021 and
before their first birthday, a top-up of NBS may be paid. The top-up is
the difference between the lower and higher rate. If a child’s death is
advised as part of a FTB claim and the lower NBS rate has not previously
been paid for the child, the higher rate of NBS will be paid for the
eligible NBS period.

Claim requirements

Unless previously provided for the child, acceptable proof of birth is
required.

Birth registration requirements do not apply to PPL, Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP) or SBP claims for a stillborn child.

Completing the claim

Points to note in completing the claim:

-   The claim form comes with a Notes booklet which should be read
    before completing the claim
-   Customers claiming PPL must meet the PPL income test and PPL work
    test. PPL cannot be paid as a lump sum payment. Customers can
    continue to receive PPL after the death of a child even if the
    customer returns to work
-   If the customer is claiming FTB, they must provide an annual income
    estimate for the current financial year. Customers may choose to
    receive their FTB bereavement payment as a lump sum or as
    fortnightly instalments for up to a 14 week period. If a bereavement
    period crosses into the 2016-17 financial year, the lump sum
    bereavement payment may be affected by the changes to the
    eligibility requirements for FTB Part B after 1 July 2016
-   If the customer is claiming SBP, they must provide an income
    estimate for the 6 month period beginning from the date of delivery
    of the stillborn child. SBP will be paid as a lump sum. For children
    delivered on or after 1 January 2021 there is a single rate of SBP.
    The single rate is paid for each stillborn child delivered on or
    after 1 January 2021. Customers will not be asked information about
    previous stillborn children in the bereavement claim, this will be
    sourced from information on the customer record and, if required, a
    personal discussion with the customer
-   If the customer wishes to claim for additional children, they will
    be required to lodge a separate claim

Lodging the claim

The claim can be lodged [] online, in person or by mail. The reply paid
address printed on the claim is for the agency's scanning provider. All
advice regarding a child who has recently died (including the FA008) is
to be urgently processed.

Note: when helping customers complete a claim form, Service Officers
must not make any notations, underline or make comments of any sort on a
claim form prior to being signed by a customer and lodged. Instead, any
notations or explanations to questions on a claim form should be made on
a separate sheet of paper and attached to the customer's claim form.

The Resources page contains links to relevant forms and publications,
and to the Bereavement/DOP Helpdesk.

Related links

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme child

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Extended Family Care Group (EFCG)

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Initial contact after someone has died

Initial contact by a parent or guardian

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Processing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) claims

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
