
Manual intervention due to a manual or special adjustment in Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation 007-18041301

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Family Assistance Manual Intervention (MIV) Smart Centre Processing
staff only.

This document outlines how to complete FTB reconciliation for a customer
after a manual or special adjustment. Adjustments in reconciliation can
result from system arrears or debts changed during the relevant
financial year.

System debts or arrears amended during financial year (#RACADJ)

If the system calculated a positive (arrears) or negative (debt) FTB
adjustment during the instalment period:

-   and these adjustments were then zeroed out or the value changed via
    the Period Rate Components (RAC) screen by the system or manually by
    a Service Officer
-   then the difference between the system calculated amount and the
    amended amount is included in reconciliation as a special adjustment

Manual intervention: determine the correctness of the resulting
reconciliation outcome and finalise reconciliation.

These activities hold the #RACADJ keyword.

System RA arrears amended during financial year (#RAOADJ)

If the system generated a positive FTB Rent Assistance (RA) adjustment
(arrears) during the instalment period:

-   and the customer had already been paid RA with their income support
    payment
-   and these adjustments were then amended via the Period Rate
    Components (RAC) screen by the system or manually by a Service
    Officer
-   then the difference between the system amount and the amended amount
    is included in reconciliation as a special adjustment

Manual intervention: determine the correctness of the adjustment amount
included in reconciliation and finalise reconciliation.

These activities hold the #RAOADJ keyword.

System debt amount changed (#ESTDEBT)

When an FTB qualification debt is sent for investigation during the
financial year:

-   and the system calculated debt amount is manually amended to a
    different amount and raised
-   then the difference between the system debt amount and the amount
    raised is included in reconciliation as a special adjustment

Manual intervention: determine the correctness of the adjustment and
reconciliation result before completing, taking into account the amended
debt amount.

These activities hold the #ESTDEBT keyword.

Manually raised FTB debts (#MANDEBT)

If an FTB qualification debt was manually raised without allowing the
system to calculate a provisional debt:

-   consider the debt within the reconciliation result for the
    corresponding financial year
-   these activities hold the #MANDEBT keyword.

Finalised ‘no debt’ adjustments in FTB reconciliation

When an FTB debt is Finalised ‘no debt’ (FND) during the financial year:

-   The debt amount is automatically included as an adjustment in the
    reconciliation calculation for that financial year
-   The FND adjustment is included in reconciliation to ensure the full
    amount paid to the customer during the instalment period is assessed

There is no specific keyword added to activities with this adjustment.

Reconciliation can still complete automatically if there is an FND
adjustment in the result and no other Manual Intervention (MIV) keyword
present.

Note: a debt being ‘Finalised, no debt’ does not mean that the customer
has not been overpaid. It means that the debt has been deferred for
assessment in reconciliation. For example, an income related FTB debt
will be deferred to reconciliation where actual income is confirmed.

Undetermined debt adjustments in FTB reconciliation

When an FTB qualification debt has been sent for investigation during
the financial year:

-   and a determination is yet to be made as to whether or not the debt
    should be raised
-   then the undetermined debt amount will be automatically included in
    reconciliation for that financial year. The undetermined debt
    adjustment is included in reconciliation to ensure the full amount
    paid to the customer during the instalment period is assessed

There is no specific keyword added to activities with this adjustment.

Reconciliation can still complete automatically if there is an
undetermined debt adjustment in the result and no other Manual
Intervention (MIV) keyword present.

Related links

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Manual intervention into family assistance reconciliation

Manual intervention due to large arrears, large debts, and the provision
of Actual Income by the Australian Taxation Office (ATO)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
