
New Financial Year Assessments (NFYA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-07130000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process whereby the New Financial Year
Assessment (NFYA) mailout invites current Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customers to provide an annual income estimate
for the new financial year.

On this page:

NFYA task and push notifications

From 1 April, customers can provide their family income estimate for the
new financial year. A task will display in their online service and
Express Plus Centrelink mobile app to prompt them to provide their next
financial year estimate.

Customers who have enabled push notifications and the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app installed on their device may receive a push
notification. The push notification directs them to the app and
navigates them directly to the task.

NFYA Electronic Message (EM)

[] In early May, an Electronic Message (EM) (SMS or email) is sent to
eligible customers requesting them to provide their new financial year
income estimate using online services or the Express Plus Centrelink
mobile app.

NFYA letter

Services Australia issues NFYA letters to eligible customers from
mid-May. Customers not selected in the initial bulk mailout may be sent
a NFYA letter if they claim FTB/CCS or become partnered after the bulk
mailout and before 1 July of the new financial year.

The NFYA letter sent to the customer:

-   requests the customer provide a new financial year family income
    estimate via self-service channels
-   advises the default estimate that will be used if they do not
    provide their own estimate. The default estimate is calculated as
    part of the Automatic Uplift process and is calculated using their
    most recent estimate at the time the letter is sent
-   can contain variable text, bilingual text, or targeted text for
    customers deemed at risk of overpayment
-   informs customers of separate income reporting requirements for
    income support payments
-   contains reminders to CCS customers to review their Activity Test
    details

Estimate of adjusted taxable income

All income components for the new financial year must be recorded even
if the details are the same as for the previous financial year. The
estimate must be considered reasonable for it to be used.

No reply from the customer to the NFYA letter

Customers may choose not to reply. If they do not provide a reasonable
estimate by 1 July (or within 21 days of the date the NFYA letter is
sent, if that is later), the default estimate will be used to work out
their ongoing FTB legislative rate.

Customers may provide their own reasonable estimate before the new
financial year starts to override a default estimate.

Payments will not be cancelled because the customer failed to reply to
the letter.

Replying to the NFYA letter

[] Customers can update their new financial year estimate using any of
the following self-service options:

-   the Update family income estimate option online
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If the customer is unable to use self-service options, they can contact
Services Australia on the Centrelink Families line.

Note: if the customer phones the Centrelink Families line between 1 May
and 30 June and has Voice Print authentication, the IVR will ask the
customer to confirm both their current financial year family income
estimate and their future financial year family income estimate (if
there is an estimate on file) while the customer is waiting in the phone
queue. The Income estimate instructions on Customer Overview will then
show the Service Officer if action is required.

Income support payment (ISP) customers

If a customer or their current partner are receiving a taxable or
non-taxable ISP, the online service and app will prohibit a $0 next
financial year income estimate for the relevant income component. To
provide a $0 next financial year income estimate for an ISP current
customer, they will need to contact Services Australia on the Centrelink
Families line.

After determining that the $0 estimate is reasonable, Service Officers
may record a $0 next financial year income estimate for an ISP current
customer using the Family Income and Choices workflow.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
contact details for the Families line.

Related links

Automatic Uplift of income estimates

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

What to check when Family Tax Benefit (FTB) rate has changed

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Access to Centrelink self service - set up, checking, locking and
resetting

Using Centrelink self service

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
