
The principal carer of a dependent child is unable to meet their agreed activities 007-04080020

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   References

This document outlines information on the action required when the
principal carer of a dependent child advises that they are unable to
meet their mutual obligation requirements as detailed in their Job Plan.

Meeting mutual obligation requirements

As part of the First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS), or
Online Participation Workflow, a job seeker's job readiness,
competitiveness and capability to look for and accept work will be
determined.

Principal carers with part-time mutual obligation requirements are
required to enter into a Job Plan which details the activities the job
seeker is required to undertake to help them find work. This may include
looking for suitable paid work of at least 15 hours per week and
participating with an Employment Services Provider.

Note: ParentsNext participants do not have mutual obligation
requirements. For more information on exemptions from ParentsNext
participation requirements, see ParentsNext exits and exemptions.

Approved Activities that Fully Meet mutual obligation requirements

A principle carer a job seeker may fully satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements through undertaking approved activities such as suitable
paid work, approved study, or a combination of paid work and study, for
at least 15 hours per week. Principal carers who fully satisfy their
mutual obligation requirements will normally be suspended from their
Employment Services Provider and be managed by Services Australia.

Other programs and activities such as voluntary work, the New Enterprise
Incentive Scheme (NEIS) and Work for the Dole (WFD) can be accessed and
approved by the job seeker's Employment Services Provider.

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

An exemption from mutual obligation requirements for a certain period of
time may be appropriate due to short term changes in the job seeker's
circumstances.

Principal carers may also be granted a long term exemption due to
special family circumstances.

Job seekers are not required to agree to a Job Plan while they are
exempt from mutual obligation requirements.

Parenting Payment Partnered job seekers are not subject to mutual
obligation requirements due to the age of their dependent children and
may volunteer to participate in activities to prepare for work. These
activities will be included in a Job Plan as a volunteer. There is no
compliance action if they do not meet the Job Plan inclusions.

Job Plan renegotiation

Where the job seeker advises they are unable to participate in their
agreed activities, they will need to renegotiate their Job Plan with
either Services Australia (if they are Services Australia managed) or
their provider.

Service Officers may grant an exemption from mutual obligation
requirements to both Services Australia and provider managed job seekers
for a period of time, if the job seeker's circumstances support this
decision. If an exemption is not a suitable option and the job seeker is
provider managed, they should discuss their situation with their
provider. The provider will decide whether it is appropriate to amend
the Job Plan.

Some principal carers are deemed to be meeting their mutual obligation
requirements through suitable paid work or other agreed activities. If a
principal carer has mutual obligation requirements and can no longer
fully meet those requirements, they must be referred to an Employment
Services Provider.

Service Officers should consider the following when re-negotiating Job
Plans for Services Australia managed job seekers:

-   the reasons why the job seeker is unable to undertake their
    activities
-   additional support that may be available to support the job seeker
    to undertake their activities
-   alternate activities that will fully meet mutual obligation
    requirements

Reasons for non-participation

Job Seekers who cannot participate in the activities agreed to in their
Job Plan are required to contact Services Australia or their provider to
discuss their situation and the reasons why they are not able to meet
their requirements.

If the job seeker is Services Australia managed and unable to comply
with activities included in their Job Plan, consider:

-   the reasons why the job seeker is unable to comply with the Job
    Plan, including both individual and family circumstances
-   the job seeker's capacity to undertake participation activities
-   if the terms of the Job Plan are reasonable, and
-   additional support required to achieve participation outcome

If the job seeker is provider managed, they should discuss their mutual
obligation requirements with their provider.

Job seekers with participation mutual obligation requirements who do not
take reasonable steps to undertake activities in their Job Plan and who
do not have undisclosed vulnerabilities may face penalties.

Related links

Helping parents return to work

Mutual obligation requirements for principal carers

Exempting a job seeker from mutual obligation requirements due to
special circumstances

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

ParentsNext eligibility and servicing

Voluntary participation for the principal carer of a dependent child

Job Plans

Negotiating Job Plans

Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements

Principal carer of a dependent child fails to attend compulsory
participation interview

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Principal carer of a dependent child

Shared care for social security payments

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
