
Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) 007-17103143

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the actions required when a customer notifies
Services Australia of changes in their circumstances and/or advises of
notifiable events for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Customer’s requirement to notify of changes in circumstances

Customers must notify Services Australia of changes in circumstances
that will impact their eligibility or entitlement to CCS or and/or
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Notifying change of circumstances

[] Customers should be encouraged to update their circumstances by
accessing their online account via myGov or using the Express Plus
Centrelink mobile app.

Where the customer advises of a change in circumstances or notifiable
event for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) verbally or in writing, Services
Australia is responsible for accepting notification of changes and
recording or updating circumstance information on the customer’s record.

Recording changes in circumstances

On receipt of the information, the details will be entered onto the
customer's record and they will be advised of the effect of the changes
on their payments.

With any change of circumstances 3 different dates apply:

-   date of receipt (the date the agency is notified of the change)
-   date of event (the date the change of circumstance actually
    occurred)
-   date of effect (the date the changes will be applied to their
    payment)

The date the change takes effect will be determined by the date the
customer notified of the change and if the impact of the change has a
favourable or unfavourable outcome on the customer’s entitlement.

Viewing change in circumstance updates completed online

Receipt details for CCS and ACCS change of circumstance transactions can
be accessed and viewed in Process Direct.

Some examples of the types of updates that can be viewed are:

-   Standalone ACCS applications (Transition to Work, Temporary
    Financial Hardship, Grandparent)
-   Income estimate updates
-   CCS activity test updates
-   Child education details updates

This includes transactions that flow through for staff action and
automatically finalise via online services. The automatically finalised
transactions will display as successfully completed with the receipt
attached.

Note: this functionality applies to updates lodged via the Customer
Online Service, and not via the Express Plus Mobile App.

Date of effect - favourable determination (does not apply to income estimate updates)

Where the customer has advised a change of circumstances that results in
a favourable determination (for example an increase in Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) entitled hours as a result of an update to the Activity
details) the following date of effect rules apply:

-   Where the customer notifies us of a change of circumstances in the
    CCS fortnight the event occurred or before the event occurs, the
    date of effect will be the start of the CCS fortnight following the
    date of event
    For example: customer commenced voluntary work on the second Tuesday
    of a CCS fortnight. The commencement of voluntary work in addition
    to the customer’s other activity increases their activity test
    result to 72 hours per fortnight. The increased entitlement will
    take effect from the start of the next CCS fortnight
-   Where the customer notifies us of a change of circumstances after
    the CCS fortnight the event occurred, the increased entitlement will
    only be backdated up to a maximum of 28 days to the beginning of a
    CCS fortnight (after the event occurred)
    For example: customer commenced voluntary work 6 months ago and has
    not advised us until today. The commencement of voluntary work in
    addition to the customer’s other activity increases their activity
    test result to 72 hours per fortnight. The increased entitlement
    will only backdated up to 28 days from the date notified and must be
    a CCS Monday (cannot be prior to 02 July 2018).

Commencing or increasing hours of paid work

The exception to the above rule is where the customer (and/or their
partner) commences or increases their hours of paid work. In these
circumstances, the date of effect (DOE) is the Monday of the CCS
fortnight before the fortnight in which the change occurred. The
fortnight in which the change occurred is referred to as an ‘event CCS
fortnight’.

To benefit from this rule, customers must notify Centrelink as soon as
possible when they (or their partner) start a job or increase their
hours of paid work.

Customers who notify after the event are subject to the same backdating
provisions above. That is, if the increased hours result in an increase
in eligible subsidised hours, the increased entitlement will only be
backdated a maximum of 28 days to the beginning of a CCS fortnight after
the event occurred. If there is an ‘event CCS fortnight’ within those 28
days, the customer would be entitled to payment for that fortnight based
on the different DOE rules.

See the Resources page for more examples of how date of effect rules
apply.

Date of effect - unfavourable determination (does not apply to income estimate updates)

Where the customer has advised a change of circumstances that results in
an unfavourable determination (for example a decrease in Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) entitled hours as a result of an update to the Activity
Test details) the following date of effect rules apply:

-   Where the customer notifies us of the update in the CCS fortnight
    the event occurred or before the event occurs, the date of effect
    will be the start of the next CCS fortnight following the date of
    event
    For example: customer ceased voluntary work on the second Tuesday of
    a CCS fortnight. The impact of ceasing voluntary work reduces the
    activity test result to 36 hours per fortnight. The reduced
    entitlement will take effect from the start of the next CCS
    fortnight
-   Where the customer notifies us of the update after the CCS fortnight
    the event occurred, the reduced entitlement will be backdated to the
    start of the CCS fortnight after the event occurred (no limit)
    For example: customer ceased voluntary work 6 months ago and has not
    advised us until today. The impact of ceasing voluntary work has
    reduced the activity test result to 36 hours per fortnight. This
    will be backdated to the start of a CCS fortnight after the date the
    event occurred (cannot be prior to 02 July 2018)

See the Resources page for a further example of the date of effect rules
for an unfavourable determination.

Date of effect - income estimate updates

Income estimate updates (both favourable and unfavourable) will take
effect from the start of the next CCS fortnight after the update was
made. Any income related adjustments will be made as part of the end of
financial year reconciliation process.

Date of effect - Multiple Child Subsidy (MCS) updates

Higher CCS (MCS) updates will take effect from the start of the next CCS
fortnight after the update was made.

See the Resources page for examples of the date of effect rules for
Higher CCS (MCS).

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrelink Calendar and
examples of how favourable and unfavourable date of effect rules are
applied to a change in activity, changes in marital status and when
children enter care.

Related links

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
becomes partnered

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
separates

Child leaves customer's care/custody

Cancellation, rejection and not effective codes for Child Care Subsidy
(CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
