[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

DAP information for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023.

This document outlines information on Dad and Partner Pay (DAP), a
payment available to eligible working dads or partners.

Government intent

DAP is not payable for a child born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023.
Fathers and partners will need to claim Paid Parental Leave (PPL).

This payment recognises and supports the important role dads and
partners have with the care of their children. It helps working dads and
partners to take time off work to support new mothers and be involved in
the care of their new baby or recently adopted child.

Overview of payment

DAP is paid under the Paid Parental Leave scheme. It is provided to the
dad or partner caring for a child born or adopted on or after 1 January
2013 and before 1 July 2023.

The dad or partner is required to lodge a claim and be assessed as
meeting the eligibility criteria.

The payment is taxable and paid as a lump sum at the national minimum
wage for a maximum of 2 weeks. DAP payments are delivered by Services
Australia.

The payment may need to be reassessed when there is a change of
circumstances such as change of care or changes to their income, work or
paid leave. DAP may also be affected when a customer travels overseas.

2023 changes

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, DAP ends. The 2
weeks (10 payable days) is rolled into PPL. See Eligibility for Paid
Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering care on or after 1
July 2023.

Customers can still submit a claim for DAP if their child's expected
date of birth or adoption is on or after 1 July 2023. However, Service
Officers should encourage customers to claim after their child is born
or enters their care.

If the customer submits a DAP pre-claim and the child's actual date of
birth or adoption is:

-   before 1 July 2023, the agency processes the DAP claim as usual once
    the customer gives proof of birth or entry to care
-   on or after 1 July 2023, the agency rejects the DAP claim once the
    customer gives proof of birth or entry to care. The rejection letter
    invites the customer to claim PPL

2021 changes

COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services Australia on or after 3 June
2021)

Customers who received a COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services
Australia on or after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month qualifying
period and lodged their DAP claim on or after 4 September 2021, can
include their COVID-19 Disaster Payments as qualifying work.

Customers who performed at least 1 hour of paid work or paid leave
(including weekends) and received COVID-19 Disaster Payment can count
whichever is greater:

-   7.6 hours for each weekday in the period (not including weekends)
-   The number of hours actually worked each day (including weekends)
-   The number of hours of paid leave each day

Special circumstances

For DAP claims made on or after 4 September 2021, customers who do not
meet the work test may qualify for an exception if:

-   they experienced special circumstances within their work test
    period, and
-   this affected their ability to perform paid work

An exception to the work test may be applied if:

-   special circumstances existed, and
-   the customer would have met the work test if the special
    circumstances did not exist

The special circumstance exception reasons include:

-   severe medical condition or caring for a close family member who is
    affected by a severe medical condition
-   natural disaster declared by the Commonwealth, a State or Territory
-   family and domestic violence

The customer must provide evidence to support their claim for special
circumstances. This includes both:

-   evidence of the special circumstance (see additional information
    below if family and domestic violence), and
-   evidence of employment (employee or self employed)

Severe medical condition

To meet this exception either the customer was:

-   affected by a severe medical condition that prevented them from
    performing paid work, or
-   caring for a close family member who was affected by a severe
    medical condition and providing this care prevented them from
    performing paid work

Severe medical condition includes severe illness and severe injury

Note: this exception, a close family member is defined as;

-   the customer’s partner, or
-   the customer’s child (natural/adoptive or step-child), or,
-   the customer’s parent (natural/adoptive or step-parent), or
-   the customer’s sibling or step-sibling, or
-   the parent (natural/adoptive or step -parent) of the customer’s
    partner, or
-   a person the customer has legal custody or guardianship of, (for
    example a foster child)

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, 'family member'
includes cultural kinship relationships.

Customers are required to provide:

-   evidence of the severe medical condition they or their family member
    were affected by, and
-   evidence that they would have otherwise met the work test had it not
    been for the severe medical condition

Natural disaster

To meet this exception the customer must have been severely affected by
a natural disaster during their work test period and this prevented them
from performing paid work. The natural disaster must have been declared
by either the:

-   Commonwealth or a State or Territory, or
-   Commonwealth, State or Territory authority responsible for managing
    responses to natural disasters

Customers are required to provide:

-   evidence that they were severely impacted by the natural disaster,
    and
-   evidence that they would have otherwise met the work test had it not
    been for the disaster

Family and domestic violence

To meet this exception the customer:

-   must have experienced, or was dealing with the impact of family and
    domestic violence during their work test period, and
-   this prevented the customer from performing paid work

Family and domestic violence claims must be referred to a social worker
who will assess whether family and domestic violence affected the
customer’s ability to work during their work test period. The social
worker may contact the customer to discuss the circumstances over the
phone. If there is enough evidence already on the customer’s record, the
social worker can complete a file assessment.

The customer will be requested in the claim to provide evidence to
confirm the family and domestic violence, but if it is not provided, the
social worker will determine:

-   if there is already enough evidence on the customer’s record, or
-   if further evidence is required

Service Officers must not request evidence of the family and domestic
violence. See Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims.

The customer will also be required to provide evidence from their
employer confirming that the customer would have been employed during
the work test period. The employer may not know why the customer was
unable to work and the customer is not expected to divulge this
information to their employer. See Paid Parental Leave Work Test.

2020 changes

From 1 January 2020, there were several changes to DAP that included the
following.

DAP work test for children born or adopted on or after 1 January 2020

The allowable gap between consecutive work days was increased from 8 to
12 weeks. In the 392 day work test period, a customer must not have a
gap of more than 12 weeks during their 295 day qualifying period. See
Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

Return to work exceptions for customer who returned to work on or after
12 March 2020

There are several reasons a customer can return to work/perform work and
continue to receive PPL. Allowable reasons for DAP include:

-   an Australian Defence Force (ADF) member or law enforcement officer
    who is compulsorily recalled to duty
-   complying with a summons or other compulsory process to give
    evidence, information or produce documents. This does not include
    jury duty
-   health professionals, emergency services or essential workers who
    have returned to work in response to a state, territory or national
    emergency (effective from 12 March 2020 onwards)
-   care of the child was lost without legal authority
-   child bereavement where the DAP child was stillborn or died

If a customer returns to work for an allowable reason, an exception is
recorded and their return to work is disregarded. See Eligibility for
Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Extended Work Test period for children born or adopted between 22 March
2020 and 31 March 2021 (inclusive)

The extended work test applies to customers who:

-   do not meet the existing PPL scheme work test because they stopped
    work, or had their work hours reduced due to COVID-19, and
-   have a child with a date of birth or adoption between 22 March 2020
    and 31 March 2021

These customers will have their work test period increased from 392 days
to 600 days. During their 600 day work test period the customer must
have a 295 day qualifying period where they did not have a 12 week gap
between consecutive work days and performed at least 330 hours of
qualifying work within the 295 day qualifying period.

Note: although the customer can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between
work days during the 600 day work test period, they cannot have this gap
during their 295 day qualifying period.

This only applies to customers who cannot meet the usual PPL or DAP work
test and do not have an exemption from the work test, such as premature
birth. See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

Contents

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Reassessments for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Reviews and appeals of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Related links

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Change in circumstance for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
