
Reconciliation of Child Care Rebate (CCR) 007-03110020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines information on a customer's annual Child Care
Rebate (CCR) entitlement.

On this Page:

Reconciliation

A customer's actual annual CCR entitlement is automatically calculated
when Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation occurs or a CCB lump sum
claim is finalised.

The system will automatically:

-   calculate CCR entitlement for the whole financial year
-   deduct any CCR payments already paid as direct or quarterly CCR
    payment
-   offset any current and previous year CCR/CCB debts
-   pay any remaining CCR entitlement due to the customer's nominated
    account or raise a debt, where applicable

Zero rate customers

For customers who elected to receive zero rate CCB (Client Request -
CLR) only during the financial year, CCB reconciliation will occur
without their actual income details being available, during bulk
reconciliation, which commences from the fourth Monday in July. This
allows the customer's actual annual CCR entitlement to be determined
sooner. There should not be a link with the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO) for these customers, however if actual income details are later
received, CCB re-reconciliation will occur and the customer's actual
annual CCR will be re-calculated.

Ineligibility for CCR

If a customer is assessed as ineligible for Child Care Benefit (CCB) for
any days, for any reason, they will not be entitled to CCR for those
days. Reasons may include absences over the 42 day limit or immunisation
requirements not being met. A public holiday is regarded as an absence
if child care fees are required to be paid for the day.

Withheld entitlement

Where the customer has requested CCR be paid as a direct to customer or
direct to service payment and they are receiving Child Care Benefit
(CCB) at a legislative rate greater than zero, 15% of the customer's CCR
entitlement will be kept from each instalment. The withheld amount will
be included in calculating the customer's CCR entitlement at
reconciliation prior to any deductions or offsetting of debts.

Lump sum payment

A customer can claim their Child Care Benefit (CCB) as a lump sum
payment after the end of the financial year and CCR will also be paid as
a lump sum. The claim will be finalised when child care attendance is
received. Note: if a customer had registered an intent to claim CCB as a
lump sum (CNN/DCL) or has received a lump sum payment in any previous
financial years, the child care attendance should be submitted during
the year. If a customer receives more than a zero rate of CCB, a
re-calculation of their CCB may occur when tax returns have been lodged
(for the relevant year) with the ATO. This will mean their Child Care
Rebate (CCR) will also be re-calculated based on their changed
entitlement to CCB.

CCR account payable letters not displaying correct amounts

There is a known issue where in some circumstances the CCR account
payable letter will have the wrong amounts displayed in some fields.
When this occurs customers may view their current and previous
reconciliation calculations using their [] online service. Service
Officers can also advise the customer of the correct amounts.

The Resources page contains examples of incorrect details which may
appear on the letter and links to CCR information on the Services
Australia Website and Online Publications.

Related links

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
