
Calculating the Child Care Benefit (CCB) percentage for approved care 007-03060050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines information in relation to calculating
percentages for Child Care Benefit (CCB).

On this Page:

CCB percentage calculation

When a customer claims Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care, a CCB
percentage is calculated. The CCB percentage depends on the family's
estimated adjusted taxable income and the age and number of children
using child care.

A CCB percentage is not required for the calculation of the registered
care rate.

The CCB percentage for approved care is calculated by using the formula:

CCB percentage = multiple child percentage x taxable income percentage.
The Resources page provides an example.

The multiple child percentage applies if more than 1 child attends the
same kind of care in the same week. For CCB, approved long day care,
family day care, in-home care, outside school hours care and vacation
care are considered to be one kind of care. Approved occasional care is
another kind of care. The higher CCB percentage is payable for each of
the customer's children attending the same kind of care in the same
week.

The CCB percentage is applied to the standard hourly rate to work out
the customer's child care fee reduction. If an approved service provider
charges more than the standard hourly rate, the customer must pay the
difference. Although the CCB percentage may be more than 100%, customers
cannot receive more CCB than the child care fees they are liable to pay.
Customers should contact the child care service to find out how much
they must pay in child care fees.

Services Australia is responsible for ensuring the information provided
by the customer is recorded accurately on the customer's record to
calculate the customer's correct CCB percentage.

The [] online estimators can be used to calculate a family's potential
CCB and Child Care Rebate (CCR) entitlement and out-of-pocket child care
expenses for approved care.

There are no blended family provisions for CCB. For families to get the
full effect of the multiple child percentage, only one member of a
couple should claim CCB.

CCB income test

Customers are entitled to the maximum Child Care Benefit (CCB)
percentage if they or their partner receive income support payments or
if their adjusted taxable income does not exceed the lower income
threshold.

The CCB percentage can be reduced to zero rate by the income test.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
Centrelink online services and online estimators, an intranet link to
the Family Assistance Payment Rates (FPR006) publication, and an example
of the multiple child percentage calculation.

Related links

Online estimator options

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Recalculation of a Child Care Benefit (CCB) lump sum claim

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
