[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process when a customer advises of a change
in circumstance for family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) prior
to payments commencing which may trigger a reassessment. For an
employer, a change in circumstances can be advised to Services
Australia.

Contact is made prior to commencement of payments

A reassessment of PPL can occur prior to the commencement of payment and
can be notified by the customer or employer.

When a change in circumstance occurs and affects the customer's
eligibility or payment of PPL the customer will be notified in writing.
If relevant, the employer will be contacted to advise their employee's
change in circumstance.

Customer reassessment

A reassessment of PPL can occur as a result of a change in circumstances
or review of decision.

A customer who has claimed, is eligible for, or is receiving family
assistance or PPL must tell the agency about any change of circumstance
that may impact their eligibility. This advice may trigger a
reassessment of the claim to determine if the customer is eligible for
payment.

Customers can advise a change in circumstances either by going []
online, calling or by visiting a Centrelink Service Centre.

Changes a customer may advise:

address/contact details

bank account

child’s care details

tax rate changes

claim choice

resignation / termination of employment

date the child enters or is going to enter care

marital status

income details

overseas departures, including temporary and permanent absences

For a PPL claim for a child born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   nominated start date for PPL
-   return to work, or performing work on a date they have claimed
    Flexible PPL
-   managing Flexible PPL days, including changing claimed dates

For a PPL claim for a child born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

-   performing work on a date they have claimed a PPL day
-   managing PPL days, including changing claimed dates
-   for Approval Givers only, give or remove approval to claim for
    Approval Seekers or give or remove approval to share PPL days to
    approved claimants

If the changes result in the customer losing eligibility for PPL,
including at the claim or component level a reassessment of their
eligibility for PPL and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) should occur.

A reassessment may result in the customer having been overpaid PPL.

Employer reassessment

An employer who provides PPL has an obligation to tell the agency about
a change in their employee’s circumstances during their employer paid
period. This can include:

-   return to work
-   termination, or
-   change in payment destination

A change in circumstances can be actioned by the employer by logging
into Business Hub. Users should select the option ‘Providing Parental
Leave Pay for Existing Claimants’, search for the employee and action
the change in the Existing Claimant’s Details workflow.

If the employer cannot access Business hub, the Paid Parental Leave
Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) can action the change.

Employers can tell the agency about a change in their employee’s
circumstances for up to 30 days in advance.

The employer also has an obligation to tell the agency about a change in
their circumstances. This can include:

-   trading that is about to or has ceased
-   the business is to be sold, transferred or merged with another
    business
-   pay cycle has changed
-   an external Administrator, Controlling trustee or debt agreement are
    appointed

Employers can tell the agency about a change in their circumstances up
to 14 days in advance.

Reassessment due to grant of Income Support Payment (ISP)

If the customer has been granted an ISP since their payments have
commenced, a PPL reassessment will occur and the paymaster role will be
automatically transferred from the employer to Services Australia.

Once the agency has been appointed as the paymaster, future
reassessments will not change the paymaster role, unless the customer
makes a subsequent request to change the paymaster role and the customer
is no longer receiving an ISP.

This only applies if the PPL customer is granted an ISP. If the
customer’s partner is granted an ISP, the paymaster role is not changed.

Payment of arrears after reassessment

When a reassessment activity results in the payment of PPL arrears for a
past period, and an overpayment of PPL or an income support payment for
the same period, these may be automatically offset against each other.
This will occur so a payment does not issue and subsequently raise a
debt for the same day. For more information, see Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) debt raising, debt offsetting and recovery.

Contents

Change in circumstances for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Customer notifies a change in circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Employer notifies a change in circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Paid Parental Leave scheme child leaves customer's care/custody

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer, for a child born before 1 July 2023,
returns to work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
