-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when and how to cancel PPL.

Cancellation after change of circumstances

PPL is cancelled if, after PPL is granted, a change in the customer's or
their child’s circumstances means that the customer is not eligible or
has already been paid their full entitlement.

In most cases, PPL cancels automatically when the customer or child
details are updated.

Restoration and reassessment

If PPL is cancelled, it can be:

-   restored without the need to reclaim if it has been established that
    the payment should not have been cancelled and the customer was
    eligible
-   reassessed if a retrospective change of circumstances is advised

A PPL claim level restoration can only be actioned if PPL is cancelled
(PPL/CAN), except where it is cancelled EOP (full PPL period).

Level cancellations

For PPL claims for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, PPL is a maximum entitlement of 100 payable days, which can be accessed

-   in a continuous block

-   as single days

-   any combination of smaller continuous blocks and single days

From For PPL claims for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020
and before 1 July 2023, PPL was comprised of two components:

-   the PPL period, which is paid as a single continuous block
-   Flexible PPL days, which are only available for children that are
    born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020

The claim level status displays on the benefit status line.

The level statuses will display on the PPL Calculation Summary (P1RCS)
screen.

Level cancellations will automatically occur once:

-   the entitlement has been paid in full. or
-   as a result of a change of circumstances

This includes if the customer is working on a PPL day, or if the PPL
child has permanently left the customer’s care.

Cancellation codes

A full list of claim and component cancellation codes can be found in
Cancellation, rejection, not effective, assessed and current zero rate
codes for Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

Note: manual cancellation of PPL should not be undertaken when a
customer advises of a change in circumstances. The change in
circumstances should be updated on the customer record.

Issuing a written notice

Written notice of the cancellation must be issued to the customer and
employer if applicable. It must include the reason for the cancellation,
their review and appeal rights, and how they can re-claim.

Bereavement

If the carer dies, eligibility for PPL does not continue past the date
of death. Estate/beneficiaries cannot be automatically paid the
remaining PPL entitlement without meeting eligibility and payability
criteria in their own right.

If a PPL customer dies, the instalments will not be cancelled. They are
held pending a possible claim from the person now caring for the child.
If no other person claims PPL, the remaining entitlement may be paid to
the estate of the deceased person.

If the PPL child dies, PPL will continue until the full amount has been
paid. See Death of a family assistance or Paid Parental Leave scheme
child.

Related links

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Customer notifies a change in circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellation, rejection, not effective, assessed and current zero rate
codes for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Restoration of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
