-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains processing arrangements for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) children aged 16-19 years. It covers requirements for children in
this age group; child turning 16, course end date and exemption end
reviews.

Options for families

Information for families with children 16 years of age or older is
available on the Services Australia Website and contains information
about the family assistance options available through Services
Australia. For children aged 16-17 years inclusive in full-time
secondary study and living at home, FTB is the main payment option.
However, the following options may also be available:

-   ABSTUDY as a student or an Australian Apprentice
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Youth Allowance (YA) as a job seeker
-   YA as a full-time student living away from home
-   YA as a student in post-secondary studies or as an apprentice

A child who is not in full-time secondary study may claim a Centrelink
payment in their own right. For payment to commence when they turn 16,
they will need to complete a claim on or before their 16th birthday.

Child turning 16

Dependent children aged 16 or 17 in full-time secondary study and living
at home are generally not eligible for YA. If the child is aged over 16
years and they are not in full-time secondary study, they may claim a
payment in their own right.

To help customers work out which payment is the best option for their
family's circumstances, the Payment and Service Finder can be used. The
Resources page contains a link to the Payment and Service Finder.

From 1 January 2020, children aged 16-19 years receiving a means tested
ABSTUDY payment (such as Living Allowance and School Fees Allowance
(Group 2)) can still be considered an FTB child if they are:

-   a full time secondary student
-   approved to live away from home to study, and
-   boarding to attend school

Where the system identifies that a child may be eligible for Disability
Support Pension (DSP), a letter is sent at age 15 years and 10 months
inviting them to apply.

If the child claims a payment, FTB for the child will cancel. If the
child's claim is rejected, or if there is a gap between the FTB
cancellation date and the date of grant of the other payment, FTB may be
restored if the customer remains eligible for FTB for the child.

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over provides details about study requirements and eligibility for
FTB Part A and Part B for children aged 16 to 19 years.

The child may remain a dependent child for social security purposes if
they continue to meet Social Security Act requirements. See Assessment
of dependent children, additional income free area and child income
under social security law.

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers

DVA customers may benefit from claiming FTB for a child aged 16 years or
over, particularly where the family is entitled to FTB Part B. These
customers should be encouraged to use the Payment and Service Finder to
compare their DVA entitlements to their potential FTB rate.

In shared care arrangements, where one parent/carer is receiving
Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) or Military Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme (MRCAETS) for a
child, this does not preclude the other parent/carer from claiming or
continuing to receive FTB for this child. Both parent/carer's can be
paid their shared care percentage of the payment they elect to receive.
The DVA Clearance Team must be contacted to confirm eligibility in
shared care cases. The Resources page contains a link to the Payment and
Service Finder and contact details for the DVA Clearance Team.

Assumed study details for children turning 16 years of age

When a child is turning 16 years of age, it is 'assumed' that the
child/ren will continue to be in full-time secondary study past their
16th birthday.

In the month prior to the child's 16th birthday, a letter is issued
advising the month and year Services Australia expect the child/ren to
complete their Year 12 or an equivalent qualification. The month and
year is determined by the customer's usual place of residence and the
child's date of birth.

For example, James was born in South Australia on 10 May 2000. James
lives in the family home with both parents in SA. Services Australia
will assume that James will complete year 12 in November 2017. If this
is incorrect, [] the customer can update the expected course end date by
going online or contacting Services Australia.

For families living overseas, the 'assumed' course end date will be
calculated using Australian Capital Territory term dates.

Course end date

Services Australia will assume that a child/ren has completed year 12 or
equivalent qualification on the 'assumed' or customer advised course end
date.

FTB will continue to be paid until 31 December for any child who
completes year 12 or an equivalent qualification in November or
December.

If a child completes year 12 or equivalent qualification before
November, FTB will continue to be paid for 28 days after the course end
date.

FTB Part B eligibility

Eligibility to FTB Part B ceases for single parents and grandparent
carers whose youngest child turns 16 years of age (or at the end of the
calendar year the child turns 18 years of age if they are in full-time
secondary study).

Exemption end reviews

[] Twenty-eight (28) days before the exemption end date, the customer is
sent a letter asking them to complete the FTB child review online so
that continuing eligibility for the child after the exemption end date
can be determined. Failure to respond to the review will result in
cancellation of FTB for the child.

Shared care

The 'assumed' course end date for customers with shared care will be
based on the place of residence of the parent/carer with the majority of
care.

For 50/50 shared care situations and where the FTB customers live in
different states or territories, use Australian Capital Territory school
term dates and the child's date of birth to determine the
system-generated expected year of completion.

For example, Julie and Clare are 15 year old twins who go to different
schools. Julie attends school in New South Wales while Clare attends in
Queensland. Julie lives with 1 parent in NSW 100% of the time. Clare's
care is split 50/50 between each parent. The other parent lives in QLD
where Clare goes to school.

In this scenario, the assumed course end date for Julie and Clare would
be different. The assumed date for Julie would be based on the date of
birth and usual place of residence, NSW. Clare however, would use ACT
term dates and date of birth.

Blended families

For customers sharing payment of FTB as a blended family who have a
child aged 16-19 (until the end of the calendar year in which the child
turns 19), the 'assumed' course end date will be determined by the
customer who receives the greater percentage of FTB.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

In some instances, children over the age of 13 may be eligible for CCS
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

See Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme payments

Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) Scheme payments are not a
Prescribed Education scheme payment. AIC payments do not affect
eligibility for FTB. For further information about AIC see Eligibility
for Assistance for Isolated Children (AIC) scheme.

Equity Scholarship and Educational Access Scheme

Staff may receive requests from customers to provide a letter confirming
FTB Part A entitlement in respect of a particular child to support their
application for an Equity Scholarship or the Educational Access Scheme.

The following evidence may be requested by customers:

Equity Scholarship

'A recent Centrelink family assistance letter which has been issued to
your parent/s or guardian/s demonstrating receipt of Family Tax Benefit
Part A. The letter provided must include your given name to demonstrate
that you are a dependant of the parent/s or guardian/s receiving Family
Tax Benefit Part A.'

Educational Access Scheme

'A Centrelink family assistance letter that has been issued to your
parent/s or guardian/s demonstrating their receipt of Family Tax Benefit
Part A. The letter must be dated within the period of your year 11
and/or year 12 or equivalent study to be eligible for assessment. The
Centrelink letter provided must include your given name to demonstrate
that you are a dependant of the parent/s or guardian/s receiving Family
Tax Benefit Part A.'

A manual Q999 letter can be issued to the customer. The Resources page
contains approved Q999 text and further information.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website,
including the Payment and Service Finder, and a comparison of FTB and YA
study requirements and approved Q999 letter text.

Related links

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

Initial contact with students or Australian Apprentices claiming Youth
Allowance (YA)

Claiming ABSTUDY

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Claiming Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Restoration of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
