
Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) 007-07040020

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility for NBS and NBU. NBS is a
component of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and is included in an
individual's FTB rate for up to 13 weeks (91 days). It helps with the
upfront costs of having a baby.

NBS replaces BBY

NBS replaced Baby Bonus (BBY) from 1 March 2014 for families not
eligible for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for the child.

Customers have their eligibility for NBS and NBU assessed automatically
when they claim FTB for a child born, or entrusted to care as part of an
adoption process. NBS/NBU can be paid with an FTB instalment or lump sum
claim.

If a customer is eligible for NBS, NBU will be automatically paid in
most cases.

NBU is a separate payment to NBS and is not part of FTB Part A.

NBS is subject to reconciliation.

Eligibility criteria for NBS

Customers must be eligible for FTB Part A at a rate greater than nil and
not have received Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for the same child. Note: as
NBS is included in a customer's maximum Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
rate, a higher income limit applies during the NBS payment period.

Extra criteria depend on the customer/child relationship:

Parents of a child born on or after 1 March 2014:

-   child is under 1 year of age (on the first day of FTB eligibility
    for the child)
-   birth registration requirements are met

Child born on or after 1 March 2014 and entrusted to care of non-parent,
for example, foster care:

-   child is under 1 year of age (on the first day of FTB eligibility
    for the child)
-   child remains their Family Tax benefit (FTB) child for 13 continuous
    weeks from date they become eligible for NBS

Child entrusted to care on or after 1 March 2014 as part of an adoption
process:

-   child (of any FTB child age) has been entrusted to care by an
    authorised party as part of an adoption process
-   eligible for FTB Part A within 12 months of the date the child was
    entrusted to their care

An Approved Care Organisation (ACO) is not eligible for NBS or NBU.

NBS eligibility is calculated daily. It is payable for up to 13 weeks
(91 days) from the first date of eligibility. It will only be paid for
days in the 13 weeks that all eligibility requirements are met.

Rate of NBS

There are 2 NBS rates.

A higher rate is paid for:

-   the customer's first newborn child
-   the first child entrusted to their or their partner's care
-   the first child entrusted to their or their partner's care as part
    of an adoption process, and
-   each child of a multiple birth/entry into care

A lower rate is paid for a second or subsequent child. If a second or
subsequent child dies on or after 1 January 2021 and before their first
birthday, a top-up of NBS may be paid. The top-up is the difference
between the lower and higher rate.

The NBS rate can be reduced if the customer's adjusted taxable income
(ATI) is above the Part A higher income free area and is subject to the
Method 2 income test.

For the current rate of NBS, see Payment rates and thresholds.

Rate of NBU

If a customer is eligible for NBS, NBU is payable in relation to the
first day of NBS eligibility.

A customer is not eligible for NBU if they or their partner have
previously received NBU for the child.

However, NBU can be paid to more than one customer for the same child.
For example, for shared care or change of care. The payment is a
separate payment from NBS and is not a component of Family Tax Benefit
(FTB).

NBS and NBU are subject to indexation on 1 July. For the current rate,
see Payment rates and thresholds.

The Resources page contains links to forms, the NBS/NBU maximum rate
matrix and NBS maximum rate map, and examples.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Payment rates and thresholds

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
