
Processing Parenting Payment (PP) claims 007-19082022

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This is a Family and Domestic Violence Interaction Point. If the
customer is with another person, on speaker phone, or already identified
with family and domestic violence concerns, continue with the current
business conversation. Otherwise, go to the Family and domestic violence
procedure to conduct the risk identification and referral process.

This document outlines how to process Parenting Payment (PP) claims.

Submitting claims and documentation

Customers can be advised they can make a claim for PP:

-   by submitting an [] online claim, or
-   with help from a Service Officer running the ACC

The claim information can be viewed in the review of claim.

If the customer lives in a remote area and normally uses an agent,
Remote Service Centre or phone to do business, transfer them to the
Remote Claims Processing (RCP) team to begin their ACC unless the
customer has already lodged a paper claim.

Upon receipt of documentation to support a customer's claim, scan the
document to Document Tools on the customer's record. Update the
customer's claim task list using the Request and Manage Customer Tasks
guided procedure in Customer First.

[] A correspondence nominee can submit a PP online claim on behalf of
their principal.

Verifying partner details before finalising an online claim or ACC

If a customer lodges an online claim, verification of the partner
details included in the claim, must be provided. A Temporary Access Code
(TAC) will be issued to customers when claiming if they confirm they can
provide accurate information about their partner's circumstances.

When assisting customers to claim using ACC, verbal confirmation can be
provided by the partner if they are present, otherwise the TAC can be
printed or posted to the customer.

See Confirming a partnered relationship.

Straight through processing

Straight through processing is where a claim for a social security
payment or service is assessed using criteria to identify if it is
suitable for an automated grant outcome.

The system may process Parenting Payment Single (PPS) claims
automatically if they meet these criteria:

Identity is confirmed

Residency requirements met

Tax file number recorded

Employment status requirements met

No change in known relationship details

No change in known children details

The customer does not identify as having a:

-   disability
-   illness
-   injury
-   is unwell, or
-   in a bereavement period

Homeowners on less than 2 hectares, or paying government rent

Customer advises of less than $50,000 in savings

Claim results in a grant outcome

If a claim meets the criteria for automated assessment, DOCs or Display
Notes on the customer's record will show that ROXY has created these.

Customer contact

If a customer asks for an explanation or applies for a formal review of
the decision, the Service Officer must enter their own logon as the
Decision Maker and customer's local service centre when running the
script.

If the claim was incorrectly granted, give feedback via ROXY.

Claim processing in Process Direct

Process Direct is used to review PP claim information and to process the
claim once all required information is available.

A claim ID is created as a Work Item when a PP claim has been submitted
(either online or via ACC).

Process Direct:

-   contains information provided by the customer online or recorded
    using ACC
-   lists documents the customer has been asked to provide
-   loads provisional online claim and ACC information into a PP claim
    activity
-   has functions to view scanned documents, make referrals, and request
    information

Process Direct tables specific to PP claims can be accessed via the
Super Key or the Parenting Task Selectors. To review or update child
information, select the Relationships button and select the relevant
child/ren.

Participation Interview for PPS

A customer who lodges a claim for Parenting Payment Single (PPS), whose
youngest child in care is 6 years of age or older, must be contacted to
discuss mutual obligation requirements. A new claim can be granted
without the Participation Interview being conducted when an outbound
call is unsuccessful, however, a follow up appointment must be booked
within 14 days of claim assessment.

If the claimant's partner died within the 14 weeks before the customer
claiming PPS, the customer should not be contacted for a participation
interview until after the end of the bereavement period.

Principal care of each child

To qualify for Parenting Payment a customer needs to have principal care
of a PP child under 6 if partnered or under 8 if single.

When assessing a Parenting Payment claim, a principal care assessment
must be made for each PP aged child in care. As the pension (PEN) and
Parenting (PGA) systems read child eligibility in different ways,
correct child coding is required to ensure:

-   correct assessment of a customer’s qualification for Parenting
    Payment, and/or
-   the additional child income free area for PPS customers and
    inclusion on the Pension Concession Card

When changes to shared care, loss of care or loss of principal care are
not updated correctly, customers may receive PP when not qualified.

Family Tax Benefit and Parenting Payment (PP) claim processing priorities

If the customer or partner are claiming both FTB and PP, there is no
requirement for FTB to be assessed before their PP claim can be
finalised. Assess the PP claim first if practical. If a care
determination is needed, and the Service Officer is not trained to make
this, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB and income support payment new claim
processing interactions.

Related links

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) to Parenting Payment
Single (PPS)

Transfer from Parenting Payment Single (PPS) to Parenting Payment
Partnered (PPP)

Shared care for social security payments

Rates of Parenting Payment (PP)

Assessment of income and assets for Parenting Payment (PP)

Change of circumstance for Parenting Payment (PP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Parenting Payment (PP) letters

Residence assessment for customers claiming Parenting Payment (PP)

Deferment, non-payment period or rate reduction period for Parenting
Payment Partnered (PPP)

Rejecting a Parenting Payment (PP) claim

Family Tax Benefit (FTB and income support payment new claim processing
interactions

Straight through processing

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
