
Mutual Customer identification (MCI) for family assistance customers with status of Centrelink Pending (CPN) 007-13020040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) process when more than one Centrelink record is
matched for the same Tax File Number (TFN).

Multiple Centrelink records matched to same TFN

When Centrelink attempts to establish an electronic link with the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and there is already a link established
with that TFN, the ATO will return an activity to the Centrelink system
which needs to be followed up by a Service Officer. This situation could
occur for example, where a customer's payment has been cancelled and,
when they reclaim, they are assigned a new Customer Reference Number
(CRN).

It is also possible the ATO have at one time issued the same TFN to two
different people. This can occur when two ATO customers have very
similar names and dates of birth. If the same TFN is provided for two
CRNs and the customers are not the same person, the customer with the
activity on their record will need to re-quote their TFN (or their
partner's TFN if the problem is with the partner's TFN). These cases are
known as Centrelink pending.

Delays to payment reconciliation

If the MCI match is not on the CRN that is Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
current or linked to the FTB current partner, FTB, Child Care Subsidy
(CCS), and Child Care Benefit (CCB) Reconciliation will be delayed.
Early correction will assist in preventing ongoing Manual Intervention
and enable customers to be paid their FTB, CCS and CCB Reconciliation
entitlements without delay.

TFN provided in error

A customer may have provided someone else's TFN in error to Centrelink.
If the personal details do not match, ATO will return a status of
mismatch and the customer will receive a letter requesting correct TFN
details. These are not Centrelink pending cases.

If a TFN has been recorded in error on another person's record, please
refer the record to the Data Quality Unit via the Intertwined Referral
form. See the Resources page for a link to this form.

The Resources page contains an example of a Centrelink pending case and
a link to the Intertwined Referral form.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
