
Education Tax Refund paid through the Tax system 007-10030000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to the Education Tax Refund
(ETR) administered by the Australian Tax Office (ATO).

On this Page:

Abolition of ETR

As part of the 2012 Federal Budget, the Government announced the
abolition of the ETR payment administered by the ATO.

From January 2013, Schoolkids Bonus was introduced. Payments delivered
automatically in January and July each year to eligible customers from
2013 to 2016 inclusive. Schoolkids Bonus ceased from the end of 2016,
with the final instalment paid in July for the 30 June 2016 bonus test
day.

As part of the transition to Schoolkids Bonus, the ETR for the 2011-12
financial year will be paid by Services Australia as a one off lump sum
payment. This payment is known as the ETR payment.

Reimbursement of education expenses

The Education Tax Refund (ETR) for a period prior to the 2011-12
financial year can still be claimed and paid through the ATO.

The ETR is to help families with children undertaking primary or
secondary school studies to meet the costs of school education through
assistance with certain education expenses. Under the ETR, eligible
families can claim a tax refund of 50 per cent of eligible education
expenses incurred from 1 July 2008 until 30 June 2011. This does not
include expenses for school fees. The Resources page contains a link to
the ATO website listing items that can be claimed.

Maximum Refund

The maximum refund for:

2008-09

-   $375 per child, per year for each child undertaking primary school
-   $750 per child, per year for each child undertaking secondary school

2009-10

-   $390 per child, per year for each child undertaking primary school
-   $779 per child, per year for each child undertaking secondary school

2010-11

-   $397 per child, per year for each child undertaking primary school
-   $794 per child per year for each child undertaking secondary school

Eligibility

The following customers will be eligible to claim the ETR:

Customers entitled to Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A for children
undertaking primary or secondary school studies for the relevant
financial year. This includes FTB current, current at zero rate and lump
sum claim customers. If a customer received FTB for the financial year
and at reconciliation was later found not to be entitled to FTB Part A
(for example, due to income being over the limit), they will not be
entitled to claim the ETR

Parents with a school child who stopped full-time school during the year
and received income over the child cut-out amount, which prevented them
from receiving FTB Part A

Parents with school children undertaking primary or secondary school
studies who would be an eligible child for FTB Part A but for the fact
that the child receives certain payments or allowances, for example:

-   Youth Allowance (YA)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   ABSTUDY Living Allowance
-   Payments under the Veterans' Children Education Scheme
-   Payments under the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004

Customers undertaking primary or secondary school studies who are
independent of their parents. An independent student for ETR is a
student who:

-   undertakes full-time primary or secondary school studies
-   is receiving payments under a prescribed educational scheme, for
    example, ABSTUDY Living Allowance or a social security pension or
    benefit such as Youth Allowance or payments under a labour market
    program
-   satisfies an independence requirement that is relevant to the amount
    of the payment
-   is under 25
-   is an Australian resident or a special category visa holder who
    resides in Australia
-   does not have anyone else who is eligible for the education tax
    refund for them

Claiming ETR and further information

The ETR is claimed through the ATO either via a customer's income tax
return or via a stand-alone claim if the customer is not required to
lodge an income tax return.

Note: when claiming for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A children, the
customer who receives FTB Part A must be the one who claims the ETR.

Customers requesting further information regarding the ETR should be
directed to the ATO.

The Resources page contains a link to the ETR homepage on the ATO
website.

Related links

Education Tax Refund (ETR) payment for 2011-12

Schoolkids Bonus

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
