
Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test 007-05020030

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This procedure outlines the Paid Parental Leave scheme work test for
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP). The work test
for PPL and DAP are very similar, the main difference is how the 13
month work test period is calculated.

Eligibility for PPL

To be eligible for PPL in normal circumstances, primary and secondary
claimants need to meet a work test.

To meet the work test a customer must have:

-   performed at least 330 hours of qualifying work for a period
    spanning 295 consecutive days (approximately 10 months) within the
    392 day work test period (approximately 13 months), and:
-   had no more than a break of 84 consecutive days (12 weeks) between 2
    qualifying work days in the 295 day (approximately 10 months)
    qualifying period

Note: customers can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between workdays
during the 392 day (about 13 months) work test period. They just cannot
have this gap during their 295 day (about 10 months) qualifying period.

Customers may still be eligible for PPL if they have resigned or intend
to resign from their employer. The PPL work test is based on the
customer's employment information in the 392 day period prior to the
birth/entry into care of their child.

If exceptional circumstances for PPL apply, secondary claimants may be
exempt from the work test. PPL tertiary claimants are also exempt from
the work test.

Note: JobKeeper Payment and COVID-19 Disaster Payments (paid by Services
Australia on or after 3 June 2021) count towards the work test. Other
COVID-19 payments, such as those paid by state or territory governments
and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, do not count as qualifying work for
the work test.

Eligibility for DAP

To be eligible for DAP all customers must meet the work test.

To meet the work test a customer must have:

-   performed at least 330 hours of qualifying work for a period
    spanning 295 consecutive days (approximately 10 months) within the
    392 day work test period (approximately 13 months), and:
-   had no more than a break of 84 consecutive days (12 weeks) between 2
    qualifying work days in the 295 day (approximately 10 months)
    qualifying period

Note: customers can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between workdays
during the 392 day (about 13 months) work test period. They just cannot
have this gap during their 295 day (about 10 months) qualifying period.

Current or continuing employment is not a requirement of the work test.
A customer may not be currently employed or may be planning to resign
from their employment at the time they lodge their claim, and can still
meet the work test based on their employment during the qualifying
period. The DAP work test is based on the customer's employment
information in the 392 day period before the nominated DAP period start
date.

Note: the JobKeeper Payment and COVID-19 Disaster Payments (paid by
Services Australia on or after 3 June 2021) count towards the work test.
Other COVID-19 payments, such as those paid by state or territory
governments and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, do not count as
qualifying work for the work test.

Qualifying work

A customer is considered to have worked on a day when at least 1 hour of
qualifying work has been performed on that day. Work performed (whether
or not the work was performed in Australia) as an employee, contractor,
self-employment, or any form of gainful activity for reward or financial
gain is considered as qualifying work. A customer can count work
performed during the work test period for multiple employers, such as a
second or previous job.

Paid leave, such as recreational leave and sick leave, counts towards a
claimant's qualifying work. A person is also taken to be on paid leave
if they are on unpaid leave from their employer while receiving workers
compensation, accident compensation or a similar payment.

Previous PPL and/or DAP periods in the 13 months before the birth or
adoption of a second and subsequent child will count as 'qualifying
work' towards the Paid Parental Leave scheme work test. If a customer
includes a previous period of PPL and/or DAP in the work test, a weekday
will count as 7.6 hours.

The JobKeeper Payment and COVID-19 Disaster Payments (paid by Services
Australia on or after 3 June 2021) also count towards the work test.
Customers who received JobKeeper Payment during their work test period
for PPL or DAP can count 7.6 hours for each weekday (Monday - Friday)
towards meeting the work test.

Customers who performed at least 1 hour of paid work or paid leave
(including weekends) and received JobKeeper Payment can count whichever
is greater:

-   7.6 hours for each weekday in the period (not including weekends)
-   The number of hours actually worked each day (including weekends)
-   The number of hours of paid leave each day

The Resources page contains examples of the work test period and
qualifying period.

Note: other COVID-19 payments, such as those paid by state or territory
governments and Pandemic Leave Disaster Payment, do NOT count as
qualifying work for the work test.

Exceptions

Premature birth

For a PPL customer, an exception to the work test may be applied if the
customer is required to:

-   cease employment early, or
-   reduce their hours of employment because their child was delivered
    prematurely

If a DAP customer was expected to meet the work test based on the
nominated DAP period start date but did not meet the work test due to
the child's premature birth:

-   they are determined to have met the work test if, relevant evidence
    has been provided, and
-   it is clear they would have met the work test had the child not been
    born prematurely

Pregnancy related complications or illness

A customer may meet the work test if:

-   the birth mother has experienced pregnancy related complications or
    illness that prevented them from working, and
-   the customer would have met the work test had the pregnancy related
    complications or illness not occurred, and
-   suitable evidence has been provided

No longer employed

If the customer is no longer employed, for example business has ceased
trading or their work contract has ceased, the customer may still be
deemed to meet the work test.

A Service Officer must be satisfied that the medical condition prevented
the customer from seeking new employment or extending their contract. To
support this, evidence of a consistent work history showing a strong
connection to the workforce must be provided.

Special Circumstances

For PPL and DAP claims made on or after 4 September 2021, customers who
do not meet the work test may qualify for an exception if they:

-   experienced special circumstances within their work test period, and
-   this affected their ability to perform paid work

An exception to the work test may be applied if:

-   special circumstances existed, and
-   the customer would have met the work test if the special
    circumstances did not exist

The special circumstance exception reasons include:

-   severe medical condition or caring for a close family member who is
    affected by a severe medical condition
-   natural disaster declared by the Commonwealth, a State or Territory,
    and
-   family and domestic violence

Severe medical condition

A PPL or DAP customer may meet the work test if:

they were prevented from working during their work test period because
they were:

-   affected by a severe medical condition, or
-   caring for a close family member who was affected by a severe
    medical condition

suitable evidence has been provided

A close family member is the customer’s:

-   partner
-   child (natural, adopted or step-child)
-   sibling (natural, adopted or step-sibling)
-   parent (natural, adopted or step-parent)
-   partner’s parent (natural, adopted or step-parent)
-   a person the customer has legal guardianship over

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, 'family member'
includes cultural kinship relationships.

Natural disaster

A PPL or DAP customer may meet the work test if:

-   they were prevented from working during their work test period
    because they were severely affected by a natural disaster
-   the natural disaster has been declared by the Commonwealth, a State
    or Territory
-   suitable evidence has been provided

Note: COVID-19 has not been declared a natural disaster by the
Commonwealth, a State or Territory. A more targeted approach was
implemented to support customers affected by COVID-19. These include:

-   the extended work test measure (for children born or adopted between
    22 March 2020 and 31 March 2021), and
-   counting JobKeeper Payment and the COVID-19 Disaster Payment as
    qualifying work

Family and domestic violence

A PPL or DAP customer may meet the work test if:

they were prevented from working during their work test period because
they:

-   experienced family and domestic violence, or
-   were dealing with the impacts of family and domestic violence

the circumstances have been assessed by a social worker

suitable evidence has been provided

-   the social worker may assist the customer with evidence for their
    circumstances, but the customer must still provide evidence of their
    employment

Dangerous Jobs Provision

A Dangerous Job provision applies to pregnant customers/birth mothers
who stop work due to a hazard in their workplace that was or is a risk
to their pregnancy.

There are a few recognised professions where it can be confirmed that a
particular job is dangerous to pregnant women. Currently these include:

-   boxers
-   jockeys, and
-   mining contractors

While the intent for this provision was aimed at these particular
industries, the provision does not explicitly preclude other
professions. Depending on the claimant’s individual work circumstances,
there may be a condition of the customer’s work that constitutes a
hazard connected to the work performed.

Customers will still need to meet the work test but can use the day they
stopped work as the last day of their work test period.

Note: a customer may be assessed under the Dangerous Job provision if
they:

-   cease work due to the risk that coronavirus (COVID-19) has on their
    pregnancy, or
-   are unable to be vaccinated against COVID-19 due to a risk to the
    pregnanc.

Extended work test due to COVID-19

PPL and DAP customers who do not meet the work test due to COVID-19, may
be able to extend their work test period.

The extended work test will apply to customers who:

-   do not meet the existing PPL scheme work test because they stopped
    work, or had their work hours reduced, due to COVID-19, and
-   have a child with a date of birth or adoption between 22 March 2020
    and 31 March 2021

PPL Extended Work Test

Customers who stopped work or had their hours reduced due to COVID-19,
may extend their PPL work test period if they do not meet any of the
following:

-   the existing PPL work test in the 392 days (about 13 months) before
    the child's expected/actual date of birth or adoption,
-   the premature birth or pregnancy related illness/complication
    exceptions, or
-   the dangerous job provision

In addition, the customer’s child must have a date of birth or adoption
between 22 March 2020 and 31 March 2021.

The PPL extended work test period is the 600 days (about 20 months)
before the child's expected/actual date of birth or adoption. To meet
the extended work test, the customer must meet the following within the
extended work test period:

-   performed at least 330 hours of qualifying work within the 295 day
    qualifying period (about 10 months)
-   not had a continuous gap longer than 12 weeks between consecutive
    working days during that 295 day period

Note: customers can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between workdays
during the 392 day (about 13 months) work test period. They just cannot
have this gap during their 295 day (about 10 months) qualifying period.

Primary claimants who meet the PPL extended work test, can nominate a
PPL period start date that is on or after their child's date of
birth/adoption. They can do this even if they lodge their claim and
provide proof of birth more than 28 days after the child’s birth or
adoption. If the customer nominates a start date in the past and they or
their partner are receiving an income support payment or Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) during the backdated PPL period, they must be advised of
potential overpayments to these payments. See Determining a customer’s
Paid Parental Leave (PPL) period start date.

Note: the usual backdating provisions apply for customers who meet the
existing PPL scheme work test.

COVID-19 affected PPL customers who have returned to work

Customers who meet the PPL extended work test can claim PPL after they
have returned to work and still be eligible for the PPL period. Their
PPL period can be paid up to the date they returned to work. See
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work.

DAP Extended Work Test

Customers who stopped work or had their hours reduced due to COVID-19,
may extend their DAP work test period if they do not meet either of the
following:

-   the existing DAP work test in the 392 days (about 13 months) before
    their DAP nominated start date, or
-   the premature birth exception

In addition, the customer’s child must have a date of birth or adoption
between 22 March 2020 and 31 March 2021.

The DAP extended work test period is the 600 days (about 20 months)
before the DAP nominated start date. To meet the extended work test, the
customer must meet the following within the extended work test period:

-   performed at least 330 hours of qualifying work within the 295 day
    qualifying period (about 10 months), and
-   not had a continuous gap longer than 12 weeks between consecutive
    working days during that 295 day period

Note: customers can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between workdays
during the 392 day (about 13 months) work test period. They just cannot
have this gap during their 295 day (about 10 months) qualifying period.

The work test and claiming PPL and DAP for the same child

If a customer has previously been assessed as being eligible for PPL,
including meeting the work test, and subsequently claims DAP for the
same child, the customer will also be assessed as meeting the work test
for DAP.

This also applies if a DAP customer has been assessed as eligible and
subsequently lodges a PPL claim for the same child.

The Resources page contains examples of applying the work test including
exceptions such as pregnancy related complications, the 392 day
(approximately 13 month) work test period and the 295 day (approximately
10 month) qualifying period and a link to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk
online query form.

Related links

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) customer returns to work

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
