
Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care 007-07040040

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess eligibility for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) for a child in foster care. This includes formal and informal
foster care arrangements.

Determining legal responsibility for child

If the foster carer makes a claim for FTB, the primary decision that
must be made is whether the child is an FTB child.

To make this decision, it must be determined who has legal
responsibility for the child and who has actual care of the child.

In the absence of any court orders in respect of a child, a parent
generally has legal responsibility for the child.

If a court order exists, verification of who has legal responsibility
may be obtained by contacting the relevant welfare authority.

Evidence of a change of care can include:

-   court orders
-   documentation from state welfare authorities
-   documentation from recognised foster agencies
-   for informal care, confirmation of the arrangements from the child's
    natural/adoptive parent(s) or previous carer

Where the child is not known to Services Australia that is there is no
child record, then additional proof of birth documents are also
required.

Informal care

If the child is away from the care of the person who has legal
responsibility for the child for less than 4 weeks, this can be
considered a temporary change of care, and the original carer can
continue to be eligible for FTB. For example, a state agency facilitates
the placement of a child but does not gain legal responsibility it is
considered informal care. This occurs as parents are assisted to have
respite or place their child in short-term care, and may include
placements in the care of grandparents or relatives. This does not
include legally authorised changes in care where a state authority has
placed the child with a foster carer or other carer for short periods of
time.

If the child is not to return to the care of the original carer, then a
change of care could have occurred. If the foster care is informal, that
is if a relative or friend assumes care of a child in a private
arrangement, care should be taken to identify cases where the young
person may be living with someone who is not a relative, or is at risk
of harm.

Formal care

Formal care is where the change of care is legally authorised and
involves a change in legal responsibility (whether day-to-day and/or
long term). It needs to be supported by documentation from a
state/territory child welfare authority or a court from another
jurisdiction for example family law court from the federal jurisdiction.
These documents from the state authority or the court order will
determine who has the legal right to care for the child.

In formal care situations, FTB is payable to the new carer from the date
the child enters foster care, for the relevant dates provided in the
supporting documentation. If the child moves from 1 formal carer to
another (for example another foster carer), the FTB will follow the
child and be paid to the new carer from that point in time.

Disagreement over care arrangements

If there is a disagreement over care arrangements between the foster
carer and the previous carer, a determination has to be made as to who
is qualified for FTB. In reaching a decision, consideration must be
given to all the circumstances of each case, and particular to the
following points:

-   legal responsibility for the child
-   care of the child and the duration of care
-   shared care
-   contrived arrangements, and
-   child at risk of harm

Appropriately skilled staff within the Child Support Smart Centre
Division manage all disagreed care cases. The Resources page contains
examples of foster care and eligibility for FTB.

Entitlement to other payments/concessions

A foster care claimant may also be eligible for a Health Care Card (HCC)
for a foster child if they are not eligible for an auto HCC through
their entitlement to FTB.

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) are not payable
for a formal foster care arrangement.

PPL and DAP may be payable in an informal foster care relationship where
exceptional circumstances exist or where the child becomes entrusted to
the customer's care as part of the process of adoption.

The Resources page contains examples of foster care and eligibility for
FTB, FTB examples of legal responsibility and temporary care provisions.
It also has information about the letters produced with the Child -
Change in Care Arrangements script and letters in Process Direct.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Child enters customer's care/custody

Child out of care without consent

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Verifying the date of birth or age of a customer or child

Actioning Approved Care Organisation (ACO) advice of transfer, discharge
or absence of a young person

Foster care and principal carers

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
