-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains study requirements and exemptions for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years or over. FTB is only payable for a
child aged 16 years or over if study requirements are met or if an
exemption applies.

Study requirements for FTB

For customers to receive FTB for a child aged 16 years or over, the
child must satisfy study requirements. This is part of the definition of
an FTB child.

If the customer contacts to advise study details for their child, see
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children 16-19.

To satisfy the study requirements, a child aged 16-19 years must:

-   be undertaking full-time secondary study leading towards a year 12
    or an equivalent qualification
-   have an acceptable adjusted study load, or
-   be exempt from the study requirements

Apprentices, other than school based apprentices, do not meet the study
requirements for FTB.

Payment of FTB Part A

FTB Part A can be paid for a child up until the end of the calendar year
in which the child turns 19 years of age if they continue to be in
full-time secondary study.

When completing full-time secondary study, FTB Part A can continue to be
paid:

-   for 28 days after the course end date if the end date is before
    November or until 31 December if the course end date is in November
    or December, or
-   until the end of the calendar year in which they turn 19 years of
    age

FTB eligibility criteria must be met for FTB Part A to be payable for
the child.

Payment for FTB Part B

FTB Part B can be paid for a customer who is a single parent or a
grandparent carer with a child aged 16-18 years if they satisfy the
study requirements or an exemption applies.

When completing full-time secondary study, FTB Part B can continue to be
paid:

-   for 28 days after the course end date if the end date is before
    November, or
-   until the end of the calendar year in which they turn 18 years of
    age

FTB eligibility criteria must be met for FTB Part B to be payable for
the child.

Identifying the most beneficial payment for families

A child aged 16 years or over may be an eligible FTB child but may have
the option to claim a more beneficial payment in their own right such as
Youth Allowance (YA). [] To identify the best option for the family,
customers can use the online Family Assistance-Youth Allowance
Comparison Estimator.

For more information about Youth Allowance eligibility for students, see
Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices.

Note: 16-17 year old dependent children living at home in full-time
secondary study will generally not be eligible for YA. If the child is
undertaking tertiary study, they may qualify for YA.

From 1 January 2020, children aged 16-19 years receiving a means tested
ABSTUDY payment (such as Living Allowance and School Fees Allowance
(Group 2)) can still be considered an FTB child if they are:

-   a full-time secondary student
-   approved to live away from home to study, and
-   boarding to attend school

[] Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers are encouraged to
compare their DVA and potential FTB entitlements for a child aged 16
years or over using the online estimators to identify which payment may
be more beneficial. In shared care arrangements, where one parent/carer
is receiving Veterans' Children Education Scheme (VCES) or Military
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act Education and Training Scheme
(MRCAETS) from DVA for a child, this does not preclude the other
parent/carer from claiming or continuing to receive FTB for this child.
Both parent/carer's can be paid their shared care percentage of the
payment they elect to receive. The DVA Clearance Team must be contacted
to confirm eligibility in shared care cases.

Child Support cases

Customers who have a child turning 18 years of age must contact Child
Support to apply for an extension to their child support case before the
child turns 18 years of age if all of the following apply:

-   the child is continuing in full time secondary study
-   the customer has a child support case in place for that child

If the customer does not apply to have the child support case extended
before the child turns 18 years of age, the child support case will be
ended and the customer will only be entitled to the base rate of FTB
Part A for the child from the child's 18th birthday.

See Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers
for more information about children aged 16 years and over.

Exemptions and Adjusted Study Load

Exemptions can be permanent or temporary. The only permanent exemption
is for a child with a disability.

Temporary exemptions can be granted for up to 12 months. Where an
exemption is granted this will be reviewed prior to the exemption end
date to reassess the child against the study requirements.

An adjusted study load is where a child is studying but less than
full-time for a reason beyond their control or choice. An adjusted study
load is not an exemption.

Note: if a child chooses to study part-time and work part-time this
would not be an approved adjusted study load.

Smart Centre processing staff will need to assess and grant/reject
applications for both exemptions and adjusted study loads.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
links to resources and user guides for staff. It also contains school
term dates, examples of assessing study requirements and exemptions for
FTB children aged 16-19 years, and question and answers.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for children aged 16-19 years

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Online estimator options

Schoolkids Bonus

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
