
Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income 007-11010080

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers may advise they (or their partner
or ex-partner) are not required to lodge a tax return and provide income
details for a previous financial year. This is to finalise their Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) or Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum
claim, Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claim or Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation. It also covers finalising self service
'Advise non-lodgement' activities. All CCB/CCR references relate to
financial years before 2018-19.

FTB, CCB and CCS reconciliation

FTB, CCB and CCS reconciliation cannot occur until any required actual
income details for the customer (and their partner/ex-partner) transfer
from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Partial reconciliation can
occur for FTB using customer actual income alone if only an ex-partner's
actual income details are outstanding.

CCS is not subject to partial or interim reconciliation and all CCS
customers (and their partner/ex-partners) must meet CCS reconciliation
requirements by confirming all income estimated during a CCS year. This
includes confirming income for any partners or ex-partners they may have
had during relevant CCS periods in the year.

Income for CCS is confirmed by either:

-   lodging an Income Tax Return with the ATO
-   advising Services Australia they are not required to lodge an Income
    Tax Return and providing their actual income, or
-   submitting a non-lodgement advice to the ATO, and advising actual
    income to Services Australia

A person must consult the ATO website and use the 'Do I need to lodge a
tax return?' online tool or an accountant to find out if they are
required to lodge a tax return, including when their income is below the
tax free threshold. The Resources page contains a link to the online
tool.

For FTB, a person may need to lodge a tax return if they:

-   received an income support payment for the whole financial year, and
-   had any ISP nil rate periods due to employment income

Refer the customer to the ATO website for more information. This does
not apply for CCS. All CCS customers (and their partner/ex-partner) must
provide their actual income details for reconciliation to occur, unless
the customer requests a Most Recent Estimate (MRE) exception to allow
reconciliation to be calculated using the ex-partner's most recent
estimate.

Accepting a non-lodgement advice

A non-lodgement advice is accepted if the person meets all of the
following criteria:

-   Single Touch Payroll (STP) data does not indicate that a tax return
    is required, see the Single Touch Payroll Families (STPF) screen for
    the relevant year in Process Direct
-   taxable income reported by customer is equal to or below the
    relevant tax free threshold
-   no tax was paid or withheld from any amount of income
-   the person had no net investment losses, reportable superannuation
    contributions, exempt reportable fringe benefits, other reportable
    fringe benefits or tax exempt foreign income
-   if they have a child support assessment in place to pay or receive
    child support, they received ISP for the whole financial year
-   was not involved in a business

Note: when the above criteria is met, we are able to accept
non-lodgement advice for FTB and CCS balancing purposes. Customers with
a Child Support assessment in place must be advised to check with the
ATO to ensure they do not have any other requirements to lodge for ATO
or child support purposes.

If all of the above criteria is not met, refer the customer to the ATO
to check their details, and either:

-   lodge an income tax return, or
-   complete an ATO 'non-lodgement advice'

Advise them to visit the ATO website for more information.

-   staff still need to run the non-lodgement workflow regardless of
    whether or not non-lodgement will be accepted so income details can
    be recorded
-   single ISP customers with taxable income over the tax free threshold
    may still have a requirement to lodge. See the Resources page for an
    example

Single Touch Payroll

Single Touch Payroll (STP) is an Australian Taxation Office (ATO)
initiative where employers submit payroll data to the ATO with each pay
event. Where a customer or their partner is a mutual client of
Centrelink and the ATO, the ATO will share their STP data with Services
Australia.

STP payroll data may be used to determine if a non-lodgement advice,
provided through self-service channels, is accepted. Services Australia
will not be able to accept a non-lodgement advice if STP data indicates
the person has a tax lodgement requirement. For example, a tax lodgement
may be required if a person has:

-   had tax withheld, regardless of the amount of income
-   taxable income above the tax free threshold
-   any amount of reportable fringe benefits, reportable superannuation
    contributions or tax exempt foreign income

The use of STP data does not currently extend to the Family Assistance
Office non lodgement exemption workflow in Customer First.

From the 2020/21 financial year onwards, previous financial year STP
data can be viewed on the STP Data for FTB Customer (STPF) screen in
Process Direct, including:

-   if a tax return is required (based on STP information)
-   the reasons a tax return is required
-   the amount of STP reported salary and wages (for the customer only)

This information can help to determine the expected outcome of the
non-lodgement advice before the Family Assistance Office non lodgement
exemption workflow in Customer First is run.

Note: the ‘Reconciliation income source' field on the STPF screen should
not be used to determine if income has been confirmed or if
reconciliation has completed.

Time limit

To receive their full annual FTB entitlement and avoid the non-lodger
and late lodger process, customers must meet income lodgement
requirements by the end of the lodgement year (extended lodgement year
for 2011-12 or earlier years).

To ensure that CCS customers are assessed for their CCS entitlement,
customers must also meet income confirmation requirements by the first
and second deadlines. If a CCS customer has special circumstances
preventing them from meeting income confirmation requirements, they may
request an extension to the deadline. See Reconciliation of CCS for more
details.

FTB customers with special circumstances preventing them from confirming
their income within the allowed timeframe may be granted an extension of
time to meet the requirement.

Self service options

[] Customers can notify that they or their current partner are not
required to lodge a tax return for the last 3 financial years and
provide their income details by using:

-   their Centrelink online account Advise non-lodgement of tax return
    option
-   Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

CCS customers cannot advise their ex-partner is not required to lodge
via online services. This information must be updated by a Service
Officer.

Family Assistance Office non lodgement exemption workflow

Only run the workflow if:

-   the customer has language or literacy barriers affecting their
    capacity to complete updates using self service, or
-   the customer is advising non-lodgement for a financial year more
    than 3 years in the past

This workflow is used to record 'advise non lodgement of a tax return'
and income for the non-lodgement year. It guides a discussion in
providing a non-lodgement and income declaration.

The 'not required to lodge' advice may or may not be accepted. Mostly,
this is automatically determined based on responses to the question
assessment and known information about the customer's circumstances.
Service Officers should always check the outcome is reasonable before
finalising the workflow. If an automatic determination is not
reasonable, a Service Officer can manually change the outcome.

If the income declaration is considered reasonable but the non-lodgement
declaration is not accepted, the income declaration will still be
recorded.

For CCS, ex-partner details cannot be updated using this workflow. Code
them separately in Process Direct.

Accepted

For the income estimate and 'not required to lodge' exemption to be
used, the customer must acknowledge that:

-   income may still be confirmed with the Australian Taxation Office
    (ATO) using data such as payment summaries lodged by employers and
    declarations by financial institutions
-   if a tax return is later lodged, actual income details will be
    transferred from the ATO and used to review family assistance
    entitlement

Not accepted

If the ‘not required to lodge’ advice is not accepted, the customer or
their partner must:

-   lodge a tax return, or
-   complete an ATO ‘Return Not Necessary’ (RNN) advice with the ATO

Details will then be transferred from the ATO and used to reconcile
family assistance.

Note: CCS customers must also confirm their income with Services
Australia even if they have completed the RNN with the ATO.

If Services Australia have not accepted the non-lodgement advice but the
income details are considered reasonable, the income declaration will
still be recorded on the FAO Income for Previous Year (FIPY) screen.
This income will be used in reconciliation if an ATO 'Return Not
Necessary' (RNN) advice is later received. For CCS ex-partner income
details, record this within Process Direct via the EXFNLE Super Key.

FTB and CCS top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim amounts and instalment arrears

FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim amounts and instalment arrears
can be used to recover any overpayments for:

-   Family Assistance
-   Social Security
-   Student Assistance, and
-   Paid Parental Leave

This will occur even if the customer has a current payment arrangement.

CCS arrears can only be used to recover CCS/CCB/CCR debts, excluding Job
Education and Training (JETCCFA) debts.

If exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances apply which may cause the
customer to suffer severe financial hardship, FTB customers can request
to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery prior to any money being
taken from their arrears, lump sum or top-up payments. This is not
applicable for CCS.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions and examples,
relevant contact details and links to the ATO website.

Related links

Advise non-lodgement of tax return option online

Using Centrelink self service

Enquiries about Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum
claim

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation or lump sum claim pending

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Recording or updating income estimates for previous years for family
assistance payments

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Annual income reviews for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers and their
partners who are not required to lodge a tax return

Previous partners and family assistance reconciliation

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
