
Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments 007-07010020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for a customer to provide a TFN
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS), Stillborn Baby
Payment (SBP), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) and Parental Leave Pay (PPL).
It covers coding and assessment details.

TFN requirement

Before a claim for FTB or SBP can be assessed, the TFN of the customer
(and their partner) must be obtained. The partner's TFN statement is not
required for DAP or PPL claims. An Approved Care Organisation (ACO) does
not need to provide a TFN.

TFNs are needed for CCS claims.

TFN statement

The customer is required to make a TFN statement on their claim form.
The Resources page contains more information about TFN statements.

If the customer has made a TFN statement either within an online claim
or in writing on a claim form, the TFN(s) for the customer/partner may
be supplied verbally, including over the phone.

If TFN details are not provided within the required timeframe, see new
postage timeframes, then, either the FTB/SBP claim is not effective or
the PPL claim is not effective and cannot be assessed.

Customers can provide TFNs over the phone if they or their partner have
previously made a TFN statement which did not include the TFN and they
are now able to provide the TFN.

Re-use of TFNs for family assistance customers

Where a customer has previously claimed a family assistance payment and
a TFN is recorded, the system defaults to an authorisation of 'Yes' to
allow claims to be processed without the risk of automatic cancellation
for non-provision of a TFN.

If a customer previously only provided a TFN for a social security
payment the customer must complete the TFN statement either in their
online claim, on the claim form or provide their or their partner's TFN
over the phone.

Helping family assistance customers obtain a TFN

If the customer (or their partner) does not have a TFN or cannot access
their TFN, see Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for
Family Assistance.

A newly arrived refugee can authorise Services Australia to obtain a TFN
online.

Customers in extreme or urgent circumstances

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) or Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) claimants
assessed as meeting the guidelines of experiencing an extreme or urgent
circumstance can be assessed for approval to have an override coded,
pending receipt of their TFN.

See Obtaining a TFN override for family assistance customers
experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance.

Exemptions

The legislation does not allow exemptions for the customer under any
circumstances. However, in limited circumstances, a customer may be
exempt from providing their partner's TFN details. The Resources page
contains further information on exemptions.

Confidentiality

Paper files and documentation containing TFNs must be stored securely to
guard against unauthorised access, use or disclosure. TFNs may need to
be removed or blacked out from paper records if:

-   the records are to be sent to an external organisation, or
-   a customer provides a document showing their TFN and Services
    Australia has not requested their TFN details

If a customer loses their TFN, the agency may, after confirming Proof of
Record Ownership (PoRO) disclose their TFN to them. Alternatively, the
customer can visit the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) website for more
information.

The Resources page contains further information about TFN statements,
exemptions, and privacy and confidentiality.

Related links

Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for Family Assistance

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) override for family assistance
customers experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance

Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) process for family assistance
customers

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Processing claims for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
