
Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A from 1 July 2018 007-18043002

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess the child immunisation requirements
for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A. This is payable for a child from 1
July 2018.

Meeting immunisation requirements

Customers must meet immunisation requirements when in receipt of:

-   FTB Part A
-   Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

A child meets the requirements when their FTB immunisation status on the
Child Immunisation Summary guided procedure displays as Yes. Each time a
child receives a vaccination, the provider will update the status. These
details are sent to the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR).

If a child does not meet immunisation requirements or is not
successfully linked with the AIR, the customer has a 63 day grace period
to ensure the child is:

-   up to date, or
-   successfully linked with the AIR

After this 63 day grace period, the customer may have their FTB Part A
reduced (per child).

Medical exemptions may apply, see the Resources page for an overview on
exemptions.

This does not include school age and adolescent vaccinations on the
school programs schedule. For example, the human papillomavirus (HPV)
vaccine. Customers must talk to their child's vaccination provider if
they have any questions or concerns regarding this.

Immunisation information for customers

Customers can view the information held on the Australian Immunisation
Register for a child on their Immunisation history statement.

Customers who do not meet the requirements will receive FTB immunisation
reviews and reminder letters.

Complaints, reviews and feedback about immunisation requirements

Customers can request a review of a decision that has been made about
their payments. This may include the FTB Part A rate reduction due to
immunisation.

Do not record reviews for:

-   decisions that have not yet been made, including the start of an FTB
    immunisation grace period
-   general complaints regarding the legislation, or
-   customers who want an explanation of the decision or the legislation

See Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback
Tool.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
AIR forms. It also contains exemption and vaccination objection
information and contact details for Families override contacts.

Related links

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement
for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Establish a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) link for a child between Centrelink
and the Australian Immunisation Register (AIR)

Immunisation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation reviews and reminders for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

View and update a child's immunisation status and assess or update
immunisation overrides for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Bereavement payment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Management of immunisation evidence

Attaching electronic documents to a Centrelink customer's record using
Document Tools in Customer First

Recording customer complaints and feedback in the Customer Feedback Tool
(CLK) (MED)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
