
Economic Security Strategy (ESS) Payment for Families 007-10020000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Economic Security Strategy (ESS) payment for
families. The ESS payment for families was part of the Australian
Government's $10.3 billion ESS to support sustained growth. This
assistance to Australian families took the form of a one-off payment of
$1000 per eligible child. This document does not cover details on ESS
for Carer Allowance (CA) or Carer Payment (CP).

On this Page:

ESS payment

The ESS payment was paid to Family Tax Benefit Part A recipients in
respect of each child who on 14 October 2008, was:

-   a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A child or
-   a dependent child who attracted Youth Allowance (YA), ABSTUDY, or a
    Veterans' Children's Education Scheme (VCES) payment

The ESS payment was $1000 per eligible child and automatically paid
during the period 8-19 December 2008 to families who were receiving FTB
as fortnightly instalments (not a lump sum claimant).

For recipient who claimed their FTB Part A as a lump sum payment, the
ESS payment was assessed and paid (if eligible) when their 2008-09
actual income was received from the Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and
their lump sum FTB payment was made, where tax returns were lodged by 30
June 2011.

The automatic delivery of ESS payments ceased 3 September 2016.

ESS assessments may be triggered by the FTB reconciliation process or
completion of a FTB lump sum claim that has been pending income. In this
instance, a manual follow up (MFU) will be created for specialist staff
to check entitlement to the payment.

Recipients may still be eligible for ESS payments in strictly limited
and rare circumstances. In these cases, a manual payment may be made by
specialist staff only.

The circumstances a recipient could be entitled are:

-   they lodged a claim in the required two year period for the 2008-09
    financial year,
-   have not received an ESS payment previously (that is, for that
    particular child/ren), and
-   they were otherwise entitled to a FTB payment at the relevant dates
    in 2008.

ESS assessments are processed by the Families Ongoing Entitlement Team
and enquiries can be emailed to them. Service Officers are not permitted
to take payment action themselves. The Resources page contains the
contact details for Families Ongoing Entitlement team.

Note: payments under the Administrative Scheme, referred to below, are
no longer payable in any circumstance. This information has been kept
for information purposes only.

Entitlement to ESS under Administrative Scheme

The Administrative Scheme was established to assist foster and
non-parent/kinship carers who gained care of a child shortly after the
announcement of stimulus payments to families under the ESS. The
Administrative Scheme also allowed people who temporarily lost care of a
child due to special circumstances to receive a payment.

This was paid in respect of each child who for the period 15 October -
31 December 2008, was:

an FTB Part A child, and

the child had entered (or re-entered) the recipient's ongoing care
during this period and one of the following applied:

-   the person was entitled to FTB Part A for the child at some time
    during the period 1 July - 13 October 2008 and there were special
    circumstances relating to why the person was not entitled to FTB
    Part A for the child on 14 October 2008
-   the person had the ongoing care of the child under a formal foster
    care arrangement, or
-   the person was non-parent carer of the child (for example
    grandparent) and had the ongoing care of the child due to an
    inability or failure of the child's parents to provide care of the
    child

Recipients with a start date of FTB Part A in the period 15 October - 31
December 2008 may be entitled to the ESS under the Administrative
Scheme.

To receive ESS under the Administrative Scheme a must have lodged a
claim by 29 January 2010. Claims lodged after 29 January 2010 will be
rejected. Payments under the Administrative Scheme are not automatic.

For historical information on claiming the ESS payment under
Administrative Scheme, see Step 4 in the Information on claiming ESS
under the Administrative Scheme table.

The Resources page contains questions and answers about the ESS payment
for families.

Related links

Household Stimulus Package

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
