
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Service Officers processing
claims for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

On this Page:

Automated processing of CCS claims

For the majority of CCS online and staff assisted claims, the system
will determine if the claim meets the criteria for straight through
processing (grants or rejections). This is generally an overnight
process. In these cases, the customer will receive more timely advice
regarding the outcome of their claim. If the claim does not meet the
criteria for straight through processing, it will be allocated to an
appropriately skilled Service Officer for processing.

Claims requiring exception management or validation of selected data
items will not auto assess and are allocated via Workload Management to
a staff member to manage.

All ACCS applications (Grandparent, Transition to Work, Temporary
Financial Hardship and Child Wellbeing) are allocated to appropriately
skilled staff to validate information and/or evidence supporting the
application.

Processing claims

Appropriately skilled staff are allocated claims which do not meet
criteria for straight through processing. Their role is to action any
errors and/or validate evidence as prompted. Exception management may
include:

-   checking all required evidence has been provided, and requesting
    further information if necessary
-   assessing ‘Other’ recognised activities
-   assessing age/school status exemptions
-   referring or assessing exceptional circumstances (e.g. request for
    more than 100 hours of child care)
-   assessing CCS Activity Test exemptions
-   assessing or handing off any specialised processing (e.g. residence
    or immunisation exemptions)
-   all CCS claims combined with an ACCS application

There is no requirement for Service Officers to review information
outside of the errors presented when processing a CCS claim. For ACCS
applications, all evidence is to be reviewed to ensure it sufficiently
supports the customer’s application.

Progress of pending claims

Customers may contact requesting their CCS claim be processed urgently.
Referral for urgent processing is only considered where the customer
meets the definition of a family in crisis or a family experiencing
financial hardship. For more information about how to manage progress of
claim enquiries, see Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Contents

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Add child claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Related links

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)
eligibility and applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
