
Effect of income support enh1ment on Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07070010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how entitlement to income support payments (ISP)
affects the rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) during the financial year
and during the reconciliation process after the end of the year.

ISP customers

Receiving an income support payment (ISP) means the customer or their
partner receives:

-   a social security benefit
-   a social security pension, or
-   a service pension, income support supplement or veteran payment from
    the Department of Veterans' Affairs

This does not include:

-   ISP waiting periods including an Income Maintenance Period (SUS-IMM)
-   employment income nil rate periods from 1 July 2018 for certain
    customers
-   from 1 July 2019, periods where the pension status is current zero
    rate (CZR) for reason PLS (see Home Equity Access Scheme for further
    details).

Effect on FTB

ISP customers eligible for FTB are paid FTB fortnightly. They have
access to the FTB payment choices to reduce the risk of overpayment due
to changes in their circumstances during the financial year.

FTB customers may be exempt from the income test for FTB Part A while
the customer or their partner receives an ISP. This is not the case
during employment income nil rate periods, ISP waiting periods or
periods where the pension status is current zero rate (CZR) for reason
PLS. During these periods their FTB rate is based on their family's
income estimate.

The FTB Part B income test applies to all partnered ISP customers
eligible for FTB Part B. The FTB Part B income test does not apply to
single ISP customers. The Part B primary earner income limit does not
apply when the customer or their partner receives an ISP.

The Process page contains more information.

Income support payments must be included as taxable income or tax-free
pension/benefit in a family's adjusted taxable income.

The FTB rate may be automatically adjusted if the customer or their
partner begins or ceases to receive an ISP.

Reporting obligations

Family assistance and ISP reporting obligations are different. ISP
customers must report actual income, not an annual estimate.

Service Officers must discuss income reporting requirements at every
opportunity and ensure actual income and income estimates are both
updated when required.

If either member of a couple is receiving family assistance, their
estimate must include income support payments, employment income and any
other components of adjusted taxable income (ATI) (received or expected)
for the financial year for both members of the couple.

If either member of the couple is receiving an ISP, the expected
payments must also be included in the estimate for family assistance.

Rent Assistance (RA)

If a customer's FTB Part A has been reduced to the base rate because
they have failed to satisfy the Maintenance Action Test (MAT), RA can be
paid with the income support payment until they satisfy the MAT - this
process is automatic.

RA is not payable if FTB Part A has been reduced to the base rate due to
maintenance income.

Child care payments

All customers are income tested and are required to provide an income
estimate for Child Care Subsidy (CCS), regardless of their ISP status.

If a customer is receiving an ISP and CCS, their estimate must include
income support payments, employment income and any other components of
adjusted taxable income (ATI) (received or expected) for the financial
year.

Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care provided before 2 July 2018
was not income tested during periods the customer or their partner was
receiving an ISP. Therefore, ISP periods are not subject to income
reconciliation.

The Resources page contains employment income nil rate period scenarios.

Related links

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Taxable and non-taxable (tax exempt) payments for Centrelink Payment
Summary

Tax-free pensions and benefits for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments, and the Parental Income Test for Youth Allowance,
ABSTUDY and Assistance for Isolated Children

Employment income nil rate period

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
