-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how parents and guardians can claim Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in their care. Customers can make
a new claim for children in their care, or claim for an additional child
who has entered their care.

Claims for newborn child or previous financial year FTB lump sum

Separate procedures apply for customers:

-   claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a
    newborn child, and
-   claiming FTB as a lump sum for a previous financial year

Online claims

[] Customers can claim online. Customers can complete the claim in their
own time without the need to speak to a Service Officer. A started
online claim can be saved so the customer can continue with it later.

When the customer submits their claim they are advised of any
documentation they will need to provide to support their claim,
including proof of a child's birth. Customers who submit an online claim
do not need to lodge a paper claim form.

Submitted online claims can be processed quickly as claim information is
uploaded onto the customer's record when the claim is ready to finalise.

Customer in crisis or experiencing financial hardship and verbal claims

For a family deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
when helping eligible remote Indigenous customers or when helping
customers in crisis or financial hardship it is reasonable for
additional assistance to be provided. Service Officers and the Smart
Centres Families and Child Care (FCC) Processing team, work in
partnership to provide a suitable outcome. Where appropriate, the use of
a verbal claim should be considered, if a claim is required. For verbal
claims, the customer must agree to the privacy agreement before starting
the claim. For these claims, the ACC can only be submitted if the
customer meets the claim signature requirements by either accepting the
Verbal Signature Declaration or returning a signed Families Declaration
Form (FDF).

If the Verbal Signature Declaration has not been accepted, the workflow
will generate a Families Declaration Form (FDF) for the customer to sign
and return.

The activity can be referred to Families Processing for priority
processing. See Progress of claim – Families claims

From 10 June 2019, FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim amounts and
instalment arrears amounts can be used to recover any family assistance,
social security, student assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payment debts. This will occur even if the customer has a current
payment arrangement. Previously, FTB amounts could only be used to
recover FTB, Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child Care Rebate (CCR) debts.

Where exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances apply which may cause
the customer to suffer severe financial hardship, customers can request
to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery prior to any money being
taken from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up payments.

Non-current FTB customers

[] The customer will be required to provide additional details via the
online claim. When the customer submits their claim they are advised of
any documentation they will need to provide to support their claim,
including proof of a child's birth. Customers who submit an online or
verbal claim do not need to lodge a claim form.

Current FTB customers

Customers currently receiving fortnightly FTB instalments who wish to
add an older child (not a newborn) to their FTB record are not required
to complete an online claim or lodge a claim form. They can verbally
advise of an additional older child entering care. See Reassessment of
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an additional
child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) customers

DVA customers may benefit from claiming FTB for a student child aged 16
years and over, particularly where the family is entitled to receive FTB
Part B. These customers should be encouraged to use the Payment and
Service Finder to compare their FTB and DVA entitlements.

Verifying care arrangements

If the customer is claiming for a child who has entered their care, the
change of care must be confirmed before the claim can be finalised.
Details of the care arrangement need to be provided and the arrangement
confirmed with the other carer/s if required.

Customers should provide documents they have to confirm the care
arrangements, for example adoption papers, letter from the state or
territory child welfare authority, court order or parenting plan.

Verification of care arrangements (including care arrangements for grandparents)

If a grandparent or third party carer contacts to advise they have
gained care of a child; and the following conditions are met:

-   the losing carer is the parent of the child, and
-   there are no Court Orders or Child Protection orders in place for
    the care of the child

further information, including the following questions should be
requested to help make a change of care decision:

-   What is the reason for the change of care?
-   Is the child going into the care of a grandparent or third party? If
    so, do they live in the same residence as the parent?
-   What involvement will the parent continue to have with their
    child/ren whilst in the grandparent or third party's care?
-   Is the reason for the change of care due to work related reasons
    and/or study?
-   Who will be providing financially for the child whilst in the
    grandparent or third party's care?
-   Is the child listed on your Medicare card?
-   Who will be making the major decisions for the child about health,
    education and discipline?

Any evidence relevant to the decision must be documented and scanned to
the record.

Note: if the Service Officer requires assistance in determining
eligibility where there has been a change of care of a child from the
parent to the grandparent or third party carer, get help from Local Peer
Support (LPS) or a Service Support Officer (SSO) using standard
escalation protocols.

Grandparents and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) is not payable to grandparents and non-parent
carers who are caring for a child in a child care capacity, for example
child attending child care (either child care centre/family day care or
care by a relative/friend) or staying overnight with a grandparent,
other relative or family friend. If the customer is the grandparent or
non-parent carer of the child, a determination should be made whether
the care is a change in care or child care while the parents are
working, studying or away.

A determination should be made whether the care is a change in care
(either formal or informal) or not. If a decision cannot be made based
on the information supplied by the customer then evidence may be
required to make the determination, see Evidence to support the actual
care arrangements.

Bereavement Payment

Customers need only lodge a Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008) in the
event of the death of a dependent child. Customers should be offered a
referral to a Services Australia social worker for assistance.

Customers overseas

The Families International Claims (FIC) team finalise claims lodged by
customers who are overseas.

Newly arrived refugees

Newly arrived refugees with children may wish to test their eligibility
for FTB. Children aged 16 or over:

-   must satisfy the education/training requirements or have an
    exemption
-   may also wish to test their eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA)

Non Biological Children

Customers claiming Family Tax Benefit Part A for a child that is not
their or their partner’s biological or adopted child, may be eligible to
receive Double Orphan Pension. Double Orphan Pension helps families with
the costs of caring for orphaned children or children who are unable to
be cared for by their parents in certain circumstances. For more
information on eligibility and how to claim, see Double Orphan Pension
(DOP).

The Resources page contains contact details for Department of Veterans'
Affairs (DVA) and the Centrelink DVA Clearance Team (SCS), the Services
Australia website and relevant publications.

Related links

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child enters customer's care/custody

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Immunisation requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A supplement
for financial years 2012-13 to 2017-18

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Initial contact after the death of a dependent child

Initial contact after the death of a potential family assistance and
Paid Parental Leave scheme customer

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Initial contact by customers claiming family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn child

Initial contact by customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) as lump
sum for a previous year

Initial contact with refugees, humanitarian entrants and protection visa
holders

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Online estimator options

Processing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Receipt of claims, forms and documentation for family assistance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
