-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to update a temporary absence from Australia
when a customer is no longer considered to be residing in Australia and
how this affects their entitlement to Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental
Leave Pay (PPL), Dad and Partner Pay (DAP), or Child Care Subsidy (CCS).
This document will also help Service Officers update other changes to a
customer's residence information.

CCS residence rules

The CCS residence rules also apply to Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS) entitlement such as ACCS (Grandparent), ACCS (Temporary Financial
Hardship), ACCS (Transition to Work) as eligibility for CCS is required
before a customer can be assessed for ACCS.

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme

Customers receiving family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments will generally continue to be entitled to these payments if
they and/or their children temporarily leave Australia, provided they
are not return rule affected.

From 1 July 2016, the maximum portability period of FTB and Double
Orphan Pension (DOP) is 6 weeks for temporary overseas absences. For PPL
and DAP, the maximum portability period for temporary absences is 56
weeks. For further information, see Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care
Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going
overseas.

Eligibility for CCS will cease if a customer is overseas for more than 6
weeks. However, this period can be extended for up to 3 years if return
to Australia is delayed due to a number of limited circumstances.

If a temporary absence changes as the customer is now living overseas,
family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments will cease to
be payable.

Change in residence details after a temporary departure

A customer may initially intend for their or their child/ren's absence
from Australia to be temporary and therefore payment can continue for
the maximum portability period, subject to ongoing entitlement. However,
a customer can no longer be considered Australian resident if:

-   the customer subsequently decides that they and/or their children
    are now living outside Australia, or
-   a Service Officer subsequently decides that they and/or their
    children are now living outside Australia, or
-   the customer's legal residence status changes, for example, their
    permanent visa expires

Determining whether a customer is residing in Australia, and whether a
customer can still be considered an Australian resident can be very
difficult and great care needs to be taken when making this decision.

A customer in Australia may also lose entitlement to family assistance
payments if their legal residence status changes, for example, they are
granted a new visa.

Changing historical residence details

The decision to change the customer's residence status can be made by
the customer or by a Service Officer. However, unless the customer has
misrepresented their circumstances, or failed in their notification
obligations, a change in the residence status is usually not backdated.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
information about payment while overseas and travelling overseas with
medicines, and examples of temporary absences from Australia.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Changing details of a customer's travel to and/or from Australia

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Returning to Australia

Coding the Country of Residence (CRES) screen

Assessing if a customer is an Australian resident

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

Referring inconsistencies in overseas departure and arrival information
to Centrelink International Services (CIS)

Identifying customer vulnerability and risk issues

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
