
Previous partners and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and Child Care Benefit (CCB) reconciliation 007-11010090

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines the reconciliation of a customer's FTB and CCB
payments when they are no longer partnered to a person who was their
partner at any time during the relevant financial year.

Note: all CCB/Child Care Rebate (CCR) references relate to financial
years prior to 2018/2019.

On this Page:

Actual adjusted taxable income

For correct assessment of FTB and CCB entitlement, actual adjusted
taxable income (AATI) details are required for the customer and their
partner(s). If a person is not required to lodge an income tax return
for the relevant financial year, an estimate of their AATI is used to
work out FTB and CCB entitlement.

Separate rules apply for Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) which is
assessed using taxable income. SIFS will only be paid for a partnered
period to eligible persons if partner income is known (reasonable
estimate was provided and accepted by Services Australia if not required
to lodge, or taxable income details were transferred from the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO)). A 'Return Not Necessary' advice reported by the
ATO will not result in a SIFS assessment unless income details for the
financial year have been recorded. Note: for the 2017-18 and later
financial years, customers must meet the SIFS grandfathering provisions
for payment of SIFS.

Partner income

A partner's income is included in the family's combined actual adjusted
taxable income (AATI) only for the period they were partnered to that
person. If the customer's partner died during the relevant financial
year, the assessment includes annualised actual income of the deceased
partner for the period they were a couple.

If the partner received an income support payment during the time they
were partnered to the customer, the customer is entitled to the maximum
FTB Part A (unless both customer and partner were within an employment
income nil rate period) and CCB rates for that period.

If a customer had a partner at any time in the relevant financial year,
reconciliation processing depends on when they were separated from that
person.

Separated as at 30 June of the relevant financial year

The partner is treated as an ex-partner for reconciliation purposes. If
only the ex-partner actual income details are still needed for
reconciliation:

-   Partial reconciliation is the process where any customer and/or
    ex-partner estimates provided throughout the relevant financial year
    are used to complete the reconciliation calculation for any
    partnered periods. The period the customer was not partnered will be
    reconciled using the customer's actual income. Partial
    reconciliation can occur from 1 July of the lodgement year. The
    customer will not incur a debt for the ex-partner period due to
    AATI, but this does not prevent debts occurring during this period
    from maintenance income or qualification. FTB Part A supplement (if
    entitled) and Part B supplement will be included in the
    reconciliation result. Debt offsetting may occur. For 2006-2007 and
    following years, the customer's annual Child Care Rebate (CCR)
    entitlement is calculated when partial reconciliation of CCB occurs
-   Interim reconciliation can occur from 1 July of the extended
    lodgement year if the customer's actual income has been received and
    adequate income for the ex-partner has not been received by 30 June
    of the lodgement year. During interim reconciliation, a calculation
    using only the most recent estimate (MRE) of the ex-partner and
    adequate income for the customer is completed. This result is then
    compared to the partial reconciliation result. Under the ex-partner
    rules, the income which produces the most favourable result is used
    in the interim reconciliation, that is, the result using estimates
    provided throughout the relevant financial year is compared to the
    result using the most recent estimate (MRE) for ex-partner together
    with adequate income for the customer. FTB Part A supplement (if
    entitled) and Part B supplement will be included in the
    reconciliation result. Debt offsetting may occur
-   Final reconciliation will only occur when the ex-partner lodges a
    tax return or Services Australia is advised that the ex-partner is
    not required to lodge. In this case the partner's adequate income is
    used to calculate a reconciliation result. This result is again
    compared to the one applied at interim or partial reconciliation and
    the most favourable result applied. The customer will not receive a
    non-lodger debt if the ex-partner does not lodge their tax return or
    does not advise they are not required to lodge

Separated as at 30 June of the lodgement year

The partner is treated as a previous partner for reconciliation
purposes. If only the previous partner's actual income details are still
needed, interim reconciliation will occur immediately after 1 July of
the extended lodgement year using adequate income (that is, actual
adjusted taxable income (AATI)) for the customer and the most recent
estimate for the relevant financial year for the previous partner. FTB
Part A supplement (if entitled) and Part B supplement will be included
in the reconciliation result. Final reconciliation may occur later if
the previous partner's income details are updated, and the customer may
incur a debt due to the previous partner's AATI. The customer will not
be subject to a non-lodger debt.

Separated during the extended lodgement year

From the 2012-2013 financial year onwards, if the customer separates
from their relevant year partner after the end of the lodgement year,
reconciliation cannot occur until the previous partner's actual income
is obtained.

The non-lodger process will apply:

-   If a customer separates from their partner before the non-lodger
    debt is raised (September of the extended lodgement year), the
    non-lodger debt will be immediately written off if the previous
    partner has not confirmed their income
-   If advice of a separation is received after the non-lodger debt has
    been raised, a temporary write-off of recovery of the non-lodger
    debt will occur, and any repayments made since the separation will
    be refunded to the customer
-   If the customer re-partners with the previous partner, the write off
    will cease and recovery of the non-lodger debt will resume

Reconciliation can occur after actual income of both parties becomes
available, however, supplements and top-ups will not be payable, due to
the late income lodgement. The customer may incur a reconciliation debt
due to the previous partner's income.

For the 2011-2012 and earlier financial years, if the separation was
advised:

before non-lodger debt processing, interim reconciliation will occur
based on the customer's adequate income and the most recent estimate for
the previous partner

-   Final reconciliation may occur later if income details are updated,
    and the customer may incur a debt due to the previous partner's AATI

after a non-lodger debt has been raised, the non-lodger debt will be
cancelled and interim reconciliation will occur, based on the customer's
adequate income and the most recent estimate for the previous partner

-   Final reconciliation may occur later if income details are updated,
    and the customer may incur a debt due to the previous partner's
    AATI. Note: for 2000-2001 there was no extended lodgement year.
    Customers and/or ex-partners were required to lodge before the
    lodgement year ended on 30 June 2002.

Reconciliation can occur after the previous partner's actual income
becomes available. The customer may incur a reconciliation debt due to
the previous partner's income.

Ex/previous partners for CCS

Different reconciliation processing applies for ex/previous-partners
(including partners who have died) for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for the
2018-19 year and from the 2019-20 year onwards.

See Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more details.

Not for CCB lump sum claims

Partial and interim reconciliation and the ex-partner period comparison
process for customers who are separated at 30 June of the relevant year
(ex-partner) do not apply to CCB lump sum claims.

Non-lodgement exemption

A non-lodgement exemption is only to be coded for a previous partner if
the customer advises that the previous partner is not required to lodge
a tax return for the relevant financial year according to tax rules (for
example, their taxable income is below the tax free threshold).

The Resources page contains examples of the reconciliation process where
a customer has an ex-partner.

Related links

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Recording ex-partner details

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

Reconciliation of Child Care Rebate (CCR)

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Maintenance reconciliation for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
