
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings 007-17103126

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
withholdings which are applied to reduce the risk of a potential CCS
overpayment and to recover CCS overpayments throughout the year.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) withholdings

Withholding some of a family’s entitlement to Child Care Subsidy before
it is paid to child care providers is a way to reduce the likelihood of
families incurring a debt at the end of a financial year. The process of
withholding does not reduce a family’s overall entitlement to Child Care
Subsidy.

How does withholding work?

Five per cent of Child Care Subsidy will be withheld to reduce the
likelihood that individuals will incur a debt. This means that the full
subsidy amount, minus 5%, is paid to providers on behalf of families
following submission of session reports. Providers will be able to see
the amount withheld on the payment advice they receive each fortnight.
The amount withheld will be part of the gap fee that needs to be paid by
parents to their child care provider.

There is no withholding for Additional Child Care Subsidy payments.

After the end of each financial year, the total entitlements and
payments for each child will be reconciled against the customer’s (and
any partner’s) actual income and activity for the year. If a customer
received more than they were entitled to, the withholding amount will be
used to offset the overpayment, so they do not have a debt (or have a
reduced debt) to repay. If the customer received the correct amount of
Child Care Subsidy, or received less subsidy than they were entitled to,
amounts withheld during the year will be paid directly to them as a lump
sum. This process of reviewing and recalculating entitlements for the
full year is called Reconciliation.

Standard withholdings for CCS

The standard withholding amount for CCS which is applied at the initial
claim is 5% of the subsidy amount. Customers cannot request a different
withholding percentage during the claim process, however are able to
request to vary the withholding amount once their claim has been
finalised.

Customer requesting a different withholding amount

Customers can request a different withholding percentage at any time
through the year. [] The preferred channel for customers to change their
withholding percentage is through online services.

Staff are able to update a customer’s verbal request for a variation
(increase or decrease) to their withholding percentage in Process
Direct.

CCS withholdings are applied to reduce the likelihood of an overpayment
at the end of the financial year. Through the year if a customer updates
their income estimate that results in a reduced CCS rate it is important
to also check if the customer would like to increase their withholding
rate.

The customer can either request:

-   A withholding rate increase from 5-100%
-   A withholding rate decrease to 0%

Reasons for lower percentage request

Reasons for requesting a lower withholding percentage:

Low risk of debt at reconciliation

-   declaration of steady employment arrangement, work hours and income
-   reported relevant change of circumstances (substantial decrease in
    estimated annual income)

Other – Customer to provide reason for request

Reasons for higher percentage request

Reasons for requesting a higher withholding percentage:

High risk of debt at reconciliation:

-   declaration of unsteady employment, highly variable income
-   reported relevant change of circumstances (substantial increase in
    estimated annual income)
-   estimated combined annual income is around CCS income threshold that
    applies a taper

Received notification that accumulated withholding was reduced or
exhausted to offset an overpayment

Other – Customer to provide reason for request

Impact of varying withholding rate

Customers who reduce their withholding rate are at as increased risk of
incurring an overpayment at the end of the financial year when their
payments are reconciled.

Customers increasing their withholding amount will reduce their
likelihood of an overpayment at reconciliation however as a result of
the increased withholdings their child care centre will receive less
Child Care Subsidy on their behalf. This this will increase the child
care fees that the customer is required to pay their service.

When requesting a change to the CCS withholding percentage customers
must indicate the start date for the change – this cannot be a date in
the past.

Customers have the option of providing an end date for the varied
withholdings. Where an end-date is not specified in the initial request,
the varied withholding amount will apply until the customer requests the
withholdings to change. Customers are not able to retrospectively end
date a varied withholdings request.

Customers who provide an end date will be notified 28 days before their
requested withholding percentage is due to be changed back to the
default 5%. They will be advised they can submit a new request for a
different withholding percentage or if they take no action their
withholding percentage will revert to the default five per cent on the
date indicated.

Changing withholding rate - date of effect

The new withholding percentage will take effect from the day specified
(i.e. does not have to be the first Monday of a CCS fortnight). This
will generally be the day indicated by the customer.

The withholding percentage that applies is the one that is in effect
when a service submits attendance information. For example, if a child
attends a service every day of a week (Mon–Fri), a new withholding
percentage is recorded on the Wednesday, and the service submits the
session report for the child on the Friday, the new withholding
percentage will apply to the whole payment, which is calculated for all
sessions in the week (i.e. the old withholding percentage does not apply
to the sessions of care delivered on the Monday and Tuesday).

Changes to CCS withholdings cannot be backdated for any reason.

CCS withholdings being used to offset overpayments throughout the year

For customers who:

-   have child care only related debt, and
-   are receiving CCS only payments, recovery is through their ongoing
    CCS payments if no other arrangements are in place

The standard rate of recovery is 20% of the CCS weekly rate. Customers
can increase or decrease this withholdings amount. Any decrease to the
rate of 20% would require the customer to undertake an assessment for
financial hardship. If a customer requests a change to the standard 20%
CCS recovery rate see Recovering Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts in
Process Direct.

Cash arrangements and voluntary deduction arrangements

See Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts for information on how to add a cash
or voluntary arrangement.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
