
Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 1) 007-07070020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how the rate of FTB Part A is calculated using
Method 1. There are 2 methods used to calculate the rate of Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) Part A, depending on whether the family's adjusted taxable
income (ATI) is above or below the Part A higher income free area.

On this Page:

Method 1

Method 1 is used if a family's combined ATI is equal to or less than the
Part A higher income free area (HIFA). See Part A higher income free
area for the rate of the HIFA. Under Method 1, the FTB Part A rate
cannot be less than base rate.

A person's maximum rate may include:

-   the FTB Part A child rate for each child (includes the Part A
    supplement which is only paid to eligible persons after the end of
    the financial year at reconciliation, not as fortnightly payments)
-   Energy Supplement Part A if the customer is grandfathered
-   Large Family Supplement (LFS) Note: LFS is not payable from 1 July
    2016
-   Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA)
-   Newborn Supplement (NBS)
-   Rent Assistance (RA), only if more than base rate Part A is payable

See the References page for a link to historical information.

For details on the Method 1 calculation when ATI is above the Part A
higher income free area, see Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A
(Method 2).

Income test

Under Method 1, the maximum FTB Part A can be reduced to the base rate
by the:

-   Income Test
-   Maintenance Action Test (MAT). If maintenance action is required but
    the person does not take reasonable action, only the base FTB child
    rate is payable for the child support child
-   Maintenance Income Test (MIT), which only applies to more than base
    rate child support children

For income support payment customers, the FTB Part A rate is generally
not income tested, but may be reduced by the MAT and MIT. From 1 July
2018, the exemption from the income test does not apply to single
customers and some partnered customers during an employment income nil
rate period. For further details, see Effect of income support
entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB).

From 1 July 2016, families with an adjusted taxable income (ATI) of more
than the supplement income limit will not be eligible for FTB Part A
supplement. This includes customers receiving an income support payment.

Any reduction due to income or maintenance income is apportioned between
the FTB Part A components. This means that loss of entitlement to one
component can result in a greater reduction in the person's overall FTB
Part A rate than the amount no longer payable. For example, if RA ceases
to be payable, the income reduction that applied to the RA rate will now
be applied to the other components.

The Resources page contains examples of FTB Part A rate calculations
using Method 1.

Related links

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A (Method 2)

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Online estimator options

Payment rates and thresholds

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Effect of income support entitlement on Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Rate explanation screens for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Maintenance Action Test (MAT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Maintenance Income Test (MIT) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B Supplements

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) savings provisions and precluding payments

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
