-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines how PPL is delivered to employees. Depending on
their circumstances, this can be by their employer, Services Australia,
or both.

Checking status and payment delivery role

A separate procedure applies for checking the status and the payment
delivery role for a Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claim assessment, including
where the claim status is assessed (ASS).

Child born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, if an employer
determination is made, the employer will be responsible for the delivery
of PPL when the customer nominated:

-   an 8 week (40 consecutive weekdays) minimum block of continuous PPL
    days (Monday to Friday only), and
-   the PPL days fall before the child turns one/anniversary of care

The employer determination only applies to the first block of PPL days
since birth/entry to care.

Services Australia will deliver:

-   any subsequent days, including periods of 8 weeks or longer that are
    separated from the first block
-   any other pattern of days from that described above

Child born or adopted before 1 July 2023

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, if an employer
determination is made, the employer will be responsible for the delivery
of:

-   the full PPL period of up to 12 weeks, plus
-   any Flexible PPL days that the employee has connected to the end of
    their PPL period

All other Flexible PPL days will be delivered by Services Australia,
regardless of the employer determination outcome. Employers cannot elect
to deliver these days.

Note: connected Flexible PPL days cannot be paid more than 52 weeks
after the child’s birth or adoption. Any connected Flexible PPL days
scheduled after the child’s first birthday or anniversary of adoption
will not be:

-   connected to the PPL period, or
-   delivered by the employer

Employer determinations for PPL

The employer will be responsible for delivery of PPL to an eligible
employee who:

-   has been an employee of the employer for 12 months or more
    immediately prior to the child's expected date of birth or entry
    into care (for Australian Public Service (APS) employees, the
    employment period is covered by all APS employment)
-   will be an employee of the employer for the employer paid period
-   is an Australian-based employee of the employer
-   is expecting to receive 8 weeks or more of PPL, and
-   is not in receipt of an income support payment (ISP)

The employer must also have an Australian Business Number (ABN).

Note: for APS employees, if the employee has worked for the APS (rather
than their particular agency or agency) for more than 12 months, then an
employer determination would be made by their current employer.

If the customer is an eligible employee, they will not have the option
to choose who will deliver the payment. This includes employees who are
full-time, part-time, casual, seasonal, contract and self-employed
workers. Exception: if a child is stillborn or has died, a PPL employee
should be given the choice of payment delivery by the agency or their
employer (this includes when PPL might have already started).

The employer obligation to accept a PPL employer determination is not
removed, where a person:

-   is casually employed, or
-   does not have a shift scheduled during their employer delivered
    period,
-   is usually employed on a temporary contract and intends to return to
    work with the same employer, or
-   is not on the current payroll

Staff will need to undertake discussions with the employee and the
employer to obtain evidence and an understanding of the employee’s work
history and pattern of employment to assist them determine whether the
employer is obligated to deliver PPL to them.

The Resources page has a matrix to determine whether a customer meets
the requirements to have either a mandatory or opt-in PPL employer
determination made for their claim. This depends:

-   on the details that they have provided in their claim, and
-   the class of employees that their employer has opted in for

If the employer is not responsible for providing PPL to the employee, it
will be delivered by the agency. However, employers can elect to provide
PPL for all full-time, part-time, permanent and casual employees,
regardless of how long they have been working for the employer. The
agency must obtain the consent from the employee before making an
employer determination.

Employers must register their details with the agency using Provider
Digital Access (PRODA) to access the Business Hub, then opt in to
provide Parental Leave Pay before their employee submits their claim.
For more details see Employer registration for PPL.

Changes to employer circumstances resulting in revocation/transfer of
the employer role will be actioned by the Paid Parental Leave Employer
Processing Team (PPLEPT).

Employers as payment nominees

If a PPL employee's PPL is to be delivered by the agency, requests to
appoint their employer as their payment nominee the associated risks for
PPL customers using employers as payment nominees should be brought to
their attention.

Service Officers should make employees aware of their entitlement to
specify an end date for nominee arrangements.

Although the employee's employer may not be legally required to provide
the employee's PPL, they may elect to do so and the employee should be
encouraged to discuss this option with their employer.

PPL provided by the employer

PPL funds will be delivered in advance to the employer, who will then
provide PPL to the employee through their existing payroll cycle.
Employers can elect to receive funding fortnightly or they may opt to
receive funds 6-weekly in 3 instalments. This will display on the
Payment Summary (PS) screen of the employee as 6WE (6-weekly).

Where the employer selects irregular/other as their pay cycle frequency,
the employer will not be able to input pay cycle dates and funding will
only be delivered in 6 weekly instalments.

It is important to note that payments from an employer will be aligned
to the employer's payroll cycle. This means any PPL delivery information
on an employee's record will reflect when payment was made to the
employer, not when payment was delivered from the employer to the
employee.

The first payment will not be provided to the employer unless the
employee is PPL/CUR on the relevant strip date. The employer pay strip
date is 2 working days before the employer pay delivery date.

Note: as employer payments are sent 7 days before the employer's pay cut
off it is not unusual for some time to elapse between the claim being
granted and the first payment to the employer being issued.

Employers are required to:

-   provide back pay of PPL in the next available regular payday and
    withhold tax from the back pay under the usual Pay As You Go (PAYG)
    withholding arrangements
-   pay PPL to their employee as part of their usual payroll cycle
-   provide the employee with a written record of the payment and any
    deductions (payslip)
-   withhold tax from the PPL under the usual PAYG withholding
    arrangements, and
-   include PPL in the total amounts on the employee's annual or
    part-year payment summary (statements produced and given to the
    employee for tax purposes)

Letters are issued to the employer to advise them when an employer
determination has been made for them to provide PPL to an employee, as
well any changes to the determination.

It is not possible to issue urgent payments to employers or transfer the
provider role to the agency because a payment is yet to be provided to
the employee. The employer has no obligation under the scheme to provide
payments at any time, other than the regular payday and once sufficient
funds have been received by the agency.

PPL provided by Services Australia

The agency will provide PPL to an employee, at commencement or during
the PPL payment period, when:

-   the conditions for an employer determination are not met, or
-   the employee is receiving an income support payment and claims PPL
    for a child born or entering care

The agency may decide not to make an employer determination where the:

-   child in respect of whom PPL is payable is stillborn or has died
-   employer does not have an Australian Business Number (ABN). For
    example, people who are not in a business and employ household
    workers such as cleaners, nannies or gardeners. In these cases,
    there is no requirement for the employer to have an ABN
-   employer does not have an Australian bank account
-   employer is not a fit and proper person

PPL will also be delivered directly to the customer if they are an
independent contractor, or self-employed with no additional employees.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   customer is a tertiary claimant
-   customer's PPL period has ended
-   primary claimant owes a debt in relation to an instalment paid in
    relation to a child and the customer is a secondary claimant for the
    same child
-   any Flexible PPL days that are not connected to the PPL period

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

-   where a customer has claimed a day on the weekend (ie: Saturday or
    Sunday)
-   any subsequent PPL days, including periods of 8 weeks or longer that
    are separated from the first period
-   where the customer is already current and a day or more is added
    before the continuous block and the new day(s) are not a continuous
    block of at least 8 weeks of consecutive weekdays

In these cases the agency will:

-   pay PPL as fortnightly instalments to the customer into their
    nominated Australian bank account
-   withhold tax at a rate of 15% unless the customer specifies another
    amount
-   pay PPL to a nominee if requested by the customer (Note: when a
    customer has or requests a payment nominee, it may indicate the
    customer is not able to provide enough care for the child to meet
    PPL eligibility. If the customer is unable to provide this care it
    may be more appropriate for another person to claim PLP for the
    child)

Paymaster determinations and changes for PPL claims for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

Employer as Paymaster

The employer will be the paymaster if:

the customer’s first claimed PPL days:

-   consist of a minimum period of 40 consecutive weekdays (Monday to
    Friday only – no weekend PPL days claimed) and
-   occur before the child’s first birthday/anniversary of care

the employer will continue as the paymaster where the claim is assessed
(ASS) pending PPL days nomination and:

-   any additional weeks or days are claimed (Monday to Friday) with no
    break, before or after, the initial (or more) 40 weekdays claimed in
    the customer’s PPL claim, as long as they are consecutive (no gaps)

Note: Where:

an additional block consisting of a minimum 40 consecutive weekdays is
claimed prior to the existing employer paid block period, and

there is a break between the two block periods:

-   the employer will be the paymaster for the first period only, and
-   Services Australia will be the paymaster for the second period

The employer paymaster will transfer to Services Australia if:

after the first consecutively claimed PPL days within the child’s first
year since birth or entry into care and:

-   there is a gap between two blocks of consecutive PPL days, (this
    could be Monday to Friday only), Services Australia will be the
    paymaster after the gap, or
-   if part of the first continuous block of PPL days goes past the
    child’s first birthday or anniversary of care, Services Australia
    will be the paymaster from the child’s first birthday or anniversary
    of care

additional PPL days are nominated within the employer paid period
(Saturday and/or Sunday):

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the nominated
    weekend day
-   The paymaster transfer will occur on the first weekend day nominated
-   All remaining days in the employer period will be paid by Services
    Australia

a date is withdrawn from the employer paid period (Monday to Friday):

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the nominated
    date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the withdrawn date
-   All remaining days in the employer period will be paid by Services
    Australia

a weekday is rejected for any reason other than Working on a PPL day
(WOD):

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the rejected
    date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the rejected date
-   All remaining days in the employer period will be paid by Services
    Australia

a weekday is rejected for reason Working on a PPL day (WOD):

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the rejected
    date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the rejected date.
-   The rejected day and all remaining days in the employer period will
    be returned to the customer’s available PPL days balance

if Working on a PPL day (WOD) is coded on a weekend day:

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the WOD date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the WOD date
-   All remaining days in the employer period will be returned to the
    customer’s available PPL days balance

if a termination of employment is notified on a weekday:

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the rejected
    date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the termination date
-   All remaining days in the employer period including the rejected
    date will be paid by Services Australia

if a termination of employment is notified on a weekend day:

-   The employer period will end on the weekday prior to the rejected
    date
-   The paymaster transfer will occur from the termination date
-   All remaining days in the employer period including the rejected
    date will be paid by Services Australia

if the first PPL day of the first block of continuous PPL days is
rejected for any reason except PDP (PPL day prior to expected/actual
DOB/DOP), the paymaster will determined as Services Australia from the
rejected day onwards

For more information, see:

-   Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children
    born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023, and
-   Cancellation, rejection, not effective, assessed and current zero
    rate codes for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Services Australia as paymaster

Services Australia will be paymaster if:

the customer’s first nominated PPL days are:

-   not a minimum of 40 consecutive weekdays
-   continuous weekdays (Monday to Friday) but are less than 40 weekdays
-   are continuous but include Saturday and/or Sunday within the first 8
    weeks

all nominated PPL days are prior to the date of receipt of the PPL claim
(due to 100 days backdating)

the child is deceased or still born and the customer has requested
Services Australia to be the paymaster.

the:

-   customer’s PPL claim has a status of ASSessed and they do not meet
    the employer determination requirements prior to the first employer
    determined block, and
-   there is a gap of at least one week day between the nominated days
    and the first day of the existing block
-   Services Australia will be the paymaster for all claimed PPL days
    including the existing block

Where Services Australia is determined as the paymaster, Services
Australia will stay as the paymaster even if there is any change of
circumstances including nomination of the days to be at least 40
continuous weekdays.

Delivery of PPL to income support payment (ISP) customers

If an employee is receiving an ISP at the time of the initial PPL claim
determination (including where the ISP will cancel due to PPL payments)
and the PPL claim is for a child that is born or entering care, the
agency will be the PPL paymaster. No employer determination will be
made.

Employees already in receipt of PPL that have had an employer
determination made (either the PPL payment has commenced or has been
scheduled to commence) and who are granted an ISP will have the
paymaster role automatically transferred from the employer to the
agency. The date of effect for the transfer will be the PPL date paid
to + 1 day to ensure there is no overpayment raised against the
employer.

Once the agency has been appointed as the paymaster, future
reassessments will not change the paymaster, unless the employee makes a
subsequent request to change the paymaster role and the employee is no
longer receiving an ISP.

This automatic paymaster role transfer does not apply where an ISP is
granted to the PPL employee’s partner. It only applies if the PPL
employee themselves are granted an ISP.

Delivery of PPL over national public holidays

Holiday processing arrangements apply to the delivery of PPL where
employer delivery dates are impacted by a national public holiday.

The revised date of payment delivery is based on the employer's 'regular
pay cut off date' and will generally be delivered a couple of days
earlier than the usual delivery date in these circumstances.

Employers have an obligation to pay PPL to their employees when they are
funded to do so and to provide PPL in line with their employee's normal
pay cycle. If an employer fails to comply with these responsibilities
normal dispute resolution procedures apply.

Delivery of PPL during employer shutdown

If it is known that an employer has shut down for a period of time (for
example, Christmas shutdown period) and there is the possibility of a
delay in the employer acceptance process, which will cause a delay in
payment to the employee, it may be appropriate to revoke the employer
determination and transfer PPL payment responsibility.

An employer is not expected to commence payments to the employee prior
to receiving funding from the agency however, there is nothing to stop
them from doing so. Employers are only required to pay an instalment to
an employee if an employer determination has been made and they have
received funds from the agency.

Initiating a request for refund

If a third party receives a payment or payments they are not entitled
to, they are responsible for repaying this amount. This includes when
payment(s) have been incorrectly credited to a third party’s account,
including a joint account.

Care must be taken if the payment was directed to an account nominated
by the employee and the employee does not have legal access to. A refund
should only be requested if:

-   the employee made a genuine error when notifying the account details
-   the account details were changed without the authority of the
    employee, or
-   there was an agency error

If payments have been incorrectly credited to a third party’s account, a
request for refund is made under section 1234AA of the Social Security
Act 1991, section 93A of the Family Assistance Administration Act 1999,
section 169 of the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010 or section 42A of the
Student Assistance Act 1973. A Request for Refund (RFR) should be
initiated on the employee’s record. Only whole payments can be requested
and each payment must be requested individually. If there are multiple
payments, the system totals the amount at the end of the day then sends
a consolidated request to the financial institution.

Under Section 169 of the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010, a third party
debt is only a debt due to the Commonwealth if the incorrect payment was
made by Services Australia. If an employer pays the Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) into an incorrect account the amount is a debt due to the employer
and the agency has no role in the recovery process.

Note: if the agency pays the PPL funds which are intended for an
employer account but are deposited into an incorrect account see PPL
funds for employer paid to incorrect bank account table.

The Resources page contains a table of processes for revoking employer
determination, approved 'Please contact us' email text, contact details
and letter/fax templates, links to the ICT Service Desk for reporting
PPL issues, the Services Australia website and Fair Work Ombudsman
website.

Related links

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Employer registration for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Reassessments for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employer assisted dispute resolution

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Reissuing a rejected payment

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals

SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions

Nominees

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
