
Rejecting a family assistance claim 007-07030150

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Families Smart Centre Processing staff

This document explains why a claim for family assistance would be
rejected. Claims covered in this procedure include Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) and Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP). A customer's claim is rejected
if they do not meet the eligibility requirements for the payment. Claims
may be rejected at the customer level or child level (for example, the
customer may be eligible for one child but not for another).

Rejection of FTB/SBP claims

The claim will be rejected if, for example:

-   a child is not a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of the customer, for
    example care requirements not met
-   family income over limit
-   the customer is not (or would not have been) the primary carer of
    the child for SBP
-   FTB/SBP has already been paid for the child
-   Parental Leave Pay (PPL) has already been paid for the child (for
    SBP)
-   the income estimate provided is not considered reasonable

Other Families claims

Separate procedures cover:

-   Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave
    Pay (PPL)
-   Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner
    Pay (DAP)

Residence requirements

All claims will be rejected if the customer does not satisfy Australian
residence requirements.

A customer whose claim is rejected for a residence related reason may
have the claim rejected based on information the customer has provided.

However, in some cases visa, citizenship and movement information, which
is provided directly from the Department of Home Affairs datalink, may
cause the claim to be rejected.

If the datalink with Department of Home Affairs has provided the
information, this will take precedence over any conflicting information
provided by the customer.

All claims will be rejected if proof of birth is not provided for the
child. However, if the child's birth is not registered as required by
parents of newborn children, Newborn Supplement (NBS) will not be paid
with Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) will
be rejected.

Claims will either be automatically rejected, according to details
recorded on the customer's record, or manually rejected when assessing
the claim. A letter will be sent to the customer advising why the claim
has been rejected. In most cases, the letter is sent automatically.

Non effective claim

If the claim is not effective, for example, not all required information
has been provided as requested, the claim cannot be assessed. The
customer is to be advised why their claim cannot be assessed and, if
appropriate, advised that they will need to lodge a new claim to receive
payment.

Early claim rejections

Claims lodged for family assistance, up to 3 months before the
birth/entry into care of a child can be rejected by discretionary
decision. For example, if the income is clearly above the allowable
limit for the early claim. All early claim rejections will need to be
coded manually and a rejection letter sent to the customer explaining
the outcome of the decision. A person whose claim is rejected apply for
a formal review of the rejection and can reapply for payment in the
future.

The Resources page has example text for manual rejection letters.

Related links

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or
Stillborn Baby Payment

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Steps in the review and appeals system (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
