-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to check to identify why a customer's Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) rate has changed.

Determining CCS entitlement

The rate of CCS a customer is entitled to receive is determined by a
number of factors:

-   The combined family income
-   If the family have more than one child aged 5 or under
-   The level of activity of the customer (and partner, if they have
    one) and any exemptions in place
-   The age of the child and the type of child care service they attend

CCS entitlement is calculated as a CCS percentage and the number of
hours per fortnight a customer is able to receive a subsidy for.

In general terms, the combined family income determines the CCS
percentage. Families who have more than one CCS eligible child aged 5 or
under can also receive a higher CCS percentage for one or more of their
children. This is known as Higher CCS or multiple child subsidy.

The number of subsidised hours a customer is entitled to is determined
by the amount and type of recognised activity the customer (and partner,
if they have one) participate in each fortnight. Other factors can
affect the number of CCS hours a customer can receive, such as:

-   if they are caring for an adult or a child with a disability, or
-   if an exemption is in place

Child Care Subsidy is paid directly to a child care service to reduce
the out of pocket child care costs a family pays. Any changes to CCS
entitlement will impact:

-   the amount of CCS Services Australia pays the child care service,
    and
-   the family’s out of pocket child care fees

CCS Changes from 10 July 2023

From 10 July 2023, CCS increased which means most families using child
care now get more subsidy.

The maximum amount of CCS increased from 85% to 90% for families earning
below the CCS low income threshold (CCS LIT).

Families earning above the CCS LIT and below the CCS higher income
threshold (CCS HIT) may get a subsidy starting from 90%. The maximum CCS
percentage of 90% decreases by 1% for each $5,000 of income they earn
above the CCS LIT.

The income limit for families to be entitled to CCS (CCS HIT) has
increased.

Families with income below the higher CCS higher income threshold (HCCS
HIT) and more than one child aged 5 or under can still get a higher rate
of CCS for one or more of their children. From 10 July 2023, the rates
for standard rate children and higher rate children will be calculated
using separate income tests.

See the Resources page for a graph showing the relationship between
standard and higher CCS rates, and the effect of family income on the
CCS percentage.

See Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more information about
how CCS percentages are calculated.

Activity test changes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children

From 10 July 2023, CCS introduced a base level of 36 hours per fortnight
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children. For the 2023-2024
CCS year, this will be applied using a CCS rate override via exceptional
circumstance coding.

Note: it is voluntary for families to advise they are caring for an
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child. Evidence is not required and
not to be requested under circumstance.

Families may be entitled to more than the base level of 36 hours per
fortnight based on their hours of recognised activity or other
circumstances.

See Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for details.

Initial checks

When trying to work out why a customer's CCS percentage or hours of
entitlement have changed, check all details in the DOCs and Notes on the
record that may point to a rate-affecting change in the customer's
circumstances.

CCS percentage

An income estimate is one of the main factors that determines a
customer's CCS percentage. All CCS customers must provide an income
estimate, which should reflect their circumstances for the year for
themselves and their partner (if they have one).

The standard CCS percentage payable is on a sliding scale from 90% to 0%
depending on the combined family income. Any changes to the combined
family income could change the CCS percentage which will also impact the
customer's out of pocket expenses and child care fees they pay.

For more information on calculating CCS entitlement, see Entitlement to
Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Note: changes to a families combined income to above the lower income
threshold can impact the number of subsidised hours of child care. See
Automatic Activity test results.

Higher CCS for families with more than one child aged 5 or under (Multiple Child Subsidy) percentage

From 7 March 2022, a higher rate of CCS (Multiple Child Subsidy) was
introduced for families with more than one CCS eligible child aged 5 or
under.

Families with more than one CCS eligible child in care aged 5 or under
may get a higher subsidy for one or more of their children.

The Entitlement table in Customer Summary will:

-   identify any children attracting the higher rate of CCS, and
-   display any percentage increases

The ‘standard rate child’ is usually the eldest CCS eligible child aged
5 or under. This child will get the Standard CCS rate.

The ‘higher rate child’ is any CCS eligible child in the family younger
than the standard rate child. This child will get the Higher CCS rate
(Multiple Child Subsidy).

From 10 July 2023, CCS rates for standard rate children and higher rate
children are calculated using two separate income tests. As a result,
any income estimate updates will impact standard and higher rate
child/ren differently.

The maximum CCS rate for a higher rate child is 95%. Higher rate
children can get a CCS percentage between 95% and 50%, depending on
combined family income.

For more information, see Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Cancellation due to no session of care for at least 26 weeks

From 11 July 2022, if a child has not used child care (including
allowable absences) at least once in the previous 26 week period, they
will not be eligible for CCS. This is known as the '26 week rule'.

Where a child's CCS is cancelled due to the 26 week rule, the
cancellation will apply from the CCS Monday following the 26th week. In
some circumstances, it may be more than 26 weeks. The cancellation
cannot be retrospectively applied and where a child is the last CCS
eligible child of a customer, the customers CCS will cancel.

If a family is entitled to Higher CCS for one or more of their children
and one of their children is cancelled because of the 26 week rule:

-   their CCS entitlement will be reassessed, and
-   any higher CCS rate changes will apply from the next CCS Monday

Customers will need to lodge a new claim for CCS if their child starts
attending child care again.

See the Resources page of Cancellation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for:

-   examples of the 26 week rule, and
-   how the 26 weeks are calculated

TFN requirements

When claiming CCS, customers must provide a TFN for:

-   themselves
-   their partner
-   former partner, or
-   deceased customer (as applicable)

When the customer/partner cannot be matched with the Australian Taxation
Office due to the initial link transaction, the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) screen will display a status of Mismatch.

Where a mismatch occurs, CCS may reduce to zero rate. See Mutual
Customer Identification (MCI) results for family assistance customer
mismatches.

Activity Test Details (ATD)

The Activity Test is also a main factor determining CCS entitlement. The
number of hours of subsidised care payable depends on the level of
recognised activities the customer and their partner (if they have one)
engages in each fortnight. A change in the level of participation can
have an effect on the number of hours for which a customer must pay full
fees.

See Activity test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Automatic Activity test results/Activity Test exemptions

In certain circumstances, customers will receive an automatic Activity
Test result or be eligible for an Activity Test exemption.

If the customer and their partner (if they have one) begins to be, or is
no longer qualified for one of the above, their entitlement hours may
change. This will depend on their circumstances and what is recorded on
the ATD.

See Activity test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for details.

Portability

CCS entitlement can continue for up to 6 weeks while the customer is
overseas. At the end of this 6 week period the CCS% will drop to zero if
the customer has not returned to Australia.

See Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas.

Deadline, relevant year reconciliation status

If a customer has not confirmed their relevant CCS year income by 30
June of the following year:

-   1st deadline provisions will apply, and
-   the CCS and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (with the exception
    of ACCS CWB) rate will drop to 0%

This will take effect from the first CCS Monday in the new year. Staff
will be able to see in Customer Summary under Entitlement if the
customer's CCS and ACCS rate is 0% because of the 1st deadline
provisions.

If a customer has not confirmed relevant year income by 30 June of the
extended lodgement year:

-   2nd deadline provisions will apply, and
-   CCS will cancel

See Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy.

Child age/school status

Children must be 13 years of age or under, and not in secondary school
for a customer to receive CCS (unless a school status or age/school
status exemption has been applied). A sudden cessation of CCS could mean
a child has had a fourteenth birthday or changed education status.

More information on age or school status exemptions and checking
education status can be found at Updating school status, and assessing
age exemptions for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Immunisation

Ongoing CCS for a child will cancel when the child misses certain
Immunisation deadlines. Immunisation status must remain up to date. This
can be checked as per the instructions in Immunisation requirements for
Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Additional Child Care Subsidy

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) provides extra fee assistance to
families and children who are genuinely disadvantaged and facing
barriers in accessing affordable child care.

A customer's ACCS being granted or recently ceasing will have a
noticeable effect on the out of pocket expenses they will be charged by
their child care providers.

The Process tab contains steps on how to check ACCS status, rates and
relevant dates.

Absences

CCS can be paid for up to 42 approved absence days (or up to 62 days for
the 2019/20 year) for each child for any reason. The absence days per
financial year relates to each child, not to each individual claimant.
If the customer is reporting an increase in out of pocket child care
fees, check that the absences for the relevant child/children have not
been exhausted.

See Absences for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS).

Enrolments

When a child has not attended child care for a continuous period of 14
weeks, the enrolment will automatically be ceased.

The customer remains current on CCS, but no CCS payments can be made as
there is no current confirmed enrolment. Check the enrolments and Weekly
Subsidy tables to confirm if CCS is not paying for a Child Care service.

More information can be found in Enrolment requirements for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS).

Exceptional circumstances

If a customer is experiencing unusual hardship or extreme circumstances,
they can ask for increased CCS entitlement by way of an Exceptional
Circumstances determination.

For customers on both CCS and ACCS, an Exceptional Circumstances
determination can allow access to more subsidised hours.

For ACCS customers, a percentage increase can also be requested. Staff
should check whether EXC determination has come to an end.

See Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Commencement of debt withholding

20% of a CCS-only customer's ongoing entitlement may be withheld to
recover child care debts (including Child Care Benefit, Child Care
Rebate and Child Care Subsidy).

This 20% is in addition to the standard 5% that is already withheld.

Staff should check the debt management application in Customer Summary
to see if a withholding arrangement has commenced. This may change the
amount the customer is expected to pay.

See Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts.

Child care fees

If the child care provider has made a change in their fee schedule the
amount the customer is expected to pay could vary without anything else
changing in the record. For example a change in child care fees could be
associated with a change in enrolment.

Type of child care service used

If the customer has changed the type of child care service used this
will determine the maximum hourly rate cap to which a customer's CCS
percentage will be applied.

Types of child care include:

-   centre based day care service
-   family day care service
-   outside school hours care service
-   in home care

See Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

Display of new year assessment due to CPI and rate changes

CCS family income thresholds, annual cap and hourly rate cap changes are
expected to update automatically every July to match Consumer Price
Index (CPI) and rate changes.

Where indexation has not been paused, the CCS new year rates may impact
a customer's CCS entitlement from July each year.

The Resources page has a graph that shows how the CCS rate changes based
on family income and other factors.

Related links

Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Updating school status, and assessing age exemptions for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Exceptional circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Immunisation requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) debts

New Financial Year Assessments (NFYA) for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and
Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
