
Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-17103114

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a family's income affects the percentage of
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) they will receive. Combined family income is
one of the three factors determines a family's level of Child Care
Subsidy.

Estimated annual income for CCS

During the year, the percentage of hourly child care fees payable is
based on a family’s estimated annual income. This is known as an
estimated Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI).

It is the same income estimate used to assess entitlement for other
Family Assistance payments. The income estimate must reflect the
financial circumstances of the customer (and their partner, if they have
one) for the entire financial year.

All customers are required to provide an income estimate for CCS,
regardless of their income support status.

CCS income test

The percentage of hourly child care fees payable is on a sliding scale
from 85% to 0% depending on family income. The maximum CCS rate of 85%
is payable if the customer’s Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) does not
exceed the lower income threshold. The CCS rate reduces to zero per cent
if the ATI is equal to or more than the upper income threshold.

To determine the customer's child care fee reduction, the CCS percentage
is applied to the lower of the:

-   hourly fee charged by the service, or
-   the maximum hourly rate cap

If a child care service charges more than the maximum hourly rate cap,
the customer pays the difference. Customers cannot receive more CCS than
the child care fees they are liable to pay. Customers should contact the
child care service to find out how much they must pay in child care
fees.

Services Australia is responsible for ensuring the information provided
by the customer is recorded accurately on the customer's record to
calculate the customer's correct CCS percentage.

The [] online estimators can be used to calculate a family's potential
CCS entitlement.

There are no blended family provisions for CCS. Only one member of a
couple should claim CCS.

Upper income threshold

Customers with an income equal to or above the upper income threshold
have a CCS percentage of zero per cent. So, although they may be
eligible for CCS, they are not entitled to any subsidised child care.

Customers in this situation should still be encouraged to claim CCS.
This is because there are no lump sum claim options for CCS and their
circumstances may change during the year (e.g. they have a reduction in
income) which may entitle them to CCS.

Customers who have had a CCS assessment of 0%, will have their CCS
cancelled after 52 consecutive weeks. These customers should be
encouraged to re-apply.

CCS annual cap

A CCS annual subsidy cap applies to each child if a family’s income
estimate exceeds the lower income threshold plus $120,000. There is no
cap if the Adjusted Taxable Income (ATI) is below this amount.

For customers with multiple children using In Home Care (IHC), only one
child is nominated on the enrolment notice at a time. When the nominated
child reaches the annual cap, the IHC service and the family should
commence a new enrolment to change the nominated child. This will enable
customers to access the annual child care subsidy cap for each child.

See the Resources page for scenarios of how the annual subsidy cap is
applied and removed.

The annual subsidy cap only applies to CCS payments. Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS) payments are not subject to the annual subsidy cap.

If a couple separates during the financial year, the CCS ongoing
entitlement will be based on the circumstances relevant at the period of
time. That is, for the period of the time they were partnered their
combined ATI and their level of activity will be used to determine the
family’s CCS entitlement. When separated, CCS (including any annual cap)
will be based on the individual’s ATI and level of activity.

The Resources page contains and income threshold table and scenarios of
how the annual subsidy cap is applied.

For more information on the treatment of income and the annual cap at
reconciliation, see Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

From 10 December 2021, the CCS annual cap for the 2021/22 financial year
(1 July 2021 - 30 June 2022) onwards was removed. Families who reached
the annual cap prior to 10 December 2021 were paid any CCS entitlement
owed to them in December 2021.

Note: families may still be subject to the annual cap for financial
years prior to the 2021/22 financial year.

Income apportioning when the customer is not partnered for the full CCS year

Different reconciliation processing applies for ex-partners for Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) for the 2018/19 year and from the 2019/20 year
onwards. This also applies to if a customer or partner dies. See
Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more details.

Family assistance reconciliation and payment choices

CCS is reconciled at the end of the relevant financial year. The
customer's correct CCS rate is worked out using:

-   actual income details transferred from the Australian Taxation
    Office, and
-   child care attendance details provided by the child care provider
    during the financial year

Families can reduce the risk of overpayment during reconciliation by
providing an accurate income estimate. To assist customers reduce the
risk of an overpayment throughout the year a CCS withholding percentage
will apply.

The Resources page contains and income threshold table and scenarios of
applying the annual cap.

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Taxable income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Helping families provide a reasonable annual income estimate for family
assistance payments

Combined family income for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
