
Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB) 007-03040000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
- Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
- Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines information on how to determine if a customer is
eligible for Child Care Benefit (CCB) for a child in their care.

Child eligibility

In most circumstances, as long as a child is in the physical care of the
customer claiming and paying for the child care, the child can be
considered to be an eligible child for CCB. A Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
child of a person is an eligible child for CCB.

For children aged under 20 years old, immunisation requirements for
Child Care Benefit (CCB) must be met.

Child is not an FTB child

If the child is not an FTB child or Regular Care Child, they may still
be an eligible child for CCB if they are in the customer's care, or if
the customer is temporarily caring for the child and a regular care
exception for CCB exists.

If an applicant/recipient has a child who is in receipt of Disability
Support Pension (DSP), the child may be deemed a regular care child of
the individual for the purposes of CCB if the child is living with them
and under the age of 21.

If the child is not an FTB child as they are aged 16 years or older and
have ceased study, they are no longer eligible for CCB.

CCB for approved care

CCB is payable if:

-   the customer is liable to pay child care fees for child care
    provided in Australia (whether or not the child care fees have been
    paid)
-   CCB residence requirements are met (or an exception applies)
-   CCB immunisation requirements are met for a child aged under 20
    years

For CCB lump sum claims, residence and immunisation requirements need
only be met at the time the claim is determined.

CCB is limited to 24 hours per child per week for approved care unless
the customer (and their partner) satisfies the work/training/study test
or exception applies.

Customers eligible for CCB for approved care may also be eligible for
Child Care Rebate (CCR).

CCB for approved care can be reduced to zero rate by the income test.

It is important to identify if the customer is a grandparent with
primary care of their grandchild as they may be eligible for Grandparent
Child Care Benefit (GCCB) and/or a waiver of the work/training/study
test may be applied.

For families to get the full effect of the multiple child percentage,
only 1 member of a couple should claim CCB. One member of a couple
(either the customer or their current partner) can claim CCB for any
children that each attends approved child care in the same week.

Shared care situations can mean that both parents may be liable for
different sessions of the child care (this could be in the same week or
different weeks). In these situations, both parents need to make a
claim/register for CCB (and have a formal enrolment with the service).
The liable parent is the parent who has responsibility for the child for
the session of care and pays the fees for the session of care.

A number of compliance measures regarding entitlement for CCB for Family
Day Care (FDC) were implemented by the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment in October 2015. Further measures were implemented in
October 2016 and March 2017 to strengthen the integrity of the child
care payments Compliance Framework. These regulation changes are being
enforced by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment as they
relate to the operational and attendance reporting aspects of services
(including FDC services/educators).

From 12 October 2015, CCB for approved care is no longer payable for
children attending a Family Day Care (FDC) service on the same day that
their parent/guardian is working as a FDC child care provider (also
known as a FDC educator). There are exceptions in some circumstances.

Three changes came into effect from 10 October 2016. These included:

-   restrictions on situations when child care fee assistance is payable
-   Services being required to advise of significant personal situations
    occurring for staff, and
-   stronger suitability criteria for services and individuals

From 13 March 2017, three further changes were implemented .These
related to:

-   age restrictions being applied for children attending FDC
-   updates to the definition of a ‘session of care’ for Grandparent
    Child Care Benefit (GCCB), and Special Child Care Benefit (SCCB) and
-   additional changes to the October 2015 child swapping measure

See the Resources page for links to further information.

If it is suspected that a customer's Child Care payment entitlements may
be impacted in relation to the above FDC compliance changes, their Child
Care Benefit is not to be cancelled. In these cases, it is potentially
the service (in particular the FDC service or educator) who is acting
fraudulently and not adhering to the changes. If the Service Officer
suspects fraudulent activity, see Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption.

CCB for registered care

CCB is payable for registered care if:

-   The customer has paid for the care provided in Australia and
    provides receipts.
-   The customer (and their partner) satisfied the work/training/study
    test or exception applies at some time during each week child care
    was provided
-   CCB residence requirements are met at the time the claim is
    determined (or exception applies).
-   CCB immunisation requirements are met at the time the claim is
    determined for children or young individuals aged under 20 years
-   The child is not a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of the registered
    carer or registered carer's partner
-   The care being claimed is not for hours the child is attending
    primary school (or other compulsory education) in their relevant
    state or territory

CCB for foster carers

Foster carers who are deemed liable to pay child care fees by the child
care service, can claim CCB and subsequently Child Care Rebate (CCR) for
any children that attend approved care (that is, the foster carer pays
the child care fees and the receipts are in the name of the foster
carer). The relevant state authority may pay the remaining gap in the
fees. Any reimbursement of fees from the relevant state authority does
not change the foster carer's liability in these types of cases.

Where the relevant state authority pays all the child care fees for the
child care provided, there is no liability for the child care fees for
the foster carer. No attendance for the child will be submitted to the
Services Australia in these cases.

Where foster carers use registered care, they must provide receipts that
show they have paid the fees, the same as other customers who claim
registered care.

CCB for customers who salary sacrifice the cost of child care

For a customer to be eligible for CCB, they must be liable for child
care fees.

If a customer salary sacrifices the cost of child care fees in such a
way, that their employer has the legal liability to pay the fees (not
the customer), the customer is not eligible for CCB and consequently
Child Care Rebate (CCR) for the child care costs paid under the
agreement.

Payment of child care fees by the customer’s employer is exempt from
Fringe Benefits Tax (FBT) if the employer is legally liable for the
fees. If the customer is not sure who is legally obliged to pay the
fees, the customer will need to clarify this with their employer. It is
not possible for a child care service or Services Australia to determine
who has legal liability for the child care fees. The customer must
obtain this information from their employer. As the issue of who is
liable to pay the child care fees also has a bearing on FBT, the
employer should be aware of the situation and be able to advise the
customer accordingly.

If a portion of the child care fees are paid by the customer, they are
only liable for the portion of the fees that they pay. Only attendance
related to the customer’s liability is provided to Services Australia.

Residence exceptions

A customer may be eligible for CCB if a residency exception applies. The
following cases must be referred to the Level 2 Policy Helpdesk for
determination of eligibility:

-   Customers who have a child in receipt of Special Benefit (SpB)
-   Customers who do not meet residence requirements as they or their
    partner are a temporary visa holder suffering temporary hardship, or
-   Customers who have special circumstances existing
-   Customers who are a foreign sponsored student

A customer who abducts a child and is in breach of the law is not
eligible for CCB for the child.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website, a
fact sheet kit on child care on the Department of Social Services
website, Level 2 Policy Helpdesk Online Query form and examples of
eligibility for CCB.

Contents

Eligible hours for Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Related links

Online estimator options

Report Suspected Fraud and Corruption

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
