
Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP) 007-11010120

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the processes for the Prohibition of Family Tax
Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP), and what to do when customers contact
about its effect on their Family Tax Benefit (FTB) payments.

Changes to FTB fortnightly instalments from 1 July 2010

From 1 July 2010, FTB fortnightly instalments based on an estimate will
not be paid if the customer or their partner:

-   has an outstanding non lodger debt, and
-   has less than 3 countable non lodger debt decisions for any
    financial year from 2000-01 onwards when either person was in
    receipt of FTB, and
-   FTB is subject to an income test or maintenance income test

This is Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit (PIP). FTB will be restricted
to a zero rate when PIP applies.

Note: for a non-lodger debt raised before 1 July 2010 to be counted
towards PIP or the Sunset Clause, the debt must have had an outstanding
balance (i.e. not fully repaid) as at 1 July 2010. All non-lodger debts
raised from 1 July 2010 is a countable debt.

If subject to both PIP and the non-payment of FTB instalment payments
due to the zero entitlement measure, the zero entitlement measure will
always override PIP. Entitlement to associated ancillary payments will
be lost.

If a zero rate preclusion is in place and the customer resolves their
non-lodger status or an exemption is granted, arrears for the precluded
component/s will not be payable from the date the preclusion was
applied.

FTB will be cancelled under the Sunset Clause if a customer (or their
current partner):

-   has an outstanding non lodger debt, and
-   has had 3 or more non lodger decisions, and
-   are subject to an income test / maintenance income test

See Sunset Clause.

Reminders/mail outs

The annual non-lodger mail out in March each year reminds FTB customers
of their obligation (and the obligation of their partner) to lodge an
income tax return, or to advise Services Australia they are not required
to lodge.

Eight weeks after the mail out, a reminder Electronic Message (EM) is
sent to customers who have not taken the appropriate action.

There is a PIP grace period of 75 days from the date the non-lodger debt
is raised before PIP will be applied. There is no grace period in
relation to the Sunset Clause.

Avoiding non lodger debt

To avoid a non-lodger debt and PIP being applied, customers can, within
the required time:

-   lodge tax returns
-   advise they are not required to lodge
-   seek an Australian Taxation Office (ATO) extension and advise this
-   advise lodgement of their tax return/s
-   seek and have a relevant deferral granted, or
-   repay in full all outstanding non-lodger debts

If PIP is applied

Fortnightly FTB payments will be stopped. The following will not be
paid:

-   FTB Part A
-   FTB Part B
-   Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA)
-   Rent Assistance (RA)

Access will be retained to:

-   Lower threshold of the Extended Medicare Safety Net
-   Child Dental Benefit Schedule (CDBS) administered by Medicare
-   Health Care Card via FTB

A letter is sent to the customer outlining what has occurred and what
they need to do to have their payments reinstated.

PIP is applied to both members of a blended family couple, whether or
not the partner is also receiving FTB instalment payments.

Receipt of actual income details will trigger re-reconciliation for the
relevant financial year and the non-lodger debt will be cancelled and
replaced with a reconciliation result. Lodgement of outstanding tax
returns may be beneficial to customers who have a non-lodger debt. Once
all non-lodger debts have been removed or repaid, the PIP will be lifted
and fortnightly FTB payments may recommence.

The customer will receive their FTB entitlements for periods in which
PIP applied when the PIP is lifted and re-reconciliation occurs for the
years in which PIP applied.

Impact upon RA

If subject to PIP, the customer still retains their entitlement to FTB,
which includes Rent Assistance (RA). However, the rate of FTB payable if
FTB is prohibited is zero.

RA is not paid with their income support payment during this period as
they are still entitled to receive RA through the FTB system.

If PIP is deferred, payment of FTB including RA will recommence. Any
arrears including RA will be paid once their non-lodgement issues are
resolved and prohibition is lifted.

Extensions to lodge

An extension to lodge or suspension of enforcement action on outstanding
income tax returns can be granted through the Australian Taxation Office
(ATO).

A PIP deferral can be recorded if the customer provides the details
verbally or provides written evidence of the ATO extension to Services
Australia.

PIP deferrals

Before a PIP deferral is considered, FTB customers are encouraged to
contact the ATO to discuss lodgement requirements, extensions or gaining
lost documentation. The customer can visit the ATO website for more
information.

Separated from partner or partner deceased

If an FTB customer separates from their partner and PIP was being
applied solely due to outstanding partner tax returns, PIP will be
automatically lifted after updating their relationship status. FTB
arrears will be paid from the date PIP was applied.

If they reconcile and the now current partner had previously been in
receipt of FTB and not yet lodged tax returns, PIP will automatically
resume once relationship details are updated.

Similarly, if their partner dies and PIP was applied solely due to
outstanding tax returns of the deceased partner, PIP is automatically
lifted once the partner's death is recorded. FTB arrears will be paid
from the date PIP was applied.

Formal reviews of decisions

If the FTB customer wants to apply for a formal review of the
application of the PIP, the normal review and appeal process applies.

A deferral needs to be apply until the formal review of decision is
completed.

See SME explanations, ARO referrals and implementing ARO decisions.

Lump sum claims

PIP does not apply to FTB lump sum claimants as payment cannot occur
until:

-   actual adjusted taxable income is received, or
-   not required to lodge details are recorded

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia and
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) contact details, and frequently asked
question and answers about PIP.

Related links

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme options online

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Cancellation of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments due to 3 or more
non lodger decisions (Sunset Clause)

Deferral of Prohibition of Family Tax Benefit Instalment Payments (PIP)

Energy Supplement for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customers

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

Non-lodger and late lodger process for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
reconciliation

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year income

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
