
Transferring debts from customers to child care services pre 2 July 2018 007-18110804

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for managing the transfer of simple
debts from customers to child care services until the new Child Care IT
System was implemented on 2 July 2018.

On this page:

Overview

It has been identified that a number of debts have been assigned to
customers rather than non-compliant service providers. This problem
typically arises where attendance reports are amended by a service after
the relevant customer has undergone end of financial year reconciliation
(which starts in 3rd week of July each financial year). There may also
be cases where customers advise that the children have never attended
care but there has been attendance lodged incorrectly.

On 24 July 2017, an IT enhancement was implemented by the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment that means services must now apply to
the Department of Education, Skills and Employment before they can
amend/cancel attendances for previous financial years. This will reduce
the potential outcome of debt being raised against customers.

Customer contacts to question a debt raised due to cancelled attendance

Service open

In general, the customer is responsible for confirming details with the
Approved Service Provider (ASP). Customers who disagree with the
information provided by their ASP via the Child Care Management System
(CCMS) are required to contact their ASP to discuss the issue in the
first instance (if they are still open/operating).

The CCMS Support Team will deal with issues regarding incorrect or
missing CCMS data after the recipient has attempted to resolve the issue
with the ASP.

If the customer claims they never provided their Customer Reference
Numbers (CRN) to the service in question (they were obtained
fraudulently), these should be reported to the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment via email (as per current CCMS protocols) in the
first instance. See Step 1 of the Child never attended care – attendance
status ‘Cancelled’ table on the Process page for the information to
include in the email to the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment, to enable them to investigate the issue.

If a correction of attendance is going to be made for a previous
financial year that has already been reconciled, be aware of the changes
that came into effect from 24 July 2017, where the submission and
cancellation of attendance records for previous financial years is
restricted. The Department of Education, Skills and Employment CCMS team
will be required to provide access to the service to resubmit the data.

Note: The Department of Education, Skills and Employment will attempt to
resolve issues with open service providers in the first instance as per
current contact once processes. It should be noted that on occasion
documentary evidence will be required from the customer which Services
Australia may be requested to discuss with the customer.

Service is cancelled or closed

Where a service is cancelled for non-compliance or there are compliance
indicators against a closed service, the Department of Education, Skills
and Employment and Services Australia must ensure that debts are
not/have not been incorrectly raised against customers in the event of
cancelled attendance data post reconciliation. This also extends to
attendance data where care had never occurred. See the Process page for
common scenarios and the treatment of these cases.

See also Customer queries Child Care Management System (CCMS)
information for more information.

Other Matters – 'Phase 2'

There may be other instances where debts are being incorrectly assigned
to individuals. Other scenarios can be complex and leave uncertainty as
to who received the benefit of the fee reduction. As these scenarios
unfold they will be work-shopped and adapted into a similar process.

Some of these scenarios may include, attendances amended to:

-   reflect less hours of care
-   backdate SCCB, GCCB and JET
-   remove absences at the end of care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
