-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines information on PPL, a payment available to
eligible carers of a newborn or newly adopted child. It complements
existing entitlements to employer provided paid and unpaid leave.

Government intent

PPL enhances maternal and child health development by enabling working
mothers to spend longer at home with their newborn children. It aims to:

-   facilitate workforce participation
-   improve the balance of family and work life in Australian families,
    and
-   assist in the promotion of gender equity

Overview of payment

PPL supports eligible parents or carers to care for a newborn or adopted
child. Full-time, part-time, casual, seasonal, contract and
self-employed workers may be eligible.

PPL is paid under the Paid Parental Leave scheme and was introduced on 1
January 2011.

It is paid at a base rate based on the national minimum wage. See Rate
of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

For children that are born or adopted:

on or after 1 July 2023, PPL is made up of:

-   20 weeks (100 PPL days)
-   A cap of 90 days will apply for claimants who are partnered at the
    time of claim, and reserving the remainder of the entitlement on a
    use it or lose it basis

on or after 1 July 2020 and before 1 July 2023, PPL is made up of:

-   a PPL period of up to 12 weeks (60 payable days), plus
-   30 Flexible PPL days

before 1 July 2020, PPL was made up a PPL period of up to 18 weeks (90
payable days)

PPL can be paid after stillbirth or death of a child.

PPL entitlement

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

the PPL period will be removed, meaning all 100 days are to be treated
as ‘flexible’ PPL days where they can be accessed as:

-   a single block
-   all scattered days
-   any combination of smaller blocks and scattered days

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   the PPL period is a single continuous block, paid on weekdays, from
    a date nominated by the customer. It must be claimed within 52 weeks
    of the child’s birth or adoption
-   30 Flexible PPL days must be taken within two years of the child’s
    birth or anniversary of care

To receive the maximum PPL entitlement, customers must lodge their claim
and choose a PPL start date within the time limits for claiming PPL.

See Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

Effect on other payments

PPL is taxable income and is:

-   included in a customer's adjusted taxable income for family
    assistance payments
-   included in the customer’s income for claims or renewals for the Low
    Income Health Care Card (LIC). See LIC income test
-   treated as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment for
    income support payments. This automatically reduces the impacted
    customer’s (and/or their partner’s) rate of income support payment
    while they are receiving PPL payments. No additional coding is
    required

Customers are not eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B on any
days that they receive PPL.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, DAP will be
combined with PPL to form a single, 20 week entitlement. DAP is not
payable for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023. Fathers
and partners will need to claim PPL.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, one customer can
receive both PPL and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) for the same child.
However the PPL and DAP periods:

-   must be taken at different times, and
-   a maximum of 18 weeks of the two payments can be paid

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks PPL and DAP combined for the
same child. One customer can receive PPL and DAP for different children
at the same time.

Customers partnered at the time of their initial claim can receive a
maximum entitlement of 90 days per child. The remaining 10 days are
reserved on a 'use it or lose it' basis for their partner, the other
parent or another person. Customers not partnered at the time of their
initial claim can receive a maximum entitlement of 100 days per child.

July 2023 changes

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023:

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) will cease, with the 2 weeks (10 payable days)
being rolled into PPL

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) will increase to 20 weeks (100 payable days)
entitlement

PPL will be fully flexible, meaning all 100 days are to be treated as
‘flexible’ PPL days where they can be accessed as:

-   a single block
-   all scattered days
-   any combination of smaller blocks and scattered days

Primary, secondary and tertiary claim types will be removed

Birth mothers no longer need to claim PPL first, or at all, in order for
the other parent or partner to receive PPL. Either parent or their
partner can claim PPL first

Approval to claim and approval to share days is required from the birth
mother for:

-   the partner of the birth mother
-   the other parent
-   the partner of the other parent
    Note: these approvals will be obtained via an online task

In cases of adoption, where there is:

-   one adoptive parent, they must give approval to claim and approval
    to share PPL days to any other claimant (that is, partner of the
    adoptive parent)
-   two adoptive parents, the first adoptive parent to claim must give
    approval to share PPL days to the other adoptive parent. They do not
    need to give approval to claim

A family income test will be introduced, in addition to the individual
income test. If the customer does not meet the individual income test,
then the family income test limit is applied. This applies to both
single and partnered customers

A cap of 18 weeks/90 days will apply for customers who are partnered at
the date of claim. The remaining 10 days will be reserved on a ‘use it
or lose it’ basis for their partner, the other parent or another person.
Note: the birth mother is still required to provide approval to claim
and share the ‘reserved’ PPL days

Customers who are single at the date of claim can take all 100 days, no
cap is applied

Customers no longer need to have ‘primary care’ of the child on their
PPL days, just ‘care’. As more than one customer can have care of a
child on a day, multiple customers can claim PPL on the same day. There
is a maximum of 10 concurrent dates per child. This means a maximum of
10 PPL days can be taken by customers for the same child on the same day

Fathers and partners may be payable for PPL where the birth mother does
not meet the income test or residency test, or is serving a newly
arrived residents waiting period (NARWP). Note: The birth mother must
still meet the work test even if the birth mother is not claiming PPL
for the child

See Claiming and managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children
born or entering care on or after 1 July 2023 and Eligibility for Paid
Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering care on or after 1
July 2023.

2021 changes

COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services Australia on or after 3 June
2021)

Customers who received a COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid by Services
Australia on or after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month qualifying
period and lodged their PPL claim on or after 4 September 2021, can:

-   include their COVID-19 Disaster Payments as qualifying work in the
    work test
-   backdate their PPL period nominated start date to their child’s date
    of birth/adoption
-   backdate their flexible PPL days more than 42 days in the past

Customers who performed at least 1 hour of paid work or paid leave
(including weekends) and received COVID-19 Disaster Payment can count
whichever is greater:

-   7.6 hours for each weekday in the period (not including weekends)
-   The number of hours actually worked each day (including weekends)
-   The number of hours of paid leave each day

Customers who lodged their PPL claim on or after 4 September 2021 and
who received COVID-19 Disaster Payment during their 10 month qualifying
period, can backdate their nominated PPL period start date to a date on
or after their child’s date of birth/adoption. This can occur even if an
effective claim is lodged or proof of birth/entry into care is provided
more than 28 days after the date of birth/adoption.

From 4 December 2021, the online claim will check whether the customer
received any COVID-19 Disaster Payments within their 13 month work test
period. Where a customer received the payment, the online claim will ask
the customer whether it was received in their 10 month qualifying
period. If the customer selects ‘Yes’ the claim will allow the customer
to select a nominated start date from the date of birth/adoption
(regardless of the date of claim).

These customers can also select flexible PPL days that are more than 42
days in the past, if all other conditions are met. This COVID-19
Disaster Payment information will be available on the PPL Work Test
History (P1WH) screen. In addition, the Paid Parental Leave Exemption
(P1EX) screen will display ‘Backdating the start date’.

For more information see Processing standalone and combined claims for
family assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave scheme payments, Finalise
claim, Step 4, Backdating PPL for customers who received COVID-19
Disaster payment.

Special Circumstances

For PPL claims made on or after 4 September 2021, customers who do not
meet the work test may qualify for an exception if:

-   they experienced special circumstances within their work test
    period, and
-   this affected their ability to perform paid work

An exception to the work test may be applied if:

-   special circumstances existed, and
-   the customer would have met the work test if the special
    circumstances did not exist

The special circumstance exception reasons include:

-   severe medical condition or caring for a close family member who is
    affected by a severe medical condition
-   natural disaster declared by the Commonwealth, a State or Territory,
    and
-   family and domestic violence

The customer must provide evidence to support their claim for special
circumstances. This includes both:

-   evidence of the special circumstance (see additional information
    below if family and domestic violence), and
-   evidence of employment (employee or self employed)

Severe medical condition

To meet this exception either the customer:

-   was affected by a severe medical condition that prevented them from
    performing paid work, or
-   was caring for a close family member who was affected by a severe
    medical condition and providing this care prevented them from
    performing paid work

Severe medical condition includes severe illness and severe injury.

Note: for this exception, a close family member is defined as:

-   the customer’s partner, or
-   the customer’s child (natural/adoptive or step-child), or,
-   the customer’s parent (natural/adoptive or step-parent), or
-   the customer’s sibling or step-sibling, or
-   the parent (natural/adoptive or step -parent) of the customer’s
    partner, or
-   a person the customer has legal custody or guardianship of, (for
    example a foster child)

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, 'family member'
includes cultural kinship relationships.

Customers are required to provide:

-   evidence of the severe medical condition they or their family member
    were affected by, and
-   evidence that they would have otherwise met the work test had it not
    been for the severe medical condition

Natural disaster

To meet this exception the customer:

-   must have been severely affected by a natural disaster during their
    work test period, and
-   this prevented them from performing paid work

The natural disaster must have been declared by either the:

-   Commonwealth or a State or Territory; or
-   Commonwealth, State or Territory authority responsible for managing
    responses to natural disasters

Customers are required to provide:

-   evidence that they were severely impacted by the natural disaster,
    and
-   evidence that they would have otherwise met the work test had it not
    been for the disaster

Family and domestic violence

To meet this exception the customer:

-   must have experienced, or was dealing with the impact of family and
    domestic violence during their work test period, and
-   this prevented the customer from performing paid work

Family and domestic violence claims must be referred to a social worker
who will assess whether family and domestic violence affected the
customer’s ability to work during their work test period. The social
worker may contact the customer to discuss the circumstances over the
phone. If there is enough evidence already on the customer’s record, the
social worker can complete a file assessment.

The customer will be requested in the claim to provide evidence to
confirm the family and domestic violence, but if it is not provided, the
social worker will determine if:

-   there is already enough evidence on the customer’s record, or
-   if further evidence is required

Service Officers must not request evidence of the family and domestic
violence. See Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims
for family assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments, Table 3, Step
4.

The customer will also be required to provide evidence from their
employer confirming that the customer would have been employed during
the work test period. The employer may not know why the customer was
unable to work and the customer is not expected to disclose this
information to their employer. See Paid Parental Leave Work Test.

2020 changes

From 1 January 2020 to 1 July 2020, several changes were made to PPL
that included the following.

PPL work test for children born or adopted on or after 1 January 2020

There were 2 changes to the PPL work test:

-   the allowable gap between consecutive work days was increased from 8
    to 12 weeks. In the 392 day work test period, a customer must not
    have a gap of more than 12 weeks during their 295 day qualifying
    period
-   the Dangerous Jobs provision was introduced. This provision only
    applies if customers/birth mothers stop work because a hazard in
    their workplace was/is, a risk to their pregnancy. This provision
    applies if customers have failed to meet the usual work test, and
    another work test exemption is not applicable. For example,
    pregnancy related complication/ illness exemption

See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

Return to work exceptions for customers who returned to work on or after
12 March 2020

There are several reasons a customer can return to work/perform work and
continue to receive PPL. Allowable reasons for PPL include:

an Australian Defence Force (ADF) member or law enforcement officer who
is compulsorily recalled to duty

complying with a summons or other compulsory process to give evidence,
information or produce documents. This does not include jury duty

health professionals, emergency services or essential workers who have
returned to work in response to a state, territory or national emergency
(effective from 12 March 2020 onwards)

a newborn child remaining in hospital following the birth:

-   for birth mothers - the return to work can be disregarded if it
    occurs within the period that starts 14 days after the child is born
    and ends on the day the child is discharged from hospital. Note: if
    the birth mother returns to work within 14 days of the child’s
    birth, this return to work cannot be disregarded and they will not
    be eligible for PPL from the date they return to work
-   for all other claimants - including secondary claimants and adoptive
    parents, the return to work can be disregarded if it occurs within
    the period that starts on the day the child is born and ends on the
    day the child is discharged from hospital

care of the child was lost without legal authority

child bereavement where the DAP child was stillborn or died

If a customer returns to work for an allowable reason, an exception is
recorded and their return to work is disregarded. See Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) customer, for a child born before 1 July 2023, returns to work.

Extended Work Test period for children born or adopted between 22 March
2020 and 31 March 2021 (inclusive)

The extended work test applies to customers who:

-   do not meet the existing PPL scheme work test because they stopped
    work, or had their work hours reduced due to COVID-19, and
-   have a child with a date of birth or adoption between 22 March 2020
    and 31 March 2021

These customers will have their work test period increased from 392 days
to 600 days. During their 600 day work test period, the customer must
have a 295 day qualifying period where they did not have a 12 week gap
between consecutive work days and performed at least 330 hours of
qualifying work within the 295 day qualifying period.

Note: although the customer can have a gap of more than 12 weeks between
work days during the 600 day work test period, they cannot have this gap
during their 295 day qualifying period.

This only applies to customers who cannot meet the usual PPL or DAP work
test and do not have an exemption from the work test, such as pregnancy
related complication/illness, premature birth or dangerous job
provision.

The extended work test period for:

-   PPL, is the 600 days before the child’s EDOB or DOB
-   DAP, is the 600 days before their DAP period start date

See Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test.

Flexible PPL for children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2020

Parental Leave Pay is made up of:

-   a 12 week (60 day) PPL period, which must be taken within 12 months
    of the birth or adoption of the child, and
-   30 Flexible PPL days, which can be claimed any time after the PPL
    period and within 2 years of the child’s birth or adoption

Flexible PPL days can be:

-   connected to the end of the PPL period (to give the customer a
    continuous block of payment for up to 18 weeks) or accessed
    separately
-   paid before or after the customer has returned to work
-   given to another person to claim on days that they have primary care
    of the child

To be eligible for Flexible PPL on a day, a customer must meet PPL
primary care and residency requirements and must not be working.

Customers must tell Services Australia when they want to get their
Flexible PPL days. They can do this when they claim PPL or at a later
time.

Note: customers who do not receive any PPL period may still be eligible
for Flexible PPL days. For example, if they returned to work before they
claimed PLP.

The Resources page contains a link to a Parental Leave Pay (PPL)/ Dad
and Partner Pay (DAP) comparison table.

Contents

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Assessing family assistance and paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental
Leave scheme customer/child going overseas

Reassessments for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellations, restorations and rejections codes for Parental Leave
Payment (PPL)

Enquiry, rate and assessment explanation screens for family assistance
and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments

Transitional reassessment of claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)
pre-birth claims

Related links

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Initial contact for an early claim for family assistance and Parental
Leave Pay (PPL)

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Paid Parental Leave (PPL) for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
