
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person 007-07040050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a person must have at least 1 Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) child to receive payment of FTB.

FTB child

An individual may be an FTB child of a person if they are:

-   Aged 0-15
-   Aged 16-19 and satisfy study requirements. FTB can be paid up until
    the end of the calendar year in which they turn 19. Note:
    apprentices, other than school based apprentices, do not meet the
    study requirements for FTB

To qualify as an FTB child they must also be:

-   an Australian resident, a special category visa holder residing in
    Australia, or living with the person who is an Australian resident
-   in the person's care (at least 35% of the time if shared care)
-   not receiving a disqualifying payment
-   not the person's partner

From 1 January 2020, children aged 16-19 years receiving a means tested
ABSTUDY payment (such as Living Allowance and School Fees Allowance
(Group 2)) can still be considered an FTB child if they are:

-   a full-time secondary student
-   approved to live away from home to study, and
-   boarding to attend school

Unless already provided for the child, proof of the child's birth is
required.

If the above criteria are met, the person may be eligible for FTB for
the child.

In a person's care

A child under 18 years of age can be an FTB child of a person if:

-   the person has legal responsibility for the child's day-to-day care,
    welfare and development, for example parents have legal
    responsibility if there is no court order in place removing that
    responsibility
-   the person has a family law order or parenting plan that states the
    child is to live with or have contact with the person, or
-   the child is not in the care of anyone else with legal
    responsibility (such as the child's natural parent) and the child is
    not in a care situation such as child care (formal or informal) or
    staying with family or friends (overnight or holidays)

FTB can be paid for a child living away from home, as care may continue
to be provided. See the References page for a definition of care,
especially for older children.

A child aged 18-19 living away from home, for example to study, can
still be considered to be in the care of an adult, even though at that
age they are considered to have legal responsibility for themselves.

Consider the financial support provided to the child by their parent/s
or legal guardian/s, such as provision of substantial financial support
by a person to a child which may include daily costs such as food,
accommodation and transport, dental and health care, clothing, school
fees and other costs.

If limited financial support is provided, consider other factors that
suggest the person's involvement with the child could still be
considered as providing care for the child. This may include evidence
that the individual is actively involved in major decisions relating to
the child's health, schooling and relationships and/or career
development.

Grandparent or non-parent carers

If the customer is a grandparent or non-parent carer of the child, a
determination should be made whether the care is a change in care
(either formal or informal) or not. If a decision cannot be made based
on just the information supplied by the customer, evidence may be
required to make the determination, see Evidence to support the actual
care arrangements.

Grandparents and non-parent carers will not generally be eligible for
family assistance if the parent of the child also lives in the same
household unless the grandparent or non-parent carer has legal
responsibility of the child. For further information refer to
Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers.

For examples of eligible grandparent carers see Additional Child Care
Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and applications.

Child income limit

The FTB child income limit no longer applies from 1 May 2014.

Before 1 May 2014, a child was not an FTB child if the child income
limit applied to the child and the child's income for the financial year
exceeded the limit.

Difference between an FTB child and a dependent child

It is important to note differences between the definition of an FTB
child under family assistance law and a dependent child under social
security law. There will be cases where a child is considered a
dependent of a person for FTB but not for their Social Security payment
(for example, Parenting Payment) and vice versa. The References page
contains details of these differences which relate to child age and
study requirements, child income limits, receipt of Prescribed Education
Scheme payments, and shared care.

For a young person aged 16-19, a customer may be eligible for FTB but a
check should be made to see if the child should claim a payment in their
own right such as Youth Allowance (YA) as this may be more beneficial. A
dependent child aged 16-17 in full-time secondary study living at home
will generally not be eligible for YA. However, if they are not
benefiting from the FTB payment made to their parents on their behalf, a
social worker may determine that the young person can apply for YA.

Child is orphaned or 1 parent is deceased

Customers may be eligible to also receive Double Orphan Pension (DOP)
for a child who has been assessed as an FTB child of the customer and is
orphaned or 1 parent is deceased and the surviving parent is unable to
care for the child due to circumstances such as long term imprisonment,
parent is unknown or uncontactable, they are undergoing indefinite
care/treatment in a psychiatric hospital or nursing home.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
online estimators and information for families with children aged 16 or
over, a full-time secondary study comparison table, a summary of changes
to FTB Part A child eligibility since 2010, and examples of
determinations of whether a child is a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of
a customer.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
and over

Viewing child eligibility details on the Assessment Explanation (AX) and
Assessment Details (ASDT) screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child income

Claiming family assistance and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a newborn
child

Claiming payments for children entrusted to care as part of the process
of adoption or surrogacy

Claiming payments for children leaving care as part of the process of
adoption or a surrogacy arrangement

Claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB) instalments for children in care other
than a newborn or adopted child

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

Assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Child out of care without consent

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claim options and payment choices

Family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme customer/child going
overseas

Identifying the most beneficial payment for trainees or Australian
Apprentices

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
