
Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) applications 007-17103156

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

Risks to a customer's privacy have been identified. See Separating
Safely - protecting personal details to make sure the customer's
personal details are safe before progressing.

This document outlines information about how to process an application
and assess evidence for ACCS (Grandparent).

Eligibility

To be eligible for ACCS (Grandparent) a customer must be eligible for
CCS, and they (or their partner) must:

-   meet the definition of grandparent of the child they are claiming
    for
-   have all or at least 65% assessed care of the child
-   have substantial autonomy for the day to day decisions about the
    child’s care, welfare and development
-   receive an eligible income support payment

If the ACCS (Grandparent) application is lodged within a CCS claim, ACCS
Processing Service Officers will also need to assess CCS and manage any
exception processing. If a customer is not eligible for CCS they will
not be eligible for ACCS (Grandparent).

Roles and responsibilities in applications for ACCS (Grandparent)

Service Officers will:

-   [] direct new CCS customers to lodge a combined CCS/ACCS
    (Grandparent) claim online
-   complete an Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for CCS/ACCS (Grandparent)
    if appropriate
-   [] direct current CCS customers to lodge an ACCS (Grandparent)
    application using their online account
-   in limited circumstances, and only where an ACC cannot be completed,
    issue a FA084 Application for Child Care Subsidy, which incorporates
    ACCS (Grandparent)

The ACCS Processing Team (ACCPT) will assess all ACCS (Grandparent)
applications (including combined CCS/ACCS claims), using information
provided in the claim, and will advise the customer in writing of the
outcome.

Grandparents with care of a grandchild and non-parent carers who have
taken on parental responsibilities for a child may also benefit from the
services of a Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Adviser who will:

-   provide tailored information about Centrelink, Medicare and Child
    Support payments and support services specific to the circumstances
    of individual families
-   arrange appointments for non-parent carers with specialist staff,
    including social workers, Financial Information Service (FIS)
    Officers, and
-   arrange referrals to federal, state and community service providers

Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Advisers do not have delegation to
assess CCS/ACCS combined claims or ACCS Change of Circumstance
applications, including ACCS (Grandparent) applications.

Grandparent principal carers who are not on income support are supported
through CCS. Those customers who are not eligible for ACCS (Grandparent)
because they do not receive an eligible income support payment will be
exempt from the CCS activity test, and will be able to access up to 100
hours of approved child care each fortnight. CCS processing staff may
assess activity test exemptions for grandparent principle carers not
receiving income support, only where the customer has provided enough
evidence. See Activity Test for CCS for further details.

Assessing evidence

When processing ACCS (Grandparent) applications, ACCS Processing Team
(ACCPT) Service Officers must review the evidence provided or cross
reference any evidence on record to confirm the customer or their
partner:

-   is the grandparent or great grandparent of the child
-   has all or at least 65% or more ongoing care of the child, and
-   has substantial autonomy for the day to day decisions about the
    child’s care, welfare and development

If evidence is not held on the record, the Service Officer will be
required to issue a request for evidence as the claim or application
does not request this information.

Date of effect for ACCS (Grandparent)

The start date for ACCS (Grandparent) will be the start of a CCS
fortnight up to 28 days before the date the claim was submitted, which
cannot be earlier than the date CCS commenced.

During the processing of an ACCS (Grandparent) application, if a
customer is asked to provide additional information to support their
application and this is not supplied, the application will be not
effective. This means it is considered not to have been made and the
customer will need to lodge a new application.

If an application was a combined CCS/ACCS claim, a determination will be
made in relation to CCS even where the ACCS application may be rejected
or not effective.

The Resources page contains a link to the Centrelink Payments Calendar
to help explain start dates for CCS and ACCS.

Reassessments and changes in circumstances

Grandparents need to advise any change in their circumstance as soon as
possible. If the change in circumstances results in the cancellation of
ACCS (Grandparent), and they still have the child in their care they may
be entitled to receive CCS based on their adjusted taxable income and
activity test requirements.

The Resources page contains links to the Centrelink Payments Calendar,
Grandparent, Foster and Kinship Carer Adviser intranet page and letter
text. It also has examples of principal carer grandparents and
assessment of autonomy of decisions about the care of the child.

Related links

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
