-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines the change of circumstances process that applies
to customers who have claimed or who have been paid Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP).

Details that can be updated by customers and staff

Customers and Service Officers can update:

-   the nominated tax rate prior to payment of DAP
-   expected date of birth or entry into care
-   details about having care of a child for DAP purposes
-   details of work or paid leave during the DAP period

Only a Service Officer can update:

-   the DAP period nominated start date
-   DAP income test details - these can only be updated when the claim
    status is ASS (assessed) or PND (pending). Due to a system
    limitation a workaround is currently required to update DAP income
    within a new claim
-   View work test

A change of circumstances must be notified as soon as possible.

Note: top up payments made by an employer to supplement DAP are not
considered paid leave for DAP. See Payability and delivery of Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP).

Changing nominated start date before DAP paid

Customers can notify a change in their nominated start date by phone or
in person. Changes to the nominated start date after the initial claim
assessment may require an abridged eligibility test to confirm they will
meet the eligibility requirements in the new DAP period.

The following must be considered:

-   whether they did/will have care of the child for each day of the new
    DAP period
-   whether they were/will be on unpaid leave or not working for each
    day of the new DAP period
-   whether the relevant financial year for the income test has changed
-   the nominated start date can be moved to any date in the past, up to
    child's date of birth without a new claim being lodged

Changing nominated start date after DAP paid

Customers can notify a change in their nominated start date by phone or
in person. Changes to the nominated start date after the initial payment
has been made may require an abridged eligibility test to confirm they
will meet the eligibility requirements in the new DAP period.

If a change in DAP circumstances has been notified and the change:

-   would deem them ineligible, or
-   reduce their DAP period

The Service Officer must discuss whether there is another period that
DAP can be moved to where they would remain eligible.

This is the preferred approach because there may be instances where a
customer will be disadvantaged if they could not change their DAP period
start date after their payment has commenced. For example, they are
required to work in their DAP period, or there is an unexpected transfer
of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) that overlaps with their DAP period.

Before moving the DAP period to a new nominated start date, an abridged
eligibility test needs to be completed to confirm whether the customer
will meet the eligibility requirements in the new DAP period.

The Resources page contains examples of circumstances which require
changing the DAP nominated start date after DAP has been paid.

Online updates

[] For a customer to be able to update details online for DAP:

-   they must have an active self-service registration, and
-   their benefit status for DAP must be either assessed (ASS), pending
    (PND) or PAY

Online updates that do not auto-finalise will be allocated to a Service
Officer and completed using Customer First.

Interaction Activities

An Interaction record/activity can generate when:

-   a customer updates their circumstances online but the update is
    unsuccessful
-   a customer accesses the online service and no updates are made but
    it is submitted by the customer
-   a Service Officer starts a DAP Change of Circumstance and doesn't
    complete the change

To check for any outstanding interaction records:

-   check the Customer Summary screen in Customer First
-   scroll to the Activities tab/Interaction history tab to make sure
    all incomplete/outstanding work is completed

If a DAP circumstance (Guided Procedure) is started and not complete,
the activity often updates to 'in process' to continue to action the
Change of Circumstances (CoC) interaction activity.

Staff must change the activity back to 'in draft' to enable updates, and
finalise the activity.

Limiting date

A 3 year limiting date has been introduced to ensure reassessments of
older DAP claims are not occurring automatically.

The system will only apply a reassessment on DAP for an older child if
the user is actively selecting the applicable child and the relevant
claim (for example, when a retrospective change of circumstances needs
to be coded). DAP claims will be automatically reassessed only if the
child's Date of Birth or entry into care is less than 3 years from the
system date.

The Resources page contains examples of changes in circumstances for DAP
and the text for the Q999 letter.

Related links

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Payability and delivery of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Reviews and appeals of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
