
Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals 007-07040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for individuals to
receive Family Tax Benefit (FTB). There are general eligibility criteria
for FTB, and separate eligibility criteria and income tests that apply
for the various FTB components that can be paid depending on the
family's circumstances.

On this Page:

Eligibility for FTB

An individual is eligible for FTB if they:

-   satisfy Australian residence requirements
-   have an FTB child in their care. If care of a child is shared
    between 2 or more individuals, the child must be in the individual's
    actual care for at least 35% of the time. Individuals with a Regular
    Care Child in their care can claim FTB to receive ancillary benefits
    for the child
-   are entitled to a rate of FTB greater than nil

[] Individuals can use the online estimators to estimate their potential
FTB entitlement.

Only 1 member of a couple may be eligible for FTB, except for members of
a blended family and separated persons claiming for a past period when
they were a couple.

FTB components

Separate eligibility criteria must be met for a person to receive the
following FTB components. Eligibility is assessed automatically based on
the family's circumstances:

-   FTB Part A is paid for each FTB child up to the end of the calendar
    year in which they turn 19 (study requirements must be met if aged
    16-19). Part A can also include Large Family Supplement (LFS) (not
    payable from 1 July 2016), Multiple Birth Allowance (MBA), Newborn
    Supplement (NBS) and Rent Assistance (RA)
-   FTB Part B is paid per family based on the age of the youngest FTB
    child. From 1 July 2016, FTB Part B is not payable to a member of a
    couple who has a youngest child aged 13 years or over, unless the
    person is a grandparent carer. For single customers and grandparent
    carers, FTB Part B can continue to be paid up to the end of the
    calendar year in which the youngest child turns 18 (child must be in
    full-time secondary school if aged 16-18)

Note: customers cannot receive FTB Part B for the period they receive
Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS). Note: from the 2017-18
    financial year, SIFS is not payable to new claimants. Grandfathering
    provisions for SIFS will apply

Separate income tests apply for Part A, Part B and SIFS.

Claim requirements

To be eligible for FTB, individuals need to make an effective claim by:

[] submitting an online claim or lodging a paper claim by the end of the
lodgement year

providing all information and documentation required to assess their
claim including:

-   their (and their partner's) tax file number
-   child's proof of birth if this has not previously been provided for
    the child

Note: from the 2012-13 financial year onwards, a person prevented from
lodging their lump sum claim by the end of the lodgement year due to
special circumstances may be granted a lodgement extension.

Care of a child

A person is considered to have care of a child if they are responsible
for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the child. This
includes physical care (health, transport, accommodation etc.), making
daily decisions about their schooling and religion etc., financial
costs, and mental, moral and emotional support. See the References page
for a more detailed definition.

Employee of a private or state run group home

The employee would not be eligible for FTB for a child they are caring
for in the group home. This is because the employee is not legally
responsible for the child. The body responsible for the group home is
responsible for the day-to-day care, welfare and development of the
child.

If the body responsible for the group home is an Approved Care
Organisation, they may be eligible to receive FTB for the child.

Young persons aged 16-19 years

An individual may be eligible for:

-   FTB Part A until the end of the calendar year in which the young
    person turns 19 years old
-   FTB Part B until the end of the calendar year in which the young
    person turns 18 years old if the individual is either single or a
    grandparent carer

if study requirements are met, but a check should be made to see if the
child should claim a payment in their own right such as Youth Allowance
(YA) as this may be more beneficial.

If a dependent full-time secondary student living at home aged less than
18 years is not benefiting from the FTB payment made to their parents on
their behalf, a social worker may determine that the young person can
apply for YA.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
the online estimators and information for families with children aged 16
and over.

Related links

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit for a child in foster care

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental leave scheme and bereavement

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Identifying the most beneficial payment for students or Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
