-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines the cancellation, rejection, not effective,
assessed and current zero rate codes used for Parental Leave Pay (PPL).
Centrelink uses specific codes when a decision is recorded on a
customer's record to assess their claim as not effective, reject the
claim, or cancel PPL. A description of the code is used in letters to
the customer.

In most post birth cases, a PPL claim will be automatically finalised as
not effective or rejected based on details coded when processing the
claim. PPL will automatically cancel once ineligibility details are
coded and remaining PPL entitlement is nil.

PPL overall claim cancellation

Cancelling PPL is similar to rejecting a claim for PPL. A claim is
cancelled if, after it has been granted:

-   it is identified that the customer was not eligible, or
-   their entitlement is reassessed and they have already been paid
    their full entitlement

A claim level cancellation will result in the cancellation of all
components of PPL.

PPL overall claim rejections and not effective claims

In some cases, a claim must be manually rejected or made not effective.
Where a manual rejection or not effective decision is made, send the
customer a Q999 letter advising of the decision and reason.

PPL component level status

The overall PPL claim level status is displayed on the customer’s
benefit status line.

Separate statuses for the different components of PPL are displayed on
the Flexible PPL (P1FLX) screen in Process Direct and PPL Calculation
Summary (P1RCS) screen in Customer First.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023

-   first PPL day
-   last PPL day
-   individual PPL days

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023:

-   PPL period and connected Flexible PPL days
-   individual Flexible PPL days

PPL current, assessed and current zero rate claims

Once a claim for PPL is granted, the PPL claim benefit status can be:

-   current (CUR)
-   assessed (ASS)
-   current at zero rate (CZR)

PPL overall claim status - open or closed

The PPL claim summary (P1CS) screen displays:

-   the overall PPL claim status which shows whether the claim is open
    (OPN), a new claim (NCL) or closed (CLO) for further updates
-   the PPL period level status (STS) and status reason (RSN)

Customer has multiple open PPL claims

PPL cannot be claimed for two children in a multiple birth or adoption.
However a customer can claim PPL for a newborn or recently adopted child
while they still have an open claim for an older child.

Example: A customer claims PPL for a child that is born on 16 September
2020. Provided eligibility is maintained, this claim will remain open
until 16 September 2022.

If a customer has more than one active PPL claim for different children,
the benefit status line will display the status of the most recent PPL
claim. Details and information on the earlier claim can be accessed on
the PPL claim summary (P1CS) screen.

The Process page contains a list of cancellation, rejection, not
effective, assessed and current zero rate codes for PPL.

Related links

Claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellation of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Restoration of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
