
Approved Care Organisations (ACO) 007-01060000

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about an Approved Care Organisation
(ACO) and the payments available to them for the children in their care.
An ACO is an organisation that co-ordinates or provides residential care
services to young people in Australia, and has been approved as an ACO.

On this Page:

Approval as an ACO

Agencies may be accepted as an ACO if they:

-   assist homeless youth
-   care for children with an intellectual or physical disability
-   care for abused or neglected children
-   accommodate young refugees (who qualify as Australian residents) in
    order to help them adjust to Australian society
-   arrange pre-adoptive foster care (such as adoption and foster care
    agencies)
-   provide long term or permanent care for young people with an
    intellectual, emotional or physical disability (except psychiatric
    hospitals)

Services Australia may withdraw an approval previously given to an
organisation.

Organisations enquiring about approval or withdrawal must be referred to
ACO Smart Centre Processing centre.

Claiming payments

An ACO may claim:

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in their care

-   FTB is paid at the same rate per child for all ACOs, regardless of
    the age of the child. ACOs are eligible for base FTB Part A child
    rate for each FTB child and in some circumstances may be eligible to
    receive Energy Supplement Part A
-   There is no income test for FTB for ACOs
-   An ACO cannot share the care of a child and therefore cannot be paid
    a part rate of FTB

Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

An ACO must lodge a claim and is obliged to notify of any changes in
circumstances. FTB or DOP is not payable to an ACO for a child receiving
a pension, benefit or allowance in his or her own right.

An ACO is not entitled to advance payments of FTB, bereavement payments,
Carer Allowance (CA) or payments while a child is overseas.

An ACO is recorded on the system as an organisation. Children in care
are linked to the ACO in the same way a child is linked to an individual
customer. Payments to the ACO are made fortnightly based on their
entitlement period end date.

Concession cards

An ACO cannot be issued a Health Care Card (HCC) for a foster child in
their care.

A Low Income Health Care Card (LIC) may be granted to the child where
FTB for the child is not being paid to an individual. Because ACOs are
not individual persons, a child in an ACO can obtain a low income HCC
where the ACO receives FTB for the child, or FTB is not paid for the
child. If the child residing with the ACO is an FTB child of a person
who cannot be paid FTB for the child because of the income test, the
child is not entitled to a LIC. See Claiming Low Income Health Care Card
(LIC).

Contents

Approval, rejection, withdrawal and monitoring of Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Visits to Approved Care Organisations (ACO)

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) claims from Approved Care
Organisations (ACO)

Double Orphan Pension (DOP) claims made by Approved Care Organisation
(ACO)

Actioning Approved Care Organisation (ACO) advice of transfer, discharge
or absence of a young person

Health Care Cards (HCC) for foster children

Claiming Low Income Health Care Card (LIC)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
