
Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) process for family assistance customers 007-13020010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information regarding the Mutual Customer
Identification (MCI) process between Centrelink and the Australian
Taxation Officer (ATO). MCI allows the transfer of income details used
in family assistance reconciliation and in the calculation of lump sum
family assistance claims.

Centrelink and ATO mutual customers

Centrelink will establish a link with the ATO for a family assistance
customer (and any partner/s) who have been paid, or who lodge an
effective lump sum claim for Family Tax Benefit (FTB), for a financial
year. The ATO will note on their records that the customer is a mutual
customer and advise Centrelink that a link has been established.

Centrelink must advise the ATO of all Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Subsidy (CCS) customers (and their partners) except those who, for
the relevant financial year:

-   claimed zero rate of CCB (minimum CCB rate before 1 July 2008)
-   received only zero rate/minimum rate due to not satisfying Tax File
    Number (TFN) compliance, or
-   were income support CCB customers

An electronic link allows the ATO to automatically transfer actual
adjusted taxable income details to Centrelink for mutual customers for
use in reconciliation or calculation of family payment entitlement for a
relevant financial year.

TFN matching process

The use of Tax File Numbers (TFN) is critical in the matching process.
Correctly matching customers ensures that correct income details
transfer from the ATO for the customer (and their partner) for the
relevant financial year

MCI link required

An MCI link is required when FTB is granted or restored, when a
customer's and/or their partner's TFN is updated, or when the customer
becomes partnered.

When updating a TFN on a record with an existing mutual link, the
previous link will end and a transaction is sent to the ATO to establish
a new link.

There are two bases for matching:

-   an ID based match (TFN, name, Date of Birth), or
-   a name based match (exempt partners)

MCI match

A match result means that no further action is required and Centrelink
has successfully identified a mutual customer between Centrelink and the
ATO. It also means that financial year assessment details can be shared.

MCI link closed

Unless the customer is a non-lodger for the relevant financial year, the
MCI link will automatically close after three years, for example, after
June 2018 for 2014-15.

If income details are amended or reported for a financial year after the
link has closed, the customer will need to provide proof of their actual
income. This will mainly affect customers whose income is reassessed by
the ATO. Their Notice of Assessment (NOA) and income tax return (if
available) will need to be sighted and copied. Manual recording of
income may be required.

The Resources page contains a table of explanations of status fields on
the Mutual Customer Identification (MCI) screen.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
