-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to complete an Add child claim for Child Care
Subsidy (CCS). Customers can do this online or with help from a Service
Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

What is an Add child to Child Care Subsidy claim?

A shortened claim that allows a customer to add another eligible child
or children that is in their care to their CCS entitlement without
having to complete the full claim.

It is available to customers using online services and Express Plus
Mobile App. If customers are unable to complete the update using the
online options, it is also available in ACC.

Who can use the service?

Customers can use the shortened claim if they satisfy all of the
following:

CCS current for at least one other child

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) current (including CZR/ Regular Care Child) for
the child to be added

Not already CCS Current for the child to be added

The child is not already included in a submitted but not finalised CCS
claim of any type

Not receiving:

-   Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) Grandparents
-   ACCS Transition to Work, or
-   ACCS Temporary Financial Hardship for any children

Claim questions

Unless specified as optional, customers must provide information about
the child’s:

-   Medicare details
-   disability status
-   enrolment and type of child care used
-   schooling details

All other relevant information will be captured from the customer
record. Change in circumstance updates (e.g. income estimate or activity
test details) are not available with these claims. These must be
actioned separately.

Automated processing of CCS claims

The system will determine if a claim meets the criteria for straight
through processing for most claims (grants or rejections). This is an
overnight process.

The customer will be advised of the outcome of their claim quicker.

A claim is allocated for processing when the claim:

-   does not meet the criteria for straight through processing, or
-   requires exceptional management or validation of selected data items

Customers with nominee arrangements

If a nominee is claiming on behalf of a person, encourage the nominee to
help the person claim using the person's Centrelink online account. If
the nominee is unable or unwilling to do so, run the ACC with the
nominee.

The Resources page contains contact details, skill tag information,
claim access path and links to Process Direct resources. There is also a
link to the Services Australia calendar, which displays the start of
each CCS fortnight.

Related links

Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
