
Customer enquires about Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation outcome 007-19022136

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to check the progress or result of a CCS
reconciliation result when a customer contacts.

Enquiries on CCS reconciliation

Note: CCS reconciliation for the 2021-2022 CCS year will be staggered to
ensure correct outcomes.

When a customer enquires about a CCS reconciliation result:

select the CCS Reconciliation Dashboard tile from the Process Direct
landing page. Enter the customer's CRN and select the relevant financial
year to view the status of the CCS reconciliation. Select Search

The most recent reconciliation instance (1 being the oldest) will
display on the left in the Reconciliation History tab. Some
reconciliation statuses could be:

-   Completed (COMP) means either CCS payments have been balanced and
    the Net Amount can be advised, or income has not yet been confirmed
    for the relevant year and a Deadline has applied
-   Not to be reconciled (NREC) means reconciliation is not yet
    complete. All customers with these statuses will have reconciliation
    occur on their records. Do not advise the customer of any amounts
    showing as they are subject to change
-   Pending - could mean the customer/partner or ex-partner have not met
    income confirmation requirements, reconciliation is pending due to
    timing or further checks are needed for reconciliation to complete.
    Do not advise the customer of any amounts showing as they are
    subject to change

By selecting the date hyperlink within the instance, the Tax Return
Status can be viewed to confirm if income confirmation obligations have
been met

-   a status of Provisional under Obligations met could mean income is
    yet to be confirmed, or incomes have been confirmed but the
    reconciliation outcome has not been triggered yet due to the
    staggered approach
-   if the customer and their partner or ex-partner are not required to
    lodge a tax return for the relevant financial year, update the
    details on the customer's record. This may trigger CCS
    reconciliation if all conditions are met, although this may not
    occur immediately

If no further information is required from the customer and
reconciliation is delayed due to pending wash up from ATO, manual
intervention etc., advise the customer that reconciliation is in
process, noting that CCS reconciliation will not commence until at least
the 29th day after the end of the CCS year

If the reconciliation outcome is pending or delayed only due to the
inaction of an ex-partner, the customer may wish to discuss a Most
Recent Estimate (MRE) exception. If accepted this will allow
reconciliation to proceed from the date of the 1st deadline using the
ex-partner’s MRE income. Note: where the 1st deadline (usually 30 June)
is delayed due to disasters, the reconciliation for these customers will
still occur on 30 June. The customer will not be disadvantaged and will
not have to wait until the revised 1st deadline date. See Exceptional
circumstances for CCS and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) for more
information

If no further information is required, as all CCS reconciliation
requirements are met for the customer and their partner or ex-partner,
advise the customer:

-   their CCS reconciliation is in progress and they will be notified of
    the outcome once reconciliation is completed
-   they can monitor the progress of their reconciliation via their
    online services or the Centrelink Express Plus App

If the reconciliation pending Disaster Work Item displays, tell the
customer:

-   their balancing will not be completed straightaway because it looks
    like they were overpaid
-   Services has paused debt raising for Local Government Areas (LGAs
    impacted by COVID-19 lockdowns
-   balancing will complete when the debt pause ends
-   they do not need to take any further action
-   they will get a letter when their balancing is complete
-   the customer can ask to have the debt raised

Note: not required to lodge advice for an ex-partner cannot be completed
online. See Recording not required to lodge advice and previous year
income.

If CCS reconciliation has occurred, explain the outcome to the customer,
including details of any top-up payment or overpayments calculated, and
any amounts used to offset any child care payment debts (this does not
include any Jobs Education and Training (JETCCFA) debts).

If the customer disagrees with the attendance used in their
reconciliation, see CCS and ACCS – Viewing attendance reports.

Overpayments arising from reconciliation

CCS debts resulting from reconciliation will be raised automatically in
Process Direct and display in Debt Management Information System (DMIS).
If the debt is less than $50 the system will automatically waive it LTF
(Less Than Fifty) and record details on DMIS.

A previous debt from CCS reconciliation for the same year will be
automatically updated on DMIS regardless of its status, and the previous
negative adjustment included in the recalculation. It will have a status
of CRC in Process Direct and DMIS.

The customer will be sent an automatic reconciliation outcome letter
with details and payment options.

Once the CCS debt has been Determined (DET), if it is not repaid in full
it will fall into the debt hierarchy for recovery. See Debt recovery
general information.

Note: this process will not apply during periods where the agency has a
pause on debt raising and recovery.

Appeals

Customers may request an explanation of a decision made by Services
Australia however in the case of CCS reconciliation results, the
Internal Review/Explanation script must not be run unless the outcome
has been thoroughly investigated and explained.

The Process page contains the escalation process for cases where the
outcome needs further explanation.

Manual intervention

Where certain criteria are met, the reconciliation result will be placed
into pending for further checking instead of being allowed to complete
automatically (referred to as Pending ECOM status).

A work item can be identified by hovering over the Work Item ID (10
digit ID) hyperlink in the ‘Pending’ reconciliation tile of the
Reconciliation History tab within the CCS Reconciliation Dashboard in
Process Direct.

See the Process page for further information.

Privacy and confidentiality

There are restrictions with regard to disclosure and confidentiality of
customer, partner and ex-partner information for CCS customers:

-   privacy,
-   Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) and implied authority

Do not discuss results of CCS reconciliations with the child care
service.

The Resources page contains reconciliation history statuses, and an
explanation of the partial/no payment reason codes displayed in the CCS
reconciliation dashboard. It also contains information about ACCS
(Transition to Work) 2018/19 reconciliation debts requiring further
investigation, and a link to the Services Australia website for CCS.

Related links

Assessment of adjusted taxable income for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Reconciliation of Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Manual intervention for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) reconciliation

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) overpayments arising from reconciliation

Debt offsetting during family assistance reconciliation and lump sum
claim processing

Estimating income for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review

Debt recovery for Centrelink

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
