
Parenting Payment (PP) automatic letters 007-04040010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about automatic letters for Parenting
Payment (PP).

On this Page:

Automatic letters are issued when

Automatic letters for PP are issued to customers as a result of claim
processing, a reassessment activity on a customer's record and to
explain the customer's rights and responsibilities. They give details of
the customer's PP entitlement and how it was calculated.

Circumstances where a manual letter is required

In some circumstances, an automatic letter will not be generated and a
letter will need to be manually issued. These include cases where:

-   an automatic letter cannot be generated due to the number of changes
    recorded or the type of activity (for example, cancelling a payment
    with a reason of 'Other')
-   where an automatic letter is unavailable (for example, bereavements)

Information on customer obligations

Obligations listed on the backs of letters are different depending on
the type of payment the customer has claimed and the type of payment
their partner receives.

Mutual obligation requirements

PP customers will be sent automatic letters to advise them about their
mutual obligation requirements. This includes letters advising details
of an appointment to discuss their future mutual obligation
requirements.

PP partnered customers will receive a letter around the time their
youngest child is aged 5 years 9 months advising them of an appointment
to discuss mutual obligation requirements and the need to apply for
another income support payment when their child turns 6 years of age.

PP single customers will receive letters:

-   around the time their youngest child is aged 5 years and 9 months
    advising them of details of an appointment to discuss their mutual
    obligation requirements when their child turns 6 years of age, and
-   around the time their youngest child turns 7 years and 9 months of
    age advising them of an appointment to discuss the need to apply for
    another income support payment when their child turns 8 years of age

Exemption from mutual obligation requirements

PP customers who have an exemption from their mutual obligation
requirements will receive a letter before the exemption expires,
advising them of an appointment to discuss their future mutual
obligation requirements or extension of the exemption.

Viewing and reissuing letters

Letters created in the previous 28 days can be viewed and reissued from
the History Summary (HS) screen. Older letters can be retrieved through
the Advice History (AH) screen in the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR)
system in the Income security Integrated System (ISIS).

Creating manual letters

If an automatic letter is not generated and the customer needs to be
advised of the change, a Manual Follow-up (MFU) activity will be created
and prompt to issue a letter manually.

The Resources page contains information about a customer's rights and
responsibilities that is printed on automatic letters for Parenting
Payment (PP).

Related links

Reporting overview

Creating an Online Advice (OLA), including within an existing activity

Creating a Q134 letter

Letters and customer advices

Viewing or reissuing a letter or electronic message

Using the Customer Archive Retrieval (CAR) system and microfiche
requests for archived information

myGov Inbox

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
