
Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) 007-04060000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility requirements for Stillborn Baby
Payment (SBP). For a stillborn child, Parental Leave Pay (PPL) is the
more beneficial payment and parents can return to work without it
affecting their PPL eligibility. If a customer's PPL claim is rejected,
they should still test their eligibility for SBP.

On this Page:

Claim requirements

[] Customers should be encouraged to claim online or they can lodge a
Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008). The FA008 is issued by the
hospital and contains a doctor/midwife declaration, used as verification
of the stillbirth.

Claims must be lodged within 52 weeks of the stillbirth. This period can
be extended if necessary due to severe illness associated with the
stillbirth, or when PPL is rejected.

Customers who have lost or not issued the FA008 by the hospital may
lodge a FA008M downloaded from the website or issued by a Service
Officer. As the FA008M does not have the doctor/midwife declaration, the
customer must provide other suitable evidence, such as a statement or
report from a qualified medical practitioner familiar with the case. If
the customer does not provide suitable verification, the Families
Bereavement Processing Team will contact the hospital or midwife.

Eligibility criteria

A customer may be paid SBP for a stillborn child if all of the following
are met:

The child would have been a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of the
customer had the child been born alive and at any time within 26 weeks
of the delivery would have been eligible for FTB except that their rate
is nil

The customer or their partner would have been the child's primary carer
(at birth, had the child lived)

The customer or their partner has not received PPL for the child. Note:
receipt of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) for a child does not affect SBP
eligibility for the same child

The customer meets Australian residence requirements
Note: SBP is only payable to Norfolk Island residents for a child
delivered on or after 1 July 2016, providing they meet the Australian
residence requirements and other eligibility criteria

Income test requirements:

-   their combined income estimate for the 6 months beginning from the
    date of delivery of the stillborn child does not exceed the
    Stillborn Baby Payment income limit, or
-   their 6 month income estimate exceeds the Stillborn Baby Payment
    income limit but they are eligible for FTB Part A for another child
    within 52 weeks of the stillbirth

If SBP is paid under the FTB Part A eligibility test it is subject to
the FTB reconciliation process.

Rates of SBP

Stillborn children delivered before 1 January 2021

There are 2 SBP rates. A higher rate is paid for the customer's first
stillborn child and for each stillborn child of a multiple birth. A
lower rate is paid for a second or subsequent stillborn child.

If a customer has a multiple birth and 1 of the children is stillborn,
the customer may receive the higher rate of SBP for the stillborn child
and PPL for the other child(ren).

Stillborn children delivered on or after 1 January 2021

From 1 January 2021 there is a single rate of SBP. The single rate is
paid for each stillborn child delivered on or after 1 January 2021.

The new rate is equivalent to:

-   the higher rate of NBS/NBU, and
-   the FTB Part A bereavement payment for 14 weeks at the FTB Part A
    under 13 maximum rate

If a customer has a multiple birth and 1 of the children is stillborn,
the customer may receive:

-   SBP for the stillborn child, and
-   PPL for the other child(ren)

Eligible customer dies

If a customer is eligible for SBP and they die before they are paid,
another person can be paid SBP if they claim within 52 weeks of the
customer's death (this period may be extended in special circumstances).
Eligibility is based on the deceased customer's income and other
circumstances.

The Resources page contains contact details, a link to the Claim for
Bereavement (FA008M) which is used if the customer has lost or did not
receive the FA008 from their doctor or hospital, examples of claiming
while overseas, and eligibility for customers with older children.

Contents

Processing claims for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Process Claim for Bereavement Payment (FA008)

Related links

Initial contact after a stillbirth

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
