
Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments 007-02040000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the effect on eligibility for family assistance
and Paid Parental Leave scheme payments when the care of a child is
shared with another person and a pattern of care exists over a period.

Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

FTB can be shared between customers based on the percentage of time the
child spends in each customer's care and whether the child is considered
an FTB child. A person must have actual care of a child for at least 35%
of the time to receive FTB for the child.

-   Customers with more than 65% actual care of a child will receive
    100% FTB for the child
-   Customers with 35-65% actual care of a child will receive some FTB
    for the child based on their actual care of the child and applying
    the percentage of shared care used for family assistance
-   Customers with 14-34% actual care of a child will not receive FTB
    for the child but may be eligible for ancillary benefits for the
    child. The child is considered to be a Regular Care Child of the
    customer
-   Customers with less than 14% actual care of a child will not receive
    FTB for the child or be entitled to any ancillary benefits

The percentage recorded must be a whole number - rounding rules for
actual care percentage apply. The percentage of shared care used for
family assistance will determine the amount of FTB payable.

FTB rate components are calculated using the shared care percentage for
an FTB child (at least 35% actual care), except for Rent Assistance
(RA), Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) and Newborn Supplement
(NBS).

Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

In a shared care situation, PPL will only be paid to the primary carer.
If more than 1 carer lodges a claim for PPL, Services Australia will
determine who will be the primary carer to receive PPL. Generally the
birth or adoptive mother will be the primary carer.

PPL cannot be shared and must be paid to 1 person who is the primary
carer. Therefore, if the care is 50/50 the agency will make
determination based on primary carer first. If neither carer is birth
mother, a decision will be made in favour of the carer with workforce
connections. Carers will be notified of the decision in writing.

Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

In a shared care situation, percentages of care are not relevant for
DAP. An eligibility determination is based on the customer having care
of a child for DAP purposes on each day of the DAP period.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)/Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Shared care assessments can affect a customer’s eligibility for
CCS/ACCS. In addition to being liable to pay child care fees for the
child, the child must be a FTB or Regular care child of the customer. To
be:

-   a regular care child, the child must be in the customer’s care 14%
    to 34%
-   an FTB child, care is at least 35%

This means the customer or their current partner must have at least 14%
care of the child to be eligible for CCS/ACCS.

Note: from 27 June 2022, where a CCS customer is partnered, and does not
meet care requirements, the system will automatically check if their
current partner has the child/ren coded in their care (ICC) with 14%
care or more.

If a care determination is not already in place on the customers record,
one would need to be completed as part of their CCS/ACCS new claim. Each
person liable for the child care fees needs to have claimed CCS/ACCS
separately to have their eligibility assessed.

For a particular session of child care, CCS/ACCS can only be paid to 1
person.

Parenting Payment (PP)

A child can be a PP child of only 1 customer at a time. This means only
1 customer can be paid PP for a child. In most cases, this will be the
customer who has the greater degree of care and control.

For customers receiving a social security payment, shared care
assessment details need to be recorded separately to ensure the correct
rate of payment is made. Customers may be entitled to a higher rate of
benefit even if they are not considered the principal carer.

For customers receiving Carer Allowance (CA) and family assistance
payments and/or PP for a shared care child, shared care for CA must be
recorded separately.

Historical information

Baby Bonus (BBY) could be paid for a child born or entrusted into care
as part of the adoption process before 1 March 2014. The rate of BBY was
not affected by the level of shared care of the child. BBY was generally
paid to the birth mothers. If a change of care occurred, the rate of BBY
could be apportioned according to the period the child was in each
person's care during the BBY assessment period. Birth mothers could
continue to receive BBY instalments if they relinquished care of the
child after the birth, for example for respite.

Maternity Immunisation Allowance (MIA) was discontinued from 1 July
2012. MIA could be shared between customers according to the percentage
of actual care in the assessment period.

Before 1 July 2008, a customer had to have at least 10% actual care to
receive an equivalent rate of FTB for the child, or to be eligible for
other family assistance for the child. Customers received a percentage
of the FTB Part A child rate and Part B rate that applied.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information about shared care and child support.

Contents

Customer advises care arrangements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Notification and assessment of shared care arrangements for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Alignment of Care processing for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum
claims

Customer advises a change to their level of care of a child

Waiver of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) shared care entitlement

Traditional child rearing practices of Torres Strait Islander people

Extended Family Care Group (EFCG)

Related links

Advance payments of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Assessing Parental Leave Pay (PPL) claims

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Changes to shared care for Carer Allowance (CA)

Principal carer determination in shared care arrangements

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) for 2 carers in respect of the same
care receiver

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Rate of Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Baby Bonus (BBY)

Shared care for social security payments

'With child' rate of benefit for non-principal carers with shared care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
