-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about exemptions from providing Tax
File Numbers (TFN) when making a claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS).

On this Page

Exemptions for customers claiming CCS

Legislation does not allow exemptions from providing a TFN for the
customer under any circumstances. However, an exemption may be granted
when claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) where the customer is unable to
provide a TFN:

-   for their current partner or former partner for a genuine reason, or
-   where a claim is being made in substitution for a deceased customer

TFN exemptions for current partners

A temporary exemption can be granted to a customer if they are unable to
provide their partner’s TFN where their partner cannot be contacted
temporarily (for example, away for work or holiday in a remote location
without access to electronic communication). The period of the exemption
is limited to the period of time the partner cannot be contacted.

TFN exemptions for former partners

A customer can be granted an exemption from providing their former
partner’s TFN where:

-   the customer has requested their former partner’s details but they
    have refused to provide it. The exemption can apply until the end of
    the current financial year
-   the customer is not able to contact their former partner for valid
    reasons, such as domestic violence, imprisonment, serious disability
    or illness, whereabouts unknown. The exemption can apply to the end
    of the current financial year
-   the former partner temporarily cannot be contacted (for example,
    away for work or holiday in a remote location without access to
    electronic communication). The period of the exemption is limited to
    the period of time the partner cannot be contacted

TFN exemptions for claims in substitution for a deceased customer

Where a CCS claim is being made in substitution for a person who has
died, an exemption may be granted to provide the deceased person’s TFN
if a determination is made that the individual’s TFN cannot be known.

Exemption reviews

Prior to the expiration of an exemption, a review will be undertaken to
determine if a further exemption should be granted.

Where an exemption is time limited and it expires and the customer has
not provided their TFN, the claim will be not effective and taken to
have not been given. This may result in an overpayment where a CCS
payments have been made during the exemption period.

The Resources page contains a link to the Level 2 Policy Help Desk
online webform and the Australian Taxation Office website.

Related links

Requesting a Tax File Number (TFN)

Helping customers obtain a Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Obtaining a Tax File Number (TFN) for Family Assistance customers
experiencing an urgent or extreme circumstance

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
