
Cancellation of Double Orphan Pension (DOP) 007-06020020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process to follow when cancelling DOP.

Cancelling DOP

DOP payments can be cancelled automatically or manually, depending on
the circumstances of the reassessment. Recording changes that result in
a loss of qualification should cancel the customer's DOP, but in some
cases DOP needs to cancelled manually.

Service Officers need to consider the changes in the customer's
circumstances and decide whether the customer is still eligible for DOP
or not, and discuss this with the customer in order to determine if they
qualify for another social security payment.

For an automatic or manual cancellation, a letter will be sent to the
customer advising the cancellation of payments, the reason for the
cancellation and the customer's review and appeal rights.

Automatic cancellations

For customers who are receiving Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parenting
Payment (PP) in addition to DOP, cancellation should occur automatically
following reassessments where no continuing entitlement exists, e.g.
when a child leaves care.

DOP is not automatically cancelled when a DOP child claims Youth
Allowance (YA).

Where a Disability Support Pension (DSP) claim is lodged by a child aged
16-19 attracting DOP, auto cancellation will generally occur. If auto
cancellation has not occurred, an ACTDOC will be generated and sent to
DOP for action.

Manual cancellations

Manual cancellations are only needed if DOP is not automatically
cancelled as a result of the circumstance change. If DOP is the only
payment the customer is receiving for the child, recording the
circumstance change does not automatically cancel DOP so the payment
will need to be cancelled manually.

DOP processing

All DOP processing is done by the DOP Processing Centre. Service
Officers send an ACTDOC to DOP with keyword ACTDOP whenever:

-   DOP is automatically cancelled as a result of recording changes on
    the customer record. Notify the cancellation and any related
    overpayments so these can be actioned by the DOP Processing Centre
-   DOP is not cancelled automatically as expected or DOP needs to be
    cancelled manually

Related links

Reviews and appeals

Cancellation and rejection codes for Double Orphan Pension (DOP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
