
Processing Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS) claims 007-10010020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains claims for the annual Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS) by families who are not eligible for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) for the period they are claiming for or who do not want to
claim FTB.

SIFS claim assessment year

SIFS can be claimed for the 2012-13 financial year up until 30 June 2017
for new and existing customers. For the 2017-18 financial year onwards,
SIFS is only payable to existing customers if the grandfathering
provisions are met.

SIFS claims are assessed against circumstances for the relevant
financial year. Customers have 12 months from the end of the entitlement
year to lodge their SIFS claim.

Customers prevented from lodging their claim by 30 June of the lodgement
year may be granted a special circumstances extension to meet the
requirements. A special circumstances assessment cannot be undertaken
until the customer has lodged their SIFS claim for the relevant
financial year.

Processing SIFS claims

SIFS online claims are processed using the Social Application (claim
workflow). Customers unable to lodge an online SIFS claim will need to
have their claim processed using the Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).
After completing the workflows, the customer's eligibility for payment
is assessed and any further processing is completed manually to finalise
the claim.

SIFS only claims are processed within an FTB lump sum claim activity,
but only SIFS entitlement will be assessed.

Initial processing includes searching for submitted online claim
activities, indexing the claim where this has not occurred, and checking
that all required information/ documentation has been
provided/requested.

Access to online claims will only be available during the relevant
lodgement year. If customers wish to lodge a claim after the end of the
lodgement year, their claim will need to be completed using Assisted
Customer Claims (ACC). If the customer has special circumstances that
prevented lodgement of the claim by the end of the lodgement year, an
extension may be granted. If the customer does not have special
circumstances that prevented lodgement of the claim by the end of the
lodgement year, the claim will be rejected.

When the claim is ready to finalise, the Social Application or Assisted
Customer Claims workflow is used to:

-   index an FTB/LSC activity if necessary
-   upload claim information into the indexed FTB/LSC activity

Income details

SIFS cannot be paid for a period until adequate income details are
available for the customer and their partner/ex-partner for that period
if applicable. For SIFS, adequate income means:

-   accepted 'not required to lodge advice' and provision of an income
    estimate, or
-   taxable income details electronically transferred from the
    Australian Taxation Office (ATO) if the person is required to lodge
    a tax return

A customer has 12 months from the end of an entitlement year to confirm
income for themselves and/or their partner/ex-partner, by either lodging
tax returns with the ATO or advising Services Australia they are not
required to lodge a tax return and provide an estimate of their income.
Customers prevented from confirming income by the end of the lodgement
year may be granted a special circumstances extension to meet the
requirements.

Reviews and appeals

Customers can apply for a formal review of the decision to reject SIFS
or the amount paid. SIFS is paid under family assistance law.

The Resources page contains links to the manual processing required for
SIFS claims when data upload cannot occur for a child who is a customer
in their own right and contact details for the Families override
contacts.

Related links

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Initial contact by customers claiming Single Income Family Supplement
(SIFS)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Re-indexing claims

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Debt offsetting during family assistance reassessment, reconciliation
and claim processing

Cancellation, rejection and not effective codes for Single Income Family
Supplement (SIFS)

Assessing special circumstances extensions for families unable to meet
lodgement and other specific requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)
and Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
