
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility and applications 007-17103149

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines eligibility requirements for Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) and how customers can apply for
this subsidy.

ACCS (Transition to Work)

ACCS (Transition to Work) provides additional support to families
transitioning to work from income support by engaging in work, study or
training activities.

Eligibility for ACCS (Transition to Work)

To be eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work) customers need to meet the
following criteria:

-   Be eligible for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
-   Receiving an ACCS (Transition to Work) eligible payment, including
    where the payment is suspended or an employment income nil rate
    period applies
-   Have a combined family income of less than the CCS lower income
    threshold
-   Meet the ACCS (Transition to work) Job plan requirements
-   Participating in an ACCS (Transition to Work) approved activity,
    which must also be recorded as a CCS activity, for a minimum of 8
    hours per fortnight
-   The time limit is not exceeded for the approved activity. The time
    limit means the period ACCS (Transition to Work) can be paid for an
    activity

Rate of ACCS (Transition to Work)

ACCS (Transition to Work) subsidy is 95% of the fee charged, up to 95%
of the hourly rate cap depending on the type of care the child is
attending.

The number of subsidised hours of child care a customer can access if
eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work) is based on their Activity Test
result. Where the customer is partnered, the number of subsidised hours
will be based on the person with the lowest Activity Test result.

In exceptional circumstances, customers may apply for more than the
activity tested hours result.

Refer to Activity test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) for more
information.

Applying for ACCS (Transition to Work)

Customers can apply for ACCS (Transition to Work):

-   at the time of completing an online or staff assisted claim for
    Child Care Subsidy (CCS). The ACCS (Transition to Work) application
    is imbedded within the CCS claim. This means the ACCS (Transition to
    Work) question set will present if responses in the CCS claim
    indicate they may be eligible for ACCS (such as being in receipt of
    an income support payment and report an activity which is an ACCS
    (Transition to Work) approved activity)
-   [] if already receiving CCS, as a standalone application using their
    online account. Customers receiving an eligible income support
    payment who have an approved activity recorded for CCS, will have
    the 'Transition to Work' option available in the Child Care Subsidy
    submenu
-   in limited circumstances, an offline (paper) FA085 Application for
    Additional Child Care Subsidy (Transition to Work) form can be
    issued. See Resources for a link to the FA085

Customers can apply for ACCS (Transition to Work) prior to commencing an
ACCS (Transition to Work) approved activity, however the start date for
an activity can be no more than 28 days in the future.

Roles and responsibilities in applications for ACCS (Transition to Work)

Service Officers will:

Assist customers to meet their Job Plan or Disability Support Pension
(DSP) Participation Plan requirements prior to lodging an application
for ACCS (Transition to Work)

[] Direct new CCS customers to lodge a combined CCS/ACCS (Transition to
Work) claim online

Complete a staff assisted claim for CCS/ACCS (Transition to Work) if
appropriate

[] Direct current CCS customers to lodge an ACCS (Transition to Work)
application using their online account

Issue a FA085 Application for Additional Child Care Subsidy (Transition
to Work) after confirming the customer meets all of the following:

-   Receiving an eligible income support payment
-   Undertaking in an approved activity
-   Has an income below the lower income threshold, and
-   Is unable to lodge a claim online or through the staff-assisted
    channel

The ACCS Processing Team will assess all ACCS (Transition to Work)
applications (including combined CCS/ACCS claims) using information
provided in the claim, and will advise the customer in writing of the
outcome.

Eligible for another ACCS payment

Where a customer is eligible for multiple ACCS payments for the same
session of care, a hierarchy applies so payments can only be made under
one ACCS type. The hierarchy is:

1.  ACCS (Child Wellbeing)
2.  ACCS (Grandparent)
3.  ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship)
4.  ACCS (Transition to Work)
5.  CCS

If a customer is eligible for any other ACCS type, they will not be
eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work). If a higher type of ACCS ends,
the customer will need to re-apply for ACCS (Transition to Work) (if
still eligible). In these situations, there is no trigger to advise
customers to apply for ACCS (Transition to Work) - it is the
responsibility of the customer to re-apply if they wish to access
additional child care assistance.

Job Plans/Participation Plans

Customers must have an active Job Plan or Participation Plan (where
applicable), in place to be eligible for ACCS (Transition to Work). The
exception is customers receiving Austudy or means-tested ABSTUDY,
because the participation requirements of those payments exceed the
activity requirements for ACCS (Transition to Work).

If a customer already has an active Job Plan in place, there is no
requirement to update the Job Plan to include their ACCS (Transition to
Work) activity (unless required for the customer's income support
payment).

Customers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP) must negotiate a
DSP Participation Plan to meet requirements for ACCS (Transition to
Work). If a DSP customer does not have mandatory participation
requirements, they will need to enter into a Voluntary Participation
Plan. For the purposes of ACCS (Transition to Work) only, verbal
Voluntary Participation Plans can be negotiated.

Note: Job Plans do not meet ACCS (Transition to Work) requirements for
DSP customers.

Customers have 28 days from the date they apply for ACCS (Transition to
Work) to enter into a Job Plan. They are required to contact the agency
or an Employment Service Provider (if they have one) requesting they
negotiate a Job Plan for the purposes of ACCS (Transition to Work). Job
Plans can be negotiated without the requirement for the customer to
attend a face to face interview.

However, payment for ACCS (Transition to Work) can only be made once all
eligibility criteria are met including having an active Job Plan. If
eligible, the ACCS (Transition to Work) date of effect once a Job Plan
has been entered into will be the next CCS Monday following the Job Plan
negotiation.

If a customer fails to enter into a Job Plan within 28 days of applying
for ACCS (Transition to Work), their application will be made not
effective and considered to have not been made. If a customer enters
into a Job Plan more than 28 days after date of lodgement of their
application, even if the application has not been processed, the
application will be Not Effective.

The customer will need to lodge a new application. There are no
backdating provisions for ACCS (Transition to Work).

Suspension/cancellation of income support payment and employment nil rate

If an individual's income support payment is suspended, they may
continue to receive ACCS (Transition to Work) if they meet all other
eligibility criteria and are still undertaking their approved activity.

If a customer's income support payment is cancelled, their ACCS
(Transition to Work) will also cancel. If the customer's income support
payment was incorrectly cancelled and subsequently reinstated, customers
can apply for a formal review of the decision to cancel ACCS (Transition
to Work). However, if the customer's income support payment was
cancelled correctly, the customer will need to make a new application
for ACCS (Transition to Work).

If the customer enters an employment income nil rate period, they may
continue to receive ACCS (Transition to Work) for an additional six CCS
fortnights. Customers should be advised to continue to report their
earnings during this period or their income support payment and their
ACCS (Transition to Work) payment will be cancelled.

Reassessments and change of circumstances

If customers' circumstances change, and they are eligible for a
different ACCS payment, the period they are receiving the other subsidy
will not be included in the calculation of ACCS (Transition to Work)
time limits.

If a customer needs to change their start date, it may be amended to a
Monday in a future CCS fortnight. This is only allowed for a change of
circumstances and only if no sessions of care have occurred and no
payments have been made.

Where a customer has been granted ACCS (Transition to Work) but has had
no entitlement for six consecutive fortnights since the start date, and
subsequently do not use child care, their ACCS will cancel and they will
need to lodge a new application.

Breaks in activity

When a customer's activity includes breaks, such as term breaks (for
study or training) or paid and unpaid leave (for paid work), the
customer is still considered to be participating in their activity.

Time limits for study apply for a period of continuous weeks, and
include breaks during the entire course period. For example, an
individual undertaking a two-year course will be taken to be
participating in the activity from the start of the course through to
the final date of the course, including any mid-year breaks and the
first end of year break. ACCS (Transition to Work) is not to be
cancelled and recommenced during term breaks.

Absences from child care

ACCS (Transition to Work) can be paid for certain absences from child
care.

Exempt from Annual Cap

Payments made under ACCS (Transition to Work) are exempt from the CCS
annual cap.

The Annual Cap was removed from the 2021/22 financial year onwards.
Families may still be subject to the Annual Cap prior to 1 July 2021.

Reconciliation

Payments made under ACCS (Transition to Work) are exempt from the end of
year reconciliation process. If a customer's actual income is above the
lower income threshold at reconciliation, ACCS (Transition to Work)
eligibility will not be re-assessed retrospectively.

If the estimate for the subsequent year is below the actual income from
the previous year, Service Officers can request additional information
to support the lower income estimate. This is to ensure the customer is
not providing a reduced and unreasonable estimate to access ACCS
(Transition to Work).

If, following the reconciliation process, the agency has reason to
suspect the estimate was not a reasonable estimate, or the individual
should have notified of a change of circumstance during the year, a
compliance review may be undertaken.

The Resources page contains links to the FA084 and FA085 forms, the
Services Australia and Fair Work Ombudsman websites.

Related links

Transitional arrangements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to work) approved
activities and time limits

Processing Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work)
applications

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
