
Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) 007-07040000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how Individuals and Approved Care Organisations
(ACO) may be eligible for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for children in their
care. There are different eligibility criteria for individuals and ACOs
to receive FTB.

On this Page:

Claims from individuals

FTB consists of:

-   FTB Part A for each FTB child in their care. Part A can include
    additional components depending on the family's circumstances; Large
    Family Supplement (LFS) (not payable from 1 July 2016), Multiple
    Birth Allowance (MBA), Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Rent Assistance
    (RA)
-   FTB Part B - provides extra assistance to single parents, non-parent
    carers (including grandparents) and couples with one main income and
    is paid per family
-   Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS), paid after the end of the
    financial year, if eligible. Note: SIFS is not payable to new
    recipients from 1 July 2017, however existing recipients may be
    eligible if they meet the grandfathering provisions

There are separate income tests for FTB Part A, FTB Part B and SIFS.

[] Claimants can use the online estimator option to estimate their
potential FTB entitlement.

To be eligible for FTB, individuals need to meet claim requirements. FTB
can be claimed as fortnightly instalments or as a lump sum for the
previous financial year.

Instalment recipients are paid FTB during the year based on their
reasonable annual income estimate. Their correct entitlement is
calculated after the end of the financial year during FTB reconciliation
when, if eligible, Part A and Part B supplements and SIFS are included.
Families not eligible for FTB during the year may become eligible after
the end of the financial year due to the inclusion of supplements in the
maximum rate.

Claims from ACO

Approved Care Organisations (ACO) may be eligible for FTB Part A at the
base rate for children in their care. In some circumstances they may be
eligible for Energy Supplement Part A. An ACO cannot be paid FTB for a
child if an individual is eligible for FTB for the child. A person
providing care for a child living in an ACO may retain eligibility for
FTB for the child.

ACOs are not entitled to any other FTB components or SIFS.

Contents

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a child in foster care

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for grandparent carers

Residence assessment for customers claiming Family Tax Benefit (FTB),
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad Partner Pay (DAP)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) child of a person

Study requirements for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) children aged 16 years
or over

Change of care for Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Blended families and Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) and/or Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customer
separates

Separated couples and eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a
period before separation

Family assistance customer becomes partnered

Related links

Family assistance payments, Paid Parental Leave scheme and bereavement

Foster care

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Initial contact by customers claiming payments for families

Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS)

Rate of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Shared care eligibility for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Single Income Family Supplement (SIFS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
