
Assisted dispute resolution for employer determination for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) 007-13030020

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Paid Parental Leave Employer Processing Team (PPLEPT) staff only.

This document outlines the process to follow where a Parental Leave Pay
(PPL) employer determination has been made and the employer fails to
accept the determination.

Assisted dispute resolution

Assisted dispute resolution for an employer determination may be needed
if the employer has:

-   registered, not accepted the employer determination and failed to
    apply for a formal review of the decision within 14 days of the date
    the employer determination was made
-   not registered and not accepted the employer determination
-   had an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or the Administrative Appeals
    Tribunal (AAT) undertake a review and affirm the original decision,
    and the employer determination remains in force

Assisted dispute resolution action cannot be initiated:

-   within 14 days of the date of the employer determination, or
-   if an employer review of decision or appeal has been lodged, but has
    not been finalised by the ARO or the AAT

Note: if a PPL claim is made not effective (NEF) the employer
determination will be revoked. An Employer End of Role letter (PPEPP004)
will be sent to the employer. When PPL is re-claimed by the customer the
initial claim may be re-indexed, however it is still taken to be a new
claim. An employer determination for this new claim is then required.
Employers may contact to either query the second determination, or fail
to take action on it due to this action having been completed on the
original claim.

Services Australia will initiate the assisted dispute resolution process
for an employer who has withdrawn their application for a formal review
of decision or appeal or has a finalised formal review or appeal
decision and has still failed to accept the determination.

Employer advises alternate ABN in response to Employer Determination

An employer is considered as the employee's nominated employer, if they:

-   respond to an Employer Determination, and
-   provide an alternate Australian Business Number (ABN) to the one
    advised by the employee

This is not a compliance issue for the employer determination. See Role
of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL).

This includes information about a registered employer who has not
completed the process with the Services Australia to pay an employee
PPL.

Non-compliance following the dispute resolution process

Employers who do not comply with a Compliance Notice (Q840) may be
issued an Infringement Notice (Q841) and financial penalty.
Infringements can only be issued within 12 months of the day on which
the 21 day period specified in the compliance notice issued ends.

In some cases, an Infringement Notice (Q841) may be issued without a
Compliance Notice being sent first.

Issuing an infringement notice

Infringement notices can also be issued in the following circumstances,
when an employer does not:

-   notify Services Australia when certain events happen that could
    impact on their Paid Parental Leave paymaster role, such as the
    employer is likely to cease their business,
-   respond to an employer determination, or
-   provide their bank account and pay cycle details, following a formal
    review of a decision

The Resources page contains links to the Financial Accounting Branch,
dispute resolution referral and penalty table, request form to raise a
customer invoice and processes for revoking employer determination or
transferring the provider role from the employer to Services Australia.

Related links

Role of the employer in Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Parental Leave Pay (PPL) employer assisted dispute resolution

Paid Parental Leave (PPL) employer initiated reviews and appeals

Assisted dispute resolution for employer obligations for Parental Leave
Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
