-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Approved Care Organisations
(ACO). An ACO is an organisation that co-ordinates or provides
residential care to young people in Australia and has been approved as
an ACO by the Secretary.

ACOs and eligibility for FTB

Approved Care Organisations (ACO) may be eligible for Family Tax Benefit
(FTB) for children in their care.

Claim requirements for ACOs are similar to those for an individual,
except that ACOs do not need to provide a tax file number or income
details.

An 'ACO Admission, transfer or discharge spreadsheet' is required for
the initial FTB claim by an ACO. An ACO may lodge an ACO admission,
transfer or discharge spreadsheet (provided by the agency when claiming
for additional children. The spreadsheet is available from the ACO Smart
Centre Processing team, after an organisation has had their ACO status
approved.

ACOs are:

-   paid FTB fortnightly
-   eligible for the base rate of FTB Part A for each FTB child in their
    care
-   eligible for Energy Supplement Part A in some circumstances
-   not entitled to any other components of FTB
-   not entitled to bereavement payment of FTB

The rate is not income tested.

Foster families, ACOs and eligibility for FTB

If an Approved Care Organisation (ACO) arranges long term foster care
with a carer family, the foster family is eligible for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB), not the ACO, as the foster carer has legal responsibility
for the day to day care, welfare and development of the child. However,
foster carers working as employees in a group home would not be eligible
for FTB for the child as the body responsible for the group home is
responsible for the care of the child.

Reporting and advices

ACOs receive fortnightly rate letters which details the children
currently in care and the FTB payment for the current period.

Quarterly reports can be issued to ACOs when requested. The Entitlement
Report includes the following:

-   The full names of the children in care
-   The dates of birth (DOB) of the children in care
-   The period the children were in care for during the period of the
    report
-   The type of benefit paid for each child in care: Family Tax Benefit
    (FTB), Double Orphans Pension (DOP) and Energy Supplement
-   The calculated entitlement total for each benefit paid
-   The total number of children in care for the period of the report
    (per benefit)
-   The total number of admissions (per benefit)

The Resources page contains information relating to questions on the ACO
spreadsheet.

Related links

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for Approved Care Organisations
(ACO)

Pre-processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments

Not effective, rejection, or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit
or Stillborn Baby Payment

Rejecting a family assistance claim

Child leaves customer's care/custody

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
