-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to check reconciliation of a customer's
Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B where the customer or their partner has
notified return to work details for the relevant financial year.

On this Page:

FTB Part B reconciliation

Since 1 July 2005, Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B may be paid free of
the income test for partnered customers if the lower earner in the
family has returned to work during the relevant financial year for the
first time since the birth of a child or since a child entered their
care.

FTB Part B is not payable for 2008-09 and following years if the primary
earner's adjusted taxable income exceeds the Part B primary earner
income limit, excluding income support periods.

To benefit from the return to work assistance, FTB instalment customers
need to notify return to work details.

During the financial year, the customer's FTB Part B rate is worked out
according to the income estimate for the lower earner and the customer's
FTB payment choice.

During the FTB reconciliation process for the financial year in which
the customer or their partner returned to work, the system will
determine the customer’s eligibility for this assistance based on return
to work details on the customer's record. If eligible, the customer's
FTB Part B rate will not be income tested for the Part B quarantine
period, regardless of the income of the lower earner.

The customer’s eligibility for the FTB Part B quarantine period is
displayed on the reconciliation screens.

Customer contact

A letter will be sent to the customer following reconciliation for the
financial year. The letter will advise:

-   whether or not the Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine period
    has been applied, and
-   if the customer is not eligible, the reason

In some cases it will be necessary to obtain further information from
the customer to determine their eligibility.

Partnered customers will be advised in their reconciliation letter to
contact Services Australia if they have had a return to work to see if
they are eligible for this assistance.

If a customer is claiming Parental Leave Pay (PPL), FTB Part B is not
payable during this payment period.

Related links

Recording return to work details and explaining eligibility for Family
Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine

Reconciliation of Family Tax Benefit (FTB)

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part A and Part B supplements

Income tests for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme
payments

Calculating Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B

Updating income estimates for the current financial year

Processing Family Tax Benefit (FTB) lump sum claims

Family assistance reconciliation and lump sum claim screens

Family Tax Benefit (FTB) Part B quarantine and lump sum claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
