-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL details for customers with children born or entering care both
before and on or after 1 July 2023.

This document outlines rates of payment for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and
Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Claim choice

Customers with a newborn or recently adopted child: customers can claim
either PPL or have their entitlement to Newborn Supplement (NBS) and
Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) assessed with Family Tax Benefit (FTB).
PPL and NBS cannot be paid for the same child. For a multiple birth or
entrustment to care, PPL can be paid for one child and the higher rate
of NBS/NBU for other children.

DAP can be paid to dads and partners caring for a newborn or adopted
child born or adopted before 1 July 2023. DAP can be paid before, after
or at the same time as FTB, including NBS and NBU.

For children born or adopted before 1 July 2023, a family can receive a
maximum of 20 weeks DAP and PPL combined for the same child (for
example, 2 weeks DAP may be paid to the father at the same time that 18
weeks PPL is paid to the mother). One customer can receive both DAP and
PPL for the same child but the periods must be different and must not
exceed 18 weeks in total.

For children born or adopted on or after 1 July 2023, the maximum
entitlement for a child in most cases is 100 days. Customers not
partnered at the time of their initial claim can receive a maximum
entitlement of 100 days per child. Customers partnered at the time of
their initial claim can receive a maximum entitlement of 90 days per
child. The remaining entitlement is reserved on a 'use it or lose it'
basis for their partner, the other parent or another person.

In the event of a stillbirth, customers may choose to claim PPL or
Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) if they are not eligible for PPL. SBP is
paid as a lump sum. PPL is paid in fortnightly instalments.

PPL

The PPL rate is based on the National Minimum Wage rate. From 1 July
2023, the rate of PPL is $882.75 per week. Note: due to the legislated
calculation method, the weekly rate of PPL is slightly lower than the
rate of the weekly National Minimum Wage, which is $882.80.

The PPL income test applies to eligibility and does not affect the rate
of PPL.

PPL is paid at the National Minimum Wage for up to:

-   18 weeks (90 payable days) for a child born or adopted before 1 July
    2023
-   20 weeks (100 payable days) for a child born or adopted on or after
    1 July 2023

It is a taxable payment and therefore should be included in the Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) for family assistance payments.

Income from PPL is counted as assessable ordinary income for calculating
the rate of payment for income support payments.

DAP

DAP can be paid for a child born or adopted before 1 July 2023.

The DAP rate is based on the National Minimum Wage rate. From 1 July
2023, the rate of DAP is $882.75 per week. Note: due to the legislated
calculation method, the weekly rate of PPL is slightly lower than the
rate of the weekly National Minimum Wage, which is $882.80.

The DAP income test applies to eligibility and does not affect the rate
of DAP.

DAP is paid at the National Minimum Wage for up to 2 weeks to eligible
customers.

It is a taxable payment and therefore should be included in Adjusted
Taxable Income (ATI) for family assistance payments.

Income from DAP is counted as assessable ordinary income for calculating
the rate of payment for income support payments.

Indexation

The maximum rates of PPL and DAP are indexed on 1 July each year, in
line with the National Minimum Wage.

The Process page contains historical DAP/PPL rate information.

The References page contains a link to historical rate information.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website and
Intranet.

Related links

Rates and Thresholds

Rate explanation screens for family assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payments

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Eligibility for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Claim choice for a newborn or adopted child

Delivery of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
