
Progress of claim - Families claims 007-07010050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This does not include Parenting Payment Partnered (PPP) and Parenting
Payment Single (PPS) claims. Service Officers should refer to Office
Locator for the customer's nearest service centre regarding information
about these claims. The Resources page contains a link to Office
Locator.

This document outlines information for Service Officers to answer
customer queries about their Families claim, to determine if the claim
is actionable and when it is appropriate to escalate the claim for
priority processing. Claims include instalment and lump sum claims for
Family Tax Benefit (FTB), Parental Leave Pay (PPL) or a combination of
these payments, or Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) in Process Direct and
Customer First.

Pre-claim benefit status

A separate procedure applies for checking the status of a
pre-birth/entry into care claim for family assistance and Paid Parental
Leave scheme payments.

Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

See Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy
(ACCS) for information about claim progress in Process Direct.

Actionable claims

When all the information required to assess a claim has been provided,
the claim is actionable.

A Person Permitted to Enquire (PPE) may request for an actionable claim
to be finalised. If the Service Officer is satisfied that the PPE is
acting in the best interests of the customer and it would be reasonable
for the PPE to provide the outstanding information, claim processing can
occur in most cases. Note: certain information can only be accepted from
a customer, such as Payment choices.

Check for outstanding information or documentation

If further information is required to finalise the claim and the
information cannot be obtained verbally, advise the customer that the
claim cannot be referred for finalisation and advise them what
additional information or documentation is required.

Referrals of actionable claims

Service Officers will refer the claim for finalisation via the
appropriate channels, where the criteria for claim escalation is met:

-   the claim is actionable, and
-   the customer meets the definition of a family in crisis or a family
    experiencing financial hardship

See the Process page for further information. Unless directed, do not
send an ACTDOC for any follow-up requirements.

Family in crisis or experiencing financial hardship

If a customer has contacted meets the definition of a family in crisis
or family experiencing financial hardship and requires assistance in
lodging a claim for families payments, see Helping customers in crisis
or financial hardship claim family assistance

Note: from 10 June 2019, FTB top-ups, supplements, lump sum claim
amounts and instalment arrears can be used to recover any family
assistance, social security, student assistance and Paid Parental Leave
scheme payment debts. This will occur even if the customer has a current
payment arrangement. Previously, FTB amounts could only be used to
recover FTB, CCB and Child Care Rebate (CCR) debts.

Where exceptional and/or unforeseen circumstances apply which may cause
the customer to suffer severe financial hardship, customers can request
to be temporarily excluded from debt recovery prior to any money being
taken from their FTB arrears, lump sum or top-up payments.

The Resources page contains examples of Progress of claim DOCs, links to
Services Australia Website, the Families and Child Care intranet page
and Office Locator.

Related links

Helping customers in crisis or financial hardship claim family
assistance

Checking the status of an early claim for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Helping customers provide proof of a child's birth for family
assistance, Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme
claims

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Processing proof of a child's birth

Telephone standards

Request for urgent processing of a new claim when experiencing financial
hardship

Progress of claim - Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Progress of claim - Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Progress of claim - Farm Household Allowance (FHA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
