
Child Care Benefit (CCB) 007-03000000

-   Background
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

From 2 July 2018:
-Child Care Subsidy (CCS) replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child
Care Rebate (CCR)
-Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) replaces Special Child Care
Benefit (SCCB) Child at Risk and Temporary Financial Hardship, Jobs,
Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance (JETCCFA) and
Grandparent Child Care Benefit (GCCB)
For more information, see Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child
Care Subsidy (ACCS).
Claims for CCB and CCR lump sum for approved care and CCB Registered
Care, for care received prior to 2 July 2018, can be lodged up until 30
June 2019.

This document outlines information about Child Care Benefit (CCB). It
provides links to information about options for claiming CCB and
information to assist staff with assessing CCB.

Government intent

The payment of CCB is intended to help with costs for approved and
registered care such as long, family or occasional day care, outside
school hour care, vacation care, pre-school and kindergarten.

From 2 July 2018, CCB will be replaced by Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS). The intent of CCS and ACCS is to
simplify the current child care assistance suite of payments. It will
provide better targeted assistance for low and middle income families
and additional support for vulnerable families.

CCS replaces Child Care Benefit (CCB) and Child Care Rebate (CCR). ACCS
replaces Special Child Care Benefit, Grandparent Child Care Benefit, and
Jobs Education and Training Child Care Fee Assistance.

General eligibility

CCB can be paid to customers using either approved care or registered
care. To claim CCB, customers must meet eligibility, Australian
residence and immunisation requirements. In most circumstances, as long
as a child is in the physical care of the customer claiming and paying
for the child care, the child can be considered to be an eligible child
for CCB.

Contents

Assessing Child Care Benefit (CCB) claims for approved care and
registered care

Eligibility for Child Care Benefit (CCB)

Child Care Benefit (CCB) rate

Related links

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Reconciliation of Child Care Benefit (CCB) for approved care

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
