
Activity Test for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) 007-17103115

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Activity Test for CCS, how to record activity
details, and how it is used to determine the number of subsidised hours
a customer is entitled to receive for each child. It also explains
Activity Test exemptions.

Online estimators

[] The online estimators can be used to estimate a customer's potential
CCS for approved care entitlement, including the number of hours of
subsidised child care. The estimator is available to customers and
Service Officers.

Activity Test

The Activity Test is one of 3 factors that determine a customer's CCS
entitlement.

The number of hours of subsidised child care per CCS fortnight is
determined by the level of recognised activities the customer engages in
each fortnight.

The customer, and their partner if they have one, must satisfy the
Activity Test unless there is an exemption. For partnered customers, the
number of subsidised hours is based on the member of the couple with the
lowest Activity Test result, even when an exemption applies.

If both members of a couple have an exemption, the number of hours
subsidised is based on the person with the lowest hours of entitlement.

Note: this does not apply to grandparent principle carers not receiving
income support or individuals temporarily outside of Australia. These
customers remain eligible for 100 hours regardless of the customer and
partner Activity Test result.

Note: the hours of activity do not need to align with the hours of child
care.

There are exemptions from the Activity Test for customers (and/or their
partner) who legitimately cannot meet the requirements.

The Resources page has examples.

Activity Test self-assessment

Customers are responsible for self-assessing their (and their partner's)
hours of recognised activity. In providing this information (during the
claim process, change of circumstances, or annual review) they declare
the information is true and correct.

Evidence is not required to support the activities or hours of
participation. However, customers may need to provide evidence if
requested, such as a random sample survey or 'spot check'.

If a Service Officer suspects a customer has provided fraudulent
information, they should report the suspected fraud using standard
business processes.

Activity Test result

The hours of activity will determine the maximum number of subsidised
hours of child care a customer is entitled to receive each fortnight.
Customers can receive up to 100 hours per fortnight. See the Resources
page for the Activity Test results table.

Customers with an estimated ATI below the lower income threshold are
eligible for 24 hours per fortnight of CCS without having to meet the
Activity Test.

In exceptional circumstances, customers can access a higher number of
subsidised hours of child care per fortnight.

Nil entitlement

If a customer is not entitled to any subsidised hours of child care due
to their Activity Test result, they will remain eligible for CCS for a
period of 52 weeks.

After 52 weeks of nil entitlement, CCS will be cancelled N52. They will
need to make a new claim for CCS if they wish to receive child care
assistance.

Recognised activities

Recognised activities that meet the Activity Test requirements include:

paid work (including periods of paid and unpaid leave)

being self-employed

training for the purpose of improving work skills or employment
prospects

studying in an approved course

doing unpaid work in a family business

doing unpaid work experience or internship

actively setting up a business

actively looking for work

volunteering

other activities that would maintain or improve work skills or
employment prospects or both:

-   The customer needs to request the activity be considered,
    demonstrating how it would maintain or improve their (or their
    partner's) work skills and/or employment prospects
-   Services Australia will make a determination on a case-by-case basis
    to determine whether the activity is appropriate to be considered
    under the Activity Test, and how long the activity should be
    recognised

Paid and unpaid parental leave as a recognised activity

Paid and unpaid parental leave is taken to be paid work. There is no
time limit to unpaid parental leave.

-   If permanently employed, any paid or unpaid parental leave will be
    in the terms and conditions of their employment contract. The person
    needs to be recognised as employed by their employer and have a
    continued connection to their employment during leave
-   If self-employed and taking paid or unpaid parental leave, this
    leave will only be recognised if their business continues to operate
    and they have an intention to resume work in their business in the
    foreseeable future
-   lf working from contract to contract or casually for a regular
    employer (or an employment agency), their unpaid parental leave will
    also be recognised if they intend to resume work after the period of
    leave

The period of parental leave will continue to be recognised at the same
level of activity as declared for paid work or self-employment prior to
the leave.

Periods to prepare for a birth or care for a newborn will not be
recognised as unpaid parental leave if the person:

-   has resigned from their employment
-   has been made redundant from their employment
-   was self-employed and their business has ceased to operate
-   has completed their employment contract with no understanding or
    arrangement with an employer they will return to work at a future
    date, or with no intention to return to work (for the same or a
    different employer) in the foreseeable future
-   has moved from employer to employer with no formal employment
    arrangement or contract (such that they could not be considered to
    be taking leave), and has withdrawn from the workforce for the birth
    of a child

Change of circumstances

If a person's circumstances change, and their previously declared hours
of unpaid parental leave no longer apply, they need to advise the
change. If they have completed their period of unpaid parental leave
(declared as paid work) and not resumed their hours of paid work, they
will not meet the Activity Test. Unless they undertake enough hours of
recognised activities, or are exempt.

Other paid and unpaid leave

-   Paid and unpaid annual leave, sick leave, long service leave, carers
    leave and other paid leave granted under the terms and conditions of
    the customer's (or partner's) employment will be taken to be paid
    work. Unpaid leave (except for unpaid parental leave) is recognised
    for a maximum of a continuous period of 6 months
-   Leave taken by a self-employed customer (or partner) due to illness
    or injury, or that would be described as annual leave, long service
    leave, sick leave, carer's leave or parental leave if they were
    employed will be taken to be paid work

The periods of leave will continue to be recognised at the same level of
activity as declared for paid work or self-employment before the leave.

Customers (or partners) working casual or irregular hours

A person who has paid work hours that change each fortnight can provide
an estimate of the highest number of hours they expect to work in any
one fortnight over a 3 month (6 fortnight) period. See the Resources
page for an example of estimating hours.

This can only be applied to report irregular hours of paid work and does
not apply for reporting other activities.

Note: the ability to estimate hours is not needed by fly-in fly-out,
seasonal, contract and shift workers with a consistent number of
fortnightly hours.

If a customer has estimated their (or their partner's) hours, they
should notify as soon as there are any significant changes. This may
affect their hours of subsidised child care.

Travel time

To recognise the various distances travelled to access early learning
and child care, families will be able to include a reasonable amount of
travel time in the estimation of their hours of recognised activity.
This can only include travel from the child care service to the place of
work/study and travel from the place of work/study to the child care
service. See the Resources page for examples of including travel in
activity hours.

While travel may result in a higher Activity Test result, it will not
give access to more than 100 hours of subsidised care per fortnight
unless exceptional circumstances exist.

Automatic Activity Test results

The customer (and/or their partner) will be granted an automatic
Activity Test result if they meet any of the following:

-   they have a combined income estimate below the lower income
    threshold
-   they receive Carer Allowance
-   they receive JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance (job seeker),
    Special Benefit or Parenting Payment with compulsory participation
    requirements

Customers should still report their level of activity. The higher of the
automatic Activity Test result or the reported level of activity will
apply in these cases.

Activity Test exemptions

A customer (and/or their partner) will be exempt from the Activity Test
if:

they are disabled or impaired

they are caring full time for a disabled adult or child

they are the grandparent of a child but not eligible for Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent)

they are overseas:

-   a 6 week time limit applies for the CCS customer, unless a
    portability extension exists
-   no time limit applies if it is the partner of the CCS customer who
    is outside Australia. The exemption will remain in place for as long
    as the partner is overseas

they are in prison, or lawfully detained such as in psychiatric
confinement having been charged with an offense

they have a child who attends an early educational (preschool or
kindergarten) program

they have received ACCS (Child Wellbeing) for a continuous period of 26
weeks within the last two years. Note: this exemption is at the child
level, meaning each child would need to have received ACCS (Child
Wellbeing) for a continuous period of 26 weeks to be eligible for up to
100 hours of care per fortnight for up to 18 months after the ACCS
(Child Wellbeing) ceased. If customer contacts advising this exemption
is not applying, send to Level 2 Helpdesk for exceptional circumstance
consideration and coding

unable to engage in any recognised activity due to exceptional
circumstances

Exemptions for 2018-19 flood and drought affected customers

Customers affected by the 2018-19 floods and drought have received an
exemption from the CCS Activity Test requirements for the 2018-19
financial year. These customers will have 100 eligible hours.

The exemption only applies to certain Local Government Areas (LGA). The
exemption has been applied to eligible customers. The Resources page
contains a table with exempt LGAs.

Exemptions for 2019-20 bushfire affected customers

Customers affected by the 2019-20 bushfires have received an exemption
from the CCS Activity Test requirements for the 2019-20 financial year.
These customers will receive 100 eligible hours.

The exemption only applies to certain Local Government Areas (LGA). The
exemption will be applied to eligible customers automatically, when the
customer's CCS is balanced for the 2019-20 year. No coding is required
by staff.

The Resources page contains a table with exempt LGAs.

Exemptions from the Activity test due to coronavirus (COVID-19)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) customers do not need to pay child care fees
from 6 April 2020 until 12 July 2020.

The Government announced no session fees will be charged to families
between 6 April 2020 and 12 July 2020. Updates made to Activity Test
Details (ATD) screen will have no effect on a customer’s Child Care
Subsidy entitlement. This is because customers can access child care
free of the activity test or means test during the Business Continuity
Payment period.

Eased Activity Test requirements from 13 July 2020 until 4 April 2021

From 13 July 2020 until 4 April 2021 the CCS activity test requirements
have been eased. This applies for families whose activity test hours
have reduced due to COVID-19. Impacted families will get up to 100 hours
per fortnight of subsidised care, where they:

-   had an activity test result of more than 0 before COVID-19 (around 1
    March 2020 or before)
-   can no longer engage in the same number of hours of recognised
    activities, and
-   are currently doing more than 8 hours of recognised activity per
    fortnight

Customers can apply for extra hours by going online and completing the
‘Apply for extra activity hours (COVID-19)’ service via their MyGov
account or Express Plus App.

Exceptional circumstances

Customers (and/or their partners) unable to engage in recognised
activities due to exceptional circumstances can be granted an exemption
from the Activity Test.

Exemptions are assessed on a case by case basis. When requesting an
exemption, customers are to provide:

-   details of their (and/or their partner's) circumstances to
    demonstrate it would be unreasonable for them to satisfy the
    Activity Test or care for their or their partner's children
-   evidence to support their application

Customers (or their partner) experiencing exceptional circumstances can
also request an increase in their assessed subsidised hours, or more
than 100 hours per fortnight. They will need to give the reason for an
increased Activity Test result, and submit evidence to support their
application. Assess these applications to increase subsidised hours on a
case by case basis.

Note: evidence must outline that the customer is:

-   unable to participate in any recognised activities and
-   provide a safe level of care for the child/ren due to those
    circumstance/s

If the customer requests the assessment be backdated up to the eligible
28 days (to the beginning of the CCS fortnight prior to the CCS
fortnight in which the request is made), the evidence must cover this
period.

For more information, see Exceptional circumstances for CCS and
Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS).

Date of effect of Activity Test updates

Updates to activity details could result in a favourable or unfavourable
outcome for the customer. The system determines the date of effect based
on the date of notification and the date the change occurred.

If notified before the date of change, the date of effect will be the
start of the CCS fortnight after the change occurred. Note: customers
can only notify up to 28 days in advance of a change in their activity
details.

If the customer notifies a change in their activity after it has
occurred, and the result is:

-   favourable (for example, it entitled them to more hours of
    subsidised care per fortnight), the date of effect is backdated up
    to 28 days from the date of notification to the start of a CCS
    fortnight. Any arrears will be paid directly to the customer
-   unfavourable, the date of effect is backdated to the start of the
    CCS fortnight after the change occurred (no limit). This may result
    in the customer receiving an overpayment

Starting or increasing hours of paid work

The date of effect is the first Monday of the CCS fortnight before the
fortnight in which the change occurred. This DOE is subject to the
customer notifying as soon as possible. For maximum benefit, customers
must notify in the CCS fortnight the change occurred.

For examples, see Changes in circumstances and date of effect for CCS
and ACCS.

Logically deleted ATD data

Where previously recorded ATD information has been deleted or overridden
with a new Date of Receipt (DOR) on historical ATD, debts can be raised
due to current system limitations. Specific coding is required to
correct this and ensure correct outcome.

ATD updates within CCS claims for customers who are already CCS current

CCS current customers who submit a claim for an additional child may
provide ATD information which differs to what we already have recorded.
To ensure entitlement is correct, ATD updates will need to be made
within the claim activity. For claim processing instructions, see
Process page, Table 4, Step 2 in Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
claims.

The Resources page contains links to the helpdesk webform and the
myskills website, scenarios, and more information about activities,
Activity Test results and exemptions.

Contents

Coding Activity Test details for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Reviewing assessment outcomes for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Related links

Exceptional Circumstances for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

Entitlement for Child Care Subsidy

Changes in circumstances and date of effect for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
