
Claiming Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) 007-17103102

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how customers can claim Child Care Subsidy (CCS)
(and Combined CCS/Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims) online or
with help from a Service Officer using Assisted Customer Claim (ACC).

Initial contact to claim CCS

[] If a person contacts to claim CCS, an online claim must be offered
first. Explain the benefits of claiming online:

-   help to apply for the right payment through streaming questions and
    early warnings if they may not be eligible
-   less information for them to provide, as information from their
    Centrelink record will be pre-populated into the online claim
-   they can monitor the progress of their claim through their
    Centrelink online account or the Express Plus Centrelink mobile app

If they decline the online claim offer, ACC must then be run by a
Service Officer with the customer. Once ACC is completed, advise the
customer of any outstanding documents they need to provide or action
they need to take to submit their claim.

Customers with nominee arrangements

[] If a nominee is claiming on behalf of a person, encourage the nominee
to help the person claim using the person's Centrelink online account.
If the nominee is unable or unwilling to do so, a Service Officer is to
run the ACC with the nominee.

Online claims

[] Customers can claim online. Customers can complete the claim in their
own time without the need to speak to a Service Officer. A started
online claim can be saved so the customer can continue with it later.

Before a customer is able to submit their claim they are required to
upload any required documentation they will need to provide to support
their claim.

Submitted online claims can be processed quickly as claim information is
uploaded onto the customer's record when the claim is ready to finalise.

Customers can claim CCS as a standalone claim or combine it with other
families’ payments being claimed through the families’ online claim.

Families cannot claim CCS before a child's birth, but can claim before
the child starts to attend child care. Customers are required to confirm
their child’s enrolment before any CCS payments can be made.

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) applications

[] Depending on answers provided within the CCS online claim and ACC,
customers may be given the opportunity to apply for the following within
the CCS claim:

-   ACCS (Grandparent)
-   ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) or
-   ACCS (Transition to Work)

Current CCS customers can apply for ACCS at any time via their online
account by selecting the appropriate service from the Child Care Subsidy
submenu. Offline (paper) applications are available in limited
circumstances for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) and ACCS
(Transition to Work).

ACCS (Child Wellbeing)

The child care service, rather than an individual, seeks eligibility for
ACCS (Child Wellbeing) for a child. Payment of CCS and ACCS cannot be
made to the service until the individual has claimed and been assessed
as eligible for the child. In the majority of cases, it is important to
advise the customer to lodge an application for CCS for the child as
soon as possible. See Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) Child
Wellbeing for more information.

Assisted Customer Claims (ACC)

If a person contacts seeking assistance with claiming CCS/ACCS, staff
must complete an ACC if the customer:

-   does not have access to a suitable device and/or the internet
-   is not eligible to register for self service or
-   is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim

Service Officers can also help Indigenous customers living in remote
communities who have language or literacy barriers affecting their
capacity to use forms or online services to claim CCS/ACCS.

Service Officers can access ACC via the ACC desktop icon and entering
the customer's CRN.

Before starting a paper or verbal claim with the ACC workflow, update
the customer's personal details. If ACC is started before these details
are updated, the claim can be saved and the updates made outside the
claim before submitting it. Updates made will appear on the Review and
Submit page in ACC.

The customer must answer some streaming questions on the Check
Eligibility screens to check if they are claiming the most suitable
income support payment. If the customer would not be eligible for CCS
based on their answers to these questions, discuss alternative options.

Select Make a new claim when ready to start.

If there is a started claim on the Customer Claim Summary, the claim can
be:

-   continued by selecting the pencil icon under the Actions column
-   cancelled by selecting the trash icon under the Actions column

Offline (paper) claims

In extremely limited circumstances (for example, Remote Servicing Team
has no internet connectivity, lack of interpreter availability to assist
with verbal claim), customers can lodge an offline (paper) claim.

The Resources page has a link to the offline claim (forms) for CCS and
standalone applications for ACCS (Temporary Financial Hardship) and
(Transition to Work).

Making decisions on a CCS claim

For a CCS claim to be assessed, the claim must be effective and a
customer’s eligibility can be determined. Non- effective claims are
deemed as not having been made and a new claim will need to be lodged.

If the system is unable to automatically determine if a claim meets the
criteria for straight through processing (grants or rejections), for
example, the customer has indicated they have an exceptional
circumstance, a work item will be created and allocated to a CCS trained
Service Officer to action.

All ACCS applications (including CCS/ACCS combined claims) are allocated
to appropriately skilled staff to validate evidence and manage any
exceptions.

Progress of pending claims

Customers may contact requesting their claim/application be processed
urgently. Service Officers are to check if further information is
required to enable the claim/application to be finalised. If information
cannot be obtained verbally, advise the customer the claim cannot be
referred for finalisation and what additional information or
documentation is required.

When all the information required to assess a claim has been provided
and the claim is actionable, Service Officers trained in processing CCS
claims are to finalise the CCS claim at the time of contact.

Non-processing Service Officers, and Service Officers not trained in
processing ACCS applications, can refer the claim/application for
finalisation if the criteria for escalation are met:

-   the claim is actionable (i.e. all information has been provided),
    and
-   the customer meets the definition of a family in crisis or a family
    experiencing financial hardship

The Process page contains more information about managing progress of
claim enquiries.

The Resources page contains links to the Payment and Service Finder
located on the Services Australia website and the offline (paper) claims
for CCS and ACCS, links to online support and information about the
online claim declaration.

Related links

Transition arrangements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional
Child Care Subsidy (ACS)

Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) claims

Add child claim for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Enrolment requirements for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Eligibility for Child Care Subsidy (CCS)

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Grandparent) eligibility and
applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Temporary Financial Hardship)
eligibility and applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Transition to Work) eligibility
and applications

Additional Child Care Subsidy (ACCS) (Child Wellbeing)

Online or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) for family assistance, Parental
Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Access to Centrelink self service - set-up, checking, locking and
resetting

Helping customers provide proof of a child’s birth for family assistance
and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Assisting Indigenous customers to claim family assistance and/or Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Exemption from providing Tax File Numbers when claiming Child Care
Subsidy (CCS)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
