-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before 1
July 2023 only.

This document outlines the eligibility criteria to receive Dad and
Partner Pay (DAP). DAP is paid under the Paid Parental Leave scheme and
aims to support dads or partners caring for a newborn or recently
adopted child. It is a taxable payment paid at the national minimum wage
for a maximum of 2 weeks (paid as a lump sum).

Eligibility for DAP

To receive DAP, a person must:

Meet the DAP work test

Meet the DAP income test

Satisfy Australian residence requirements

Have one of the following relationships with the child:

-   biological father
-   partner of the birth mother (including same-sex partners)
-   adopting parent
-   partner of the adopting parent
-   parent in a surrogacy arrangement
-   partner of a parent in a surrogacy arrangement, or
-   partner of the biological father (including same-sex partners)

Have care of a child for DAP purposes

Be on unpaid leave and not working for each day in the DAP period. A
person cannot be on paid leave and cannot be working during the DAP
period, unless it is for an allowable exception reason or for a
permissible purpose

Make an effective DAP claim, including proof of the child's date of
birth or verification of the child entering care

For a newborn child, notify Services Australia that the child's birth is
registered (or they have applied to register the birth) with the
relevant Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry. Note: this requirement
does not apply if the child was stillborn, born outside Australia or
adopted

Not have received more than 18 weeks (126 days) payment of combined DAP
and Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for a child

Note: birth mothers are not eligible to claim DAP. DAP claims lodged by
birth mothers on behalf of their partners are made not effective (NEF).

Work Exceptions

There are allowable exception reasons where a customer can be on paid
leave or working and not affect their DAP eligibility. These exceptions
include:

-   child bereavement where the child was stillborn or has died
-   an Australian Defence Force (ADF) member or law enforcement officer
    who is compulsorily recalled to duty
-   complying with a summons or other compulsory process to give
    evidence, information or produce documents
-   health professionals, emergency services or essential workers who
    have returned to work in response to a state, territory or national
    emergency

In addition, the following are not considered working:

-   'top up' payments paid by an employer to supplement their employee’s
    DAP during the DAP period whilst on unpaid leave
-   workers compensation received during the DAP period whilst on unpaid
    leave

Permissible purpose

Customers can still be eligible for DAP if they are working during their
DAP period for a permissible purpose as a self-employed person.
Self-employed DAP customers can work for a permissible purpose if it is
to oversee the business or is an occasional administrative task for the
business.

Permissible activities include:

-   arranging repair of equipment
-   paying an account
-   checking the delivery of an order
-   dealing with an ad hoc dispute

A self-employed customer who is actively engaged in running or
maintaining the daily operations of the business during their DAP period
would be regarded as working.

Proof of birth

The customer must provide proof of the child's birth for their claim to
be finalised.

Where PPL or FTB is claimed by the partner and they have supplied proof
of the child's birth, this can be used for DAP.

If DAP is the only payment being claimed, the following birth
verification can be used:

-   Newborn Child Declaration form (FA081) fully completed, or
-   Proof of birth declaration (back page of FA081). Note: The back page
    of FA081 alone cannot be used to finalise a DAP pre-claim. In this
    circumstance, birth verification requires a fully completed FA081 or
    other acceptable proof of birth. Confirmation the customer has
    registered or has applied to register the child’s birth with the
    relevant state or territory registry of births must be obtained
    either verbally or in writing
-   Other acceptable proof of birth

If the person lodging proof of birth is a biological parent of the
child, they must have registered or applied to register the child's
birth as required by the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registry to meet
the birth verification requirement for the child. Note: customers
advising they ‘intend’ to register the birth of their child with the
relevant state or territory registry of births do not meet the birth
verification requirement.

If the child is part of an adoption or surrogacy arrangement and the
customer is not a biological parent they will be required to provide
evidence of the surrogacy arrangement or adoption.

In the case of child bereavement where the child is stillborn or dies,
the Claim for Bereavement Payment form (FA008) including a completed
proof of birth page can be used as proof of birth for DAP.

Timeframe for claims

Claims can be submitted 3 months (97 days) before the expected:

-   date of birth
-   date the child becomes entrusted to the customer's care for
    adoptions, or
-   date the child enters care for surrogacy arrangements

Claims can be submitted no later than 52 weeks after the birth or the
child’s entry into care.

DAP is lodged as a standalone claim and cannot be submitted as part of a
combined claim for family assistance payments and/or PPL.

Start date and DAP period

The DAP period is the time a customer takes off work and receives DAP.
This can be up to a maximum of 2 weeks, or it could be for a shorter
period, for example, 1 week or 1 day. To receive DAP, the customer must
be eligible on each day of the DAP period.

The DAP period must be 1 continual period of time.

Customers are required to tell Services Australia when they want their 2
week DAP period to start. This is the nominated start date. It can be
the date of the child's birth, adoption or surrogacy or another date
they have nominated.

The nominated start date:

-   cannot be before the birth of the child, the date the child became
    entrusted to care, or the entry into care date
-   must be before 12 months (52 weeks) from the child's date of birth,
    the date the child became entrusted to care or the entry into care
    date and
-   can be a date in the past

To receive the full 2 weeks entitlement of DAP, the customer must:

-   nominate a start date 14 days before the child's first birthday or
    anniversary of adoption or surrogacy
-   not be getting Parental Leave Pay (PPL) for the same child for any
    days during the DAP period. Note: this only applies to payments of
    PPL made to the customer. Another person, such as their partner, can
    receive PPL for the same child at the same time the customer is
    getting DAP

Customers cannot receive JobKeeper Payment for the same period they
receive DAP. Customers will need to provide their start and end date for
their DAP period to their employer. Direct the customer to their
employer for any enquiries about JobKeeper Payment.

Customers cannot receive a COVID-19 Disaster Payment, Pandemic Leave
Disaster Payment or a Disaster Recovery Allowance, if they receive DAP.
Some customers may be able to change their DAP start date to another
period if they can meet eligibility in a different period. DAP customers
have the option of moving their DAP period, see Change of circumstances
for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP).

Eligibility exemptions

There are circumstances where the Service Officer will apply discretion
to override certain eligibility criteria, which would otherwise deem a
customer ineligible to receive DAP.

Exemptions may include:

-   Additional Circumstances (ACI) exemption is used when the customer
    would normally be ineligible for DAP based on their relationship to
    the child, however discretion has been used to exempt the customer
    from the usual relationship to child requirement
-   Left care without consent (LWC) exemption is used when the child
    leaves the customer's care without consent. This exemption indicates
    the customer meets the care requirement for DAP
-   Work history test (PCO) exemption is used when the customer would
    have met the work test based on the expected date of birth, but did
    not meet it based on the actual date of birth due to a premature
    birth of the child
-   Multiple Children Approved (MCA) exemption in the rare event there
    is a significant delay between the births of multiple children, for
    example 5 days apart
-   Disregard Work (DWO) exemption is used for DAP periods prior to 12
    March 2020 for customers that returned to work due to allowable
    exception reasons

Note: if 1 exemption reason is recorded, it will only exempt the
customer from that specific eligibility requirement.

DAP interaction with PPL and other payments

To be paid DAP for a child, the customer cannot be receiving DAP for
another child at the same time.

One customer can receive both DAP and PPL for the same child. However,
PPL and DAP periods must be taken at different times.

An individual customer can receive a maximum of 18 weeks of combined
payments for the same child under the Paid Parental Leave scheme (for
example, PPL and DAP combined).

A family can receive a maximum of 20 weeks DAP and PPL combined for the
same child (for example, 2 weeks DAP may be paid to the father or
partner at the same time that PPL is paid to the mother).

One customer can receive both DAP and PPL for different children at the
same time.

DAP can be paid before, after or at the same time as other family
assistance payments, for example Family Tax Benefit (FTB) including
Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU).

DAP is taxable income and is included in a customer's adjusted taxable
income for family assistance payments.

DAP is counted as ordinary income for calculating the rate of payment
for income support payments.

Deceased customers

If a DAP customer dies they will become ineligible for DAP from the date
of death.

Multiple birth

Generally, DAP can only be paid for 1 child from a multiple birth.
However, if there is a significant delay between the first and
subsequent child/ren from the same pregnancy, for example 5 days apart,
the births may be considered separate deliveries and not a multiple
birth. In these instances DAP may be payable for each child.

Note: DAP can only be paid for 1 child where multiple children are
adopted as part of the same adoption process.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia Website,
frequently asked questions, and information about care requirements and
making an effective claim.

Contents

Paid Parental Leave scheme child leaves customer's care/custody

Related links

Claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Assessing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Payability and delivery of Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Initial contact by customers claiming Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Processing Dad and Partner Pay (DAP) claims

Paid Parental Leave scheme Work Test

Change in circumstance for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Rejection and not effective codes for Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
