-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

PPL/DAP details for customers with children born or entering care before
1 July 2023 only.

This document outlines what happens to Parental Leave Pay (PPL) when a
customer returns to work. for a PPL claim for a child born before 1 July
2023.

For a PPL claim for a child born on or after 1 July 2023, a customer is
able to return to work without losing eligibility. See Claiming and
managing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) days for children born or entering
care on or after 1 July 2023.

Return to work before claiming PPL

Primary claimants must claim the PPL period within 12 months of the
child’s date of birth (DOB) or adoption. Generally, a customer must
lodge their claim for PPL before they return to work.

Unless working for an allowable exception reason, if a primary claimant
has returned to work before claiming PPL they will not be eligible for
the PPL period, but they can still be eligible for the 30 Flexible PPL
days. Flexible PPL days can be paid before and after the customer
returns to work. However, the customer cannot perform work on the date
they are claiming Flexible PPL.

Customers who have returned to work can still make a claim for PPL and
transfer the PPL period to their partner, or another primary carer. In
this case, they may choose to keep the 30 Flexible PPL days, give the
Flexible days to the new primary carer, or a combination of both.

A primary claimant can claim PPL after they have returned to work and be
eligible for the PPL period if the customer:

has:

-   lodged an effective claim within 28 days of the child's DOB, and
-   had a Nominated Start Date (NSD) of the child's DOB or a date before
    they return to work

meets the extended work test or received COVID-19 Disaster Payment (paid
by Services Australia on or after 3 June 2021) during their 10 month
qualifying period and elects a NSD before their return to work date

For more information, including claim timeframe see Paid Parental Leave
Work Test.

The Process page contains more information in these cases.

A secondary claimant may lodge their claim after returning to work and
still be assessed for payment from the first day of their PPL period to
the day they returned to work. If assessed as eligible, a secondary
claimant’s PPL period will cease to be payable on the date they returned
to work.

Return to work before the end of the PPL period or connected Flexible PPL days

The PPL period can only be paid before the customer returns to work.

If a customer returns to work before the end of their PPL period:

-   the PPL period will no longer be payable from the return to work
    date. It will cancel (reason: RTW) at the component level
-   any connected Flexible PPL days after the return to work date will
    be rejected or withdrawn. They will be returned to the customer’s
    balance of unclaimed days for the customer to claim on alternative
    dates
-   any not connected Flexible PPL days scheduled after the return to
    work do not automatically reject or withdraw when the return to work
    is recorded. These days will need to be checked and rejected or
    withdrawn if the customer is no longer eligible

If the customer has already been paid PPL period or connected Flexible
PPL for any days after the return to work, or if payments have already
been sent to their employer, an overpayment may be raised.

If the customer returns to work before the end of their PPL period, any
unused part of the PPL period may be transferred to a secondary or
tertiary claimant. Birth mothers who no longer provide care of a child
in a surrogacy case or when the child is being adopted or removed by
legal authority, may not return to work and continue to receive PPL or
transfer entitlement to a secondary/tertiary claimant.

The Resources page contains an example of how a return to work during
the PPL period impacts a customer’s connected Flexible PPL days.

Impact of return to work and working on not connected Flexible PPL days

Flexible PPL days can be accessed before or after the customer returns
to work. See Claiming and managing Flexible PPL days for children born
or entering care before 1 July 2023.

To access Flexible PPL on a day, the customer must not be working. When
claiming a Flexible PPL day, the customer must declare they will not or
did not work, unless for an allowable exception reason, on the date
claimed.

If a customer advises they performed work including if they have
returned to work on a day they claimed Flexible PPL it will:

-   be rejected, and
-   returned to their balance of unclaimed Flexible PPL days

If the customer has already been paid PPL for any days after the return
to work, or if payments have already been sent to their employer, an
overpayment may be raised.

Note: if a customer returns to work during their PPL period or connected
Flexible PPL days, any not connected Flexible PPL days scheduled after
the return to work date will be not be rejected/withdrawn as part of the
return to work activity. These days must be checked and rejected
separately if the customer is no longer eligible.

Determining whether a customer has returned to work or is working on a day

A customer is considered to have returned to work or working on a day
if, on that day:

-   the customer performs 1 hour or more of paid work, and
-   an allowable exception reason does not apply or the work performed
    is not for a permissible purpose

Note: a customer can receive JobKeeper Payment after the birth of a
child (or recently adopted child) and before their Nominated Start Date
(NSD), only where they have not returned to work.

Customers are not considered to have returned to work if they:

-   received the COVID-19 Disaster Payment in the period between the
    birth of their child and the commencement of PPL, as they have not
    performed paid work
-   performed voluntary work that is unpaid

Exceptions - work performed for an allowable reason

There are allowable exception reasons where a customer can return to
work or be working, and continue to receive PPL.

Customers can tell Services Australia they have returned to work for an
allowable reason:

-   within their post birth claim, or
-   at a later date by using the PPL Change of Circumstances online
    service or calling the agency

These allowable exceptions/ reasons include:

an Australian Defence Force (ADF) member or law enforcement officer who
is compulsorily recalled to duty

complying with a summons or other compulsory process to give evidence,
information or produce documents

health professionals, emergency services or essential workers who have
returned to work in response to a state, territory or national emergency

a newborn child remaining in hospital following the birth:

-   for birth mothers - the return to work can be disregarded if it
    occurs within the period that starts 14 days after the child is born
    and ends on the day the child is discharged from hospital. Note: if
    the birth mother returns to work within 14 days of the child’s
    birth, this return to work cannot be disregarded and they will not
    be eligible for PPL from the date they returns to work
-   for all other claimants – including secondary claimants and adoptive
    parents the return to work can be disregarded if it occurs within
    the period that starts on the day the child is born and ends on the
    day the child is discharged from hospital

care of the child was lost without legal authority

child bereavement where the PPL child was stillborn or died

When claiming Flexible PPL days, the customer is required to declare
they are not performing work for the date they are claiming, unless it
is for an allowable reason. If the customer is working for an allowable
reason, they will complete the declaration and continue to receive
Flexible PPL for the claimed date.

The customer must tell the agency if their circumstances change and they
continue to work after the allowable reason ends or for another reason.

Permissible purpose

If a PPL customer performs work for a permissible purpose, they are not
considered to have returned to work. What is considered a permissible
purpose varies depending on whether the customer is an employee or
self-employed.

Employees

PPL customers may participate in workplace activities for up to 10 days
from when they become their child's primary carer until the end of their
PPL period for the purposes of 'keeping in touch' with their workplace
and still remain eligible for PPL.

Keeping in touch (KIT)

A day of paid work is a KIT day if the purpose of performing the paid
work is to enable the employee to keep in touch with their employment or
to facilitate a return to work.

Keeping in touch days include (but not limited to):

-   attending meetings
-   planning sessions
-   training or conferences
-   normal duties

KIT days can be accessed:

-   from when they become their child's primary carer up to when they
    return to work
-   during the PPL period or on Flexible PPL days

Once the customer has returned to work, they can no longer access
keeping in touch days, regardless of whether they have accessed all 10
days.

Keeping in touch days requested by the employee cannot occur within the
first 14 days following the birth or adoption of the child.

Employer requested keeping in touch days cannot occur within the first
42 days (6 weeks) following the birth or adoption of the child. If the
employee requested or suggested a day to their employer in this period
(and it was more than 2 weeks after the birth or adoption), they can
participate if their employer agrees.

Both the employee and the employer must consent to the employee
performing work for the employer on a KIT day.

KIT days do not apply if a parent is self-employed.

Self-employed

A self-employed person who performs work for ad hoc activities would be
regarded as:

-   working for a permissible purpose, and
-   not deemed as a return to work

A self-employed person may oversee their business and perform
administrative tasks.

Permissible activities include (but not limited to):

-   paying accounts
-   checking the delivery of an order
-   arranging repair of equipment

A self-employed person who is actively engaged in running or maintaining
the daily operations of the business during their PPL period is regarded
as having returned to work.

The Resources page contains a link to the online query form for the
Families and Childcare Level 2 Policy Helpdesk and questions and answers
about the PPL 'keeping in touch' provision and examples.

Related links

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a primary claimant for
children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

Customer notifies a change of circumstances for Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Cancellation of Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Eligibility for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) as a secondary or tertiary
claimant for children born or entering care before 1 July 2023

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
