
Not effective claims or withdrawal of claim for Family Tax Benefit or Stillborn Baby Payment 007-07030140

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to record details when a claim for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB) or Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP) is assessed as not
effective or withdrawn by the customer. In either case, the claim is
taken not to have been made. Separate procedures apply for not effective
Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims.

CCS and PPL not effective claims

Separate procedures apply for not effective Child Care Subsidy (CCS) and
Paid Parental Leave (PPL) scheme claims. See:

-   Processing Child Care Subsidy (CCS) claims for not effective CCS
    claims
-   Assessing Paid Parental Leave (PPL) claims for not effective PPL
    claims

Decision on entitlement

If the claim is not effective a decision cannot be made about the
customer's entitlement. The customer must be advised why the claim is
not effective. In most cases, the customer will need to lodge a new
claim to be assessed for payment. A claim can be made []online or by
lodging the appropriate paper claim.

Early claims

Pre- processing checks for standalone and combined claims for family
assistance and/or Paid Parental Leave payments contains information
about early claim requirements.

Post-birth claims

General requirements for an effective claim:

-   it is made on the approved claim form or [] online
-   all information and documentation required to assess the claim have
    been provided by the claimant
-   bank details for direct credit have been provided, unless an
    exemption has been granted
-   Tax File Number (TFN) details have been provided for the customer
    (and their partner)

Note: a TFN is not required for claims by an Approved Care Organisation
(ACO).

For the length of time claims should be held, see timeframes.

An FTB claim is not effective if the customer has already claimed for
the same period except if claiming for an additional child entering care
(for example, newborn or adopted child).

If instalments have been cancelled because the customer has not provided
information, their claim is not effective and the decision to cancel the
payment needs to be reviewed.

Family Tax Benefit claims can still be assessed if certain information
is not provided. For example, accommodation details can be provided
later to claim Rent Assistance (RA), FTB can be granted at the
legislative rate if the customer does not advise their payment choice.

Withdrawal of claim

Customers, or their correspondence nominees, may withdraw an effective
claim for family assistance at any time before a payability
determination is made on it.

If a customer wants to withdraw their claim, the customer or their
nominee must do so either in writing, verbally, or [] online. All staff
can action the withdrawal request.

When a customer chooses to withdraw a claim, the claim is taken never to
have been made. The claim is indexed and then cancelled, and cannot be
reinstated without completing a new claim.

Exceptions - customer claims both PPL and FTB

When a primary carer submits claims for Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and
FTB, the claim for PPL is determined first.

If the customer is not eligible for PPL, Newborn Supplement (NBS) and
Newborn Upfront Payment (NBU) will be automatically assessed with their
FTB claim.

Not effective claims and formal reviews of decisions

If a claim is not effective, no decision can be made about the
customer's entitlement and so it is not possible for a customer to apply
for a formal review of a decision about their entitlement. The claim is
taken not to have been made.

The customer can however ask for an explanation or apply for a formal
review about why the claim was made not effective. If the claim is still
found to be not effective, a new claim will need to be lodged.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website,
example text for Q999 letters, and manual NEF codes.

Related links

Assessing family assistance and Paid Parental Leave scheme claims

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Cancellation, rejection and Current Zero Rate codes for Family Tax
Benefit (FTB)

Customer initiated review of decision

Eligibility for Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for individuals

Eligibility for Newborn Supplement (NBS) and Newborn Upfront Payment
(NBU)

Eligibility for Stillborn Baby Payment (SBP)

Information requests for FTB, PPL, DAP and CCB lump sum claims

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Parental Leave Pay
(PPL)

Not effective, rejection or withdrawal of claim for Dad and Partner Pay
(DAP)

Online and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC) for Family Assistance,
Parental Leave Pay (PPL) and Dad and Partner Pay (DAP)

Partner of a Family Tax Benefit (FTB) customer claims family assistance
and/or Parental Leave Pay (PPL)

Provision of Tax File Number (TFN) for family assistance and Paid
Parental Leave scheme payments

Reassessment of Family Tax Benefit (FTB) for a current customer where an
additional child enters care in the current or previous financial year

Request for an explanation or application for a formal review (CLK)

Online Document Recording (ODR)

Creating documents (Fast Note, Callbacks and ACTDOCs)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
