
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Employment Assistance Fund scheme. This
scheme provides financial assistance to purchase workplace modifications
for people with disabilities, illness or injuries.

Employment Assistance Fund overview

The Department of Social Services (DSS) are responsible for the
Employment Assistance Fund. Under this scheme, employment agencies or
employers are reimbursed for the costs of necessary workplace
modifications when employing people with illnesses, injuries or
disabilities.

The fund is available to customers of Disability Employment Services
(DES), Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) and certain job seekers
participating with Workforce Australia or Community Development Program
(CDP).

Assessment

DSS determines an applicant's eligibility for assistance from this fund.
Customers who want more information on this subject or who wish to apply
for funding should be advised to contact a JobAccess Adviser directly on
1800 464 800 or through the JobAccess website. Service Officers cannot
comment on the likely success or failure of any application.

In some cases, a work site assessment may be required before an employee
can start work. Costs for this assessment can be covered by the fund.
The amount that is paid will be determined through the assessment
process. Services Australia plays no role in making this determination.

The Resources page contains a link to the JobAccess website.

Related links

Assessment Services

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Request an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES)

Disability wage subsidies

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Work Assist

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Community Development Program (CDP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
