
Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) referral 008-03180010

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the process to be followed for a JCA referral.

When a JCA referral may be required

A customer is to be referred for a JCA where there is no existing
current and valid assessment of their work capacity, or where new
information has been provided and a referral is required to assist with
assessing eligibility for:

-   a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) or Special Benefit
    (SpB)
-   review of medical eligibility for DSP
-   access to the Supported Wage System (SWS)
-   a Special Disability Trust (SDT)
-   foreign pensions requiring a medical assessment for new claims or
    reviews
-   indefinite portability assessments under the no future work capacity
    provisions

The Medical Assessment Team (MAT) reviews the medical evidence submitted
with a DSP new claim and recommend if a JCA referral is required to
determine medical eligibility.

If a customer is claiming under an International Agreement, this may
require a manual referral to a JCA or the Health Professional Advisory
Unit (HPAU), depending on the customer's circumstances.

Note: a new JCA may be required for customers who supply new medical
evidence to support their request for an explanation or application for
a formal review of the decision to reject a DSP claim or cancel DSP. See
Reviews and appeals for DSP rejection or cancellation decisions.

When a JCA referral is not required

A customer does not need to be referred for a JCA if:

a manifest grant or rejection decision can be made because the claim can
be:

-   rejected on non-medical grounds (for example, the customer does not
    meet age, residency or income/assets criteria)
-   rejected on medical grounds (for example, the customer’s conditions
    are clearly temporary)
-   manifestly granted (for example, due to permanent blindness,
    terminal illness, nursing home level care required or an
    intellectual disability with an IQ of less than 70)

a current and valid JCA report exists and includes sufficient
information to assess the customer's medical eligibility for DSP

Before making a JCA referral

Consider the following before making a JCA referral:

-   For new customers, ensure the Medical Assessment Team (MAT)
    recommends a JCA referral is required to determine medical
    eligibility. This can be found on the Disability Support Pension
    Medical Assessment Recommendation form (SA479) and/or a DOC with a
    subject line of 'MAT DSP recommendation'
-   If the customer is not in receipt of an income support payment,
    ensure non-medical eligibility has been assessed, confirmed and
    coded on the record. Ensure coding has been applied using Selective
    Application of Data (SAD)
-   If the customer or partner are in receipt of an income support
    payment, update and apply advised changes via the SAD
    screen/function
-   Ensure any changes to the customer’s contact details, such as
    address, phone number, email address etc. are recorded on the
    customer’s record
-   Check to see if the customer has a pending review of decision on
    their DSP eligibility. See Payment pending review (PPR) of decision
    to cancel DSP due to loss of medical qualification
-   Check if there is any information on the record which would indicate
    the customer may exhibit violent or abusive behaviour towards the
    Assessor. Advice to the Assessor regarding potential violent
    behaviour may be required
-   Ensure any previous recent JCA or Employment Services Assessment
    (ESAt) referral has a status of 'finalised' or 'unable to complete'
    (if applicable)
-   Ensure the customer has an active job seeker registration on the Job
    Seeker Registration screen
-   If the customer has a nominee, and based on available information,
    there are concerns about their capacity to attend or participate in
    an assessment, contact with the nominee may assist in identifying
    and resolving potential participation/attendance issues

All available medical/sensitive information must be scanned and attached
to the customer's electronic Medical Information File Envelope (eMIFE)
before an assessment can be booked. Only once an appointment is booked
in the Online Diary by Assessment Services admin staff can the Assessor
access the information via a link from the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations, Employment Services System (ESS).

Verification of medical conditions

The request for a JCA appointment should not be actioned until all
available current and relevant medical evidence and other documentation
has been scanned and attached to the customer's record. This is to
ensure that all information is available to the Assessor prior to making
the referral.

Except in limited circumstances for vulnerable people, medical evidence
must be provided for all JCA referrals. For a DSP new claim, relevant
evidence scanned for the assessment can include:

-   clinical records, test results, medical certificates, hospital
    records and specialist reports
-   evidence required to assess conditions under specific Impairment
    Tables such as reports from a Psychiatrist, Clinical Psychologist,
    Ophthalmologist or Audiologist
-   verification of terminal illness (SA495) form
-   evidence provided by the customer to show they have actively
    participated in a Program of Support (POS)

See What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)?

JCA referral

In Process Direct, Disability Processing staff request a JCA for a DSP
new claim via the Referral options. This creates a work item which is
allocated to Assessment Services and includes the required information.

Staff required to use the JCA referral via Fast Note in Customer First
are:

-   Authorised Review Officers
-   Subject Matter Experts
-   Staff processing Random Sample Reviews
-   Customer Compliance
-   International Services
-   Supported Wage

Assessment Services use the Fast Note information in Customer First to
book an appropriate appointment and contact the customer to advise them
of the appointment details.

Scanning medical/sensitive information

Medical/sensitive information lodged at a service centre must be scanned
at the service centre.

Historical medical evidence lodged before the introduction of scanning
in July 2010 can only be scanned by the Records Management Unit (RMU).
If the historical documentation is required, request the information
through the Records Management service request webform. In most cases,
this will be done by the MAT if required. The RMU will notify when the
historical Medical Information File Envelope (MIFE) has been scanned.

If the customer provides additional medical information, ensure the
information is scanned and attached to the customer's electronic Medical
Information File Envelope (eMIFE). This information will become
available electronically to the Assessor.

JCA appointments

All JCA appointments are booked by Assessment Services using the
information contained in the Referral Request DOC. This includes
appointments for remote customers and appointments booked at the request
of Legal Services Branch.

Assessment Services

Assessment Services:

-   review the information and action requests in priority order
-   review the medical information to check for manifest eligibility or
    ineligibility, and to ensure there is sufficient evidence to conduct
    a JCA
-   determine how the assessment will be conducted (for example, file
    assessment, phone, face to face, videoconference,) and
-   book the JCA appointment via the Online Diary workflow

Rescheduling or cancelling a JCA appointment

Assessment Services are responsible for cancelling and rescheduling JCA
appointments where a customer contacts to say they are unable to attend
a future booked appointment, and wishes to arrange a new time.

Front of House (FoH) staff and Smart Centre Service Officer(s) are not
to reschedule or cancel booked JCA appointments in any circumstances. In
these cases, transfer the customer to Assessment Services.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator for Assessment
Services contact information.

Managed Service Plans and JCA referrals

If the customer has a Managed Service Plan (MSP):

-   at the time of making a JCA referral, the type of MSP and end date
    will be pre-populated into the referral
-   restricting them to 'phone', only phone session types will appear
-   restricting to 'writing', means a file assessment is organised

The Resources page contains links to the Records Management service
request and SSO referral webforms, Office Locator, mySupport and a list
of JCA referral codes.

Related links

Job Capacity Assessments (JCA)

Reviews and appeals for Disability Support Pension (DSP) rejection or
cancellation decisions

Supported Wage System (SWS) medical assessment process

Assessment Services

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Using a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report to determine payment type

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
appointments

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Foreign pension medical assessments

Diagnosis of a medical condition provided by an Assessment Services
Psychologist for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Selective Application of Data (SAD)

Coding CRES, ARD and RSS screen

Recording legal residence status

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
