-   Resources

Before starting this process, staff must read the Operational Message.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to conduct the Service Offer Interview (SOI)
for Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims in Process Direct and
Customer First.

Service Offer Interview (SOI)

The SOI is integral to helping customers understand the DSP claim
outcome. It makes sure Services Australia explains the claim decision
and offers other support options. This includes offering a copy of the
medical eligibility assessments done for the claim.

Staff must attempt an SOI in every instance, unless valid reasons apply.
The SOI must explain why the customer cannot get DSP. In some cases, an
SOI is required for DSP grants

To help the customer understand the claim outcome, all SOIs must do the
following:

tell the customer what the claim outcome is, see Eligibility for
Disability Support Pension (DSP)

clearly explain why the decision was made

if rejected for medical reasons, explain why

offer to send the medical eligibility assessments (for example, MAT,
JCA, DMA reports)

offer additional help including:

-   other income support payments, such as JobSeeker Payment (JSP)
-   employment services referrals, such as Disability Employment
    Services (DES)
-   explain reduced/temporary work capacity (if applicable), and
-   how participation in employment services and exemptions may affect
    Program of Support rules, should they claim DSP again.

tell the customer about review and appeal rights

When an SOI is required

SOIs are needed when:

there is a nominee or executor arrangement

DSP is rejected

DSP is granted and Family Tax Benefit needs updating

DSP is granted and the customer (or partner) has earnings, unless the
following is met:

-   Pension Monthly Exception Rule
-   1WE or 2WE exception

When an SOI may not be required

An SOI is not needed when:

the customer is:

-   deceased
-   in prison
-   in psychiatric confinement
-   subject to restricted servicing and contact is deemed inappropriate

there is no contact number on record

it is not appropriate, for example, the customer is overseas

Note:

-   Complete an SOI if a correspondence nominee or executor is in place
    for any of the above
-   if a Managed Service Plan (MSP) exists, contact the One Main Contact
    (OMC), Back up Contact or Personalised Services Service Officer
    (PSSO). This is to discuss how to do the SOI.

Conducting an SOI

Service Officers must make 2 phone contact attempts to the nominee or
customer. This includes trying:

-   the nominee first (if appliable). If unsuccessful, trying the
    customer
-   all numbers recorded for the nominee / customer. For example,, home,
    mobile or contact
-   at different times of the day. For example., try calling in the
    morning and afternoon

To make sure the nominee / customer answers, Service Officers must:

-   send a pre-call Short Message Service (SMS) (for registered
    nominees/customers), and
-   wait 5 minutes before calling

Sending the pre-call SMS reduces the risk of an unsuccessful SOI
contact.

Note: the Service Officer who did the first contact attempt, should do
the second attempt. If this can not be done (for example, the Service
Officer is on leave or not scheduled for processing), the Service
Officer must ask their Team Leader to manage the SOI work item.

Assessors will attempt SOI before a DSP claim is rejected for Insufficient Medical Evidence (IME)

If there is Insufficient Medical Evidence(IME) for the claim a Medical
Assessment Team (MAT) Assessor:

-   will try twice to contact the nominee or customer before finalising
    the MAT recommendation (SA479) , and
-   If successful, may give the customer more time (usually 5 days) to
    provide new medical evidence. This is recorded through the
    AssessServ Contact Completed Fast Note.

Where MAT recommends to reject IME, Disability Processing Service
Officers do not need to attempt SOI contacts, even if the Assessor was
not successful.

SOI for DSP claims selected for QMA in Process Direct only

Quality Management Officers (QMO) must complete SOI for DSP claims
selected for Quality Management Application (QMA).

QMA aims to improve efficiencies by finalising work items and customer
outcomes in a single process.

The QMO finds and fixes errors (if required) in real time and do not
refer the work back to the submitting Service Officer to fix.

As the QMO completes the DSP claim activity, they also deliver the SOI.

Exceptions to this include where the DSP claim is finalised by:

-   Service Officer who is undertaking consolidation training for
    Disability claim processing, or
-   Customer Critical Response Team (CCRT) or
-   MAT Assessor recommends DSP rejection Insufficient Medical Evidence
    (IME)

QMO must not action SOIs for claims finalised under consolidation
training or finalised by CCRT or IME rejection.

Staff undertaking consolidation training will:

-   conduct SOI after the QMA has been completed
-   check QMA feedback tile in Process Direct

Staff from CCRT will:

-   conduct the SOI before finalising the claim, and
-   run the SOI Workflow after the QMA check is finalised

Where the outcome is to reject DSP due to IME, the MAT Assessor will:

-   attempt to contact the customer to deliver the SOI
-   record the SOI outcome using one of the relevant SOI Fast Notes

SOI for DSP claims selected for QOL in Customer First only

The Service Officer assessing the DSP claim in Customer First must
complete the SOI.

If the DSP claim has been submitted for QOL (Quality On Line) the claim
must be successfully passed before the Service Officer completes the
SOI.

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of The Impairment Tables was
introduced. The new tables are used to assess a customer's medical
eligibility for all DSP claims lodged on or after this date.

The Resources page contains a link to the:

-   Escalation Coordination Policy, and
-   Payment and Service Finder on the Services Australia website

Related links

Rejecting a new claim Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Assessing eligibility to Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

Authenticating a Centrelink customer

Customers talking about suicide or self-harm

Recording and correcting employment income details

Customer service delivered through a One Main Contact (OMC) as part of a
Managed Service Plan (MSP)

Calling a customer or returning a customer’s call

Initial contact about a decision and the review of decision process

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
