
Referring a job seeker to Disability Employment Services (DES) 008-04030110

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This document outlines information about the process for Services
Australia to refer eligible job seekers to Disability Employment
Services (DES).

DES programs

DES offers 2 programs to help people whose disability, injury or health
condition is their primary barrier to finding and maintaining
employment. The participant will be assisted through either a Disability
Employment Services - Disability Management Service (DES-DMS) or a
Disability Employment Services - Employment Support Service (DES-ESS),
depending on their level of need and eligibility for Program Services:

-   DES-DMS: provides services to job seekers with temporary or
    permanent disability, injury, or health conditions who require the
    assistance of a disability employment service and who may require
    flexible ongoing support but are not expected to need regular,
    long-term support in the workplace
-   DES-ESS: provides services to job seekers with permanent disability
    and who are assessed as needing regular long-term ongoing support in
    the workplace

Eligibility for DES

A job seeker must first be assessed as eligible for DES before a
referral is made. As a general rule, a referral cannot take place unless
DES is recommended in the job seeker's most recent current and valid Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA) or Employment Services Assessment (ESAt).

Some groups of job seekers are exempt from the requirement for a JCA or
ESAt, including Work Assist participants, eligible school students,
special class clients and eligible school leavers. The DES provider
determines whether an exemption applies, and in most cases these job
seekers will directly register with a provider and do not need to be
referred by Services Australia.

For more information, see Eligibility criteria for participation with
Disability Employment Services (DES).

Job seeker registration

A person must be registered as a job seeker to be referred to DES. From
1 July 2021, volunteers not in receipt of an income support payment are
no longer eligible for DES unless they are required to satisfy Program
of Support (POS) requirements for DSP purposes.

Referral pathways

A job seeker may be referred to DES by:

an assessor:

-   When an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity
    Assessment (JCA) is being conducted, the assessor will directly
    refer the job seeker to the DES provider of the jobseekers choice if
    this is the recommended referral. Job seekers may decline a referral
    at this point if they have voluntary mutual obligation requirements

a Service Officer after an ESAt or JCA is completed, when:

-   the JCA or ESAt is completed as a file assessment
-   a job seeker with mutual obligation requirements referral is
    deferred because of their temporary reduced work capacity or
    exemption from requirements
-   there is a current and valid JCA or ESAt recommending a DES referral
    and a voluntary participation job seeker either approaches Services
    Australia, seeking referral to employment assistance, or is offered
    a referral to DES by Services Australia

a job seeker directly approaching a DES provider:

-   This pathway is known as 'direct registration' and is only suitable
    for job seekers who are not receiving a payment with mutual
    obligation requirements
-   The direct registration pathway is normally appropriate for job
    seekers who are exempt from the requirement for a JCA or ESAt,
    including school leavers and those eligible for Work Assist
-   If the job seeker does not already have a record, the DES provider
    should contact Services Australia by telephone while the job seeker
    is present, and request to create a record. See Direct registration
    with a provider for disability employment assistance services
-   If the provider finds the job seeker does not have a current and
    valid assessment of the customer's work capacity and is not exempt
    from this requirement, they can request an ESAt for the job seeker
-   A DES provider may contact Services Australia for assistance with
    determining whether a job seeker is eligible for DES, because of
    circumstances such as employment, study, or exemptions from mutual
    obligation requirements. Services Australia should provide relevant
    information to the provider on request. See Release of information
    to Employment Services Providers

Work Assist

DES providers manage Work Assist. If this assistance is considered
suitable, Services Australia can contact the DES provider directly to
arrange for the job seeker to meet with the provider. If the DES
provider confirms the job seeker is eligible for assistance under Work
Assist provisions, assistance from Services Australia will generally not
be required to commence the job seeker in DES.

Eligibility requirements for job seekers being re-referred to DES

Job seekers that have previously exited DES for any of the following
reasons cannot be re-referred to DES unless it is recommended by a
current and valid Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity
Assessment (JCA) completed after the exit from DES:

-   the job seeker achieved a 26 week outcome
-   the program review did not recommend extended DES assistance (past
    18 months)
-   the participant completed extended employment assistance but has not
    achieved an outcome (that is, exit following 24 months in employment
    assistance)
-   the exit occurred while the participant was receiving ongoing
    support

If a new ESAt is required to assess eligibility for DES or other
suitable services (such as jobactive Stream C), a referral for an ESAt
must be made.

As at 1 July 2021, job seekers who no longer meet the eligibility
criteria for DES will be able to complete their program with DES but
will not be able to be re-referred after exiting.

Employment Benchmark and work capacity

Job seekers who have been working at or above their Employment Benchmark
for the last 6 fortnights should not be referred to DES as they are not
eligible to commence in DES. Note: this restriction does not apply to
Work Assist participants who may be referred to DES even when they are
working at or above their Employment Benchmark.

The Employment Benchmark hours are not the same as assessed Work
Capacity with Intervention therefore a job seeker's record of employment
should be checked prior to actioning a referral to DES.

Job seekers working at or above their Employment Benchmark hours are
eligible for jobactive if they are looking to increase their work hours.

NEIS and DES

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements are able to concurrently
participate in both DES and New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS).
Eligible job seekers will benefit from specialist assistance from their
DES as well as specialist small business services as delivered by the
NEIS provider.

Job seekers who are engaged with DES can only be referred to NEIS by
their DES provider and the referral will be included in their Job Plan.
When referred, the Department of Education skills and Employment, Skills
will notify Services Australia as appropriate.

Eligible school leavers and direct self-referral to DES

If an eligible school leaver directly registers with a DES provider and
already has a current and valid Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or
Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) recommending referral to a specific
service, they must be referred to the recommended service.

For example, if an eligible school leaver directly registers with a
DES-DMS provider, and they have a current and valid ESAt which
recommends referral to DES-ESS, they cannot be commenced in DES-DMS and
must be referred to DES-ESS.

In this case the baseline and with intervention work capacity
recommended in the current and valid ESAt or JCA will determine the job
seeker's employment benchmark hours.

If an ESAt or JCA is completed for an eligible school leaver who has
already commenced in DES, the baseline and with intervention work
capacity in the assessment will not affect the benchmark hours. The job
seeker will already be registered as an Eligible School Leaver in the
Employment Services System and will retain their 8 hour benchmark.

Deferred referral to DES

When an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) or Job Capacity Assessment
(JCA) report recommends referral to DES, the general rule is the job
seeker is immediately connected to a DES provider by the assessor
wherever possible. Where this is not possible a Service Officer will
action the DES referral at a later time if the job seeker is receiving
JobSeeker Payment or another payment with mutual obligation
requirements.

This applies when the job seeker:

-   has mutual obligation requirements, and the report states the job
    seeker has temporary reduced work capacity of 0-7 hours per week
-   is exempt from mutual obligation requirements at the time the report
    is submitted, or
-   the job seeker is currently working at or above their Employment
    Benchmark

From 1 July 2021, job seekers with a previously assessed DES eligibility
will need to satisfy new eligibility criteria before a deferred referral
can be actioned.

For more information, see Deferred referral to Employment Services
Provider.

Making and coding DES referrals

Staff can make referrals to DES by using the Online Diary.

Job seekers are required to choose a suitable DES provider. A list of
providers is displayed in the Online Diary based on proximity to the
customer's location but a refined search can be done using a postcode or
suburb. Services Australia can provide information on DES provider
locations, DES specialist services and assistance provided. If the job
seeker is unable or unwilling to choose a provider at the time of the
initial contact:

-   a provider will be chosen using the random allocation function for
    job seekers with current mutual obligation requirements
-   job seekers with no mutual obligation requirements can complete the
    referral at a later date either by contacting Services Australia or
    directly registering with their preferred DES provider

Eligibility checks in the Online Diary

The Online Diary checks the job seeker's eligibility for DES when a
staff member commences a DES referral. This eligibility check is
conducted by the Department of Education, Skills and Employment system,
and is generally based on information in the job seeker's most recent
assessment.

-   if eligibility is confirmed, Services Australia can proceed with
    making an appointment with the job seeker's choice of DES provider
-   if eligibility is not confirmed, the Online Diary will present an
    error message

Eligibility checks in the Online Diary are the same for referrals made
by assessors (when completing an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
or Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)) and Service Officers.

From 1 July 2021, eligibility checks will also include new criteria
restricting access to DES for those with a work capacity of 30+ hours
per week or those not on a Services Australia payment. These job seekers
can be referred to Stream Services.

For more information, see Eligibility criteria for participation with
Disability Employment Services (DES).

Mutual obligation requirements/compulsory participation requirements

For job seekers with mutual obligation requirements, participation in
DES is a requirement if referral to DES-ESS or DES-DMS is recommended by
a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) or Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt). DSP recipients with participation requirements may also select
to be referred to employment services as their compulsory activity.

The requirement to participate in DES does not apply if the job seeker
is receiving a payment with mutual obligation requirements and has a
partial capacity to work (baseline and with intervention work capacity),
or temporary reduced work capacity of less than 15 hours per week. In
this case, the job seeker should be encouraged to participate, but is
not required to participate in DES. The job seeker may voluntarily exit
from DES at any time, and is not subject to any penalty if they choose
not to participate in DES. Note that job seekers with a partial capacity
to work or temporary reduced work capacity of less than 8 hours per week
or 30+ hours per week will generally not be eligible for DES.

Referral disputed by the DES service provider

When an assessor or a Service Officer refers a job seeker to a DES
provider, the DES provider has an opportunity to dispute the suitability
of the referral. This means the provider may not agree that DES is the
most suitable program or intervention for the job seeker. In this case
the DES provider's actions depend on how the referral was made. In all
cases, the DES provider should not exit the job seeker from the DES
referral until an outcome of the dispute process has been reached.

If an assessor made the referral, the DES provider should immediately
contact the assessor to discuss the suitability of the referral. If the
DES provider contacts Services Australia through other channels, they
should be asked to contact the assessor. The contact must take place
within 28 days after the Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) or Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) report is submitted, and before the report
status is finalised. This will allow the assessor to reconsider the
suitability of the referral, and if appropriate, recommend an
alternative referral or intervention for the job seeker, and amend the
JCA or ESAt report. This procedure also applies if Services Australia
made the referral immediately after the report was accepted, because the
JCA or ESAt was completed as a 'file assessment'. Where a DES provider
is disputing the suitability of the referral but does not discuss this
with the assessor within 28 days before the report is finalised, they
must accept the referral.

If the DES referral recommendation is affirmed following reconsideration
by the assessor, the DES provider should accept the referral.

If the referral was made by Services Australia because of a referral
recommendation in a current and valid JCA or ESAt and the report status
is already finalised (for example, because the referral was deferred due
to the job seeker's temporary reduced work capacity), the referral
recommendation cannot be changed by the assessor. In this case the DES
provider may refer the job seeker for a new assessment if they do not
believe the referral recommendation is suitable.

Services Australia cannot override or vary a DES referral recommendation
in an ESAt or JCA report, regardless of whether the report is finalised.

Job Plan

The DES provider negotiates the job seeker's Job Plan in all cases when
the job seeker commences and is participating in DES. Staff cannot add
the DES activity to the job seeker's Job Plan, but may view the plan,
and may also remove the DES activity from the Job Plan if the job seeker
is no longer participating.

Placement and outcomes

Acceptance or non-acceptance into a DES service is recorded by the
provider and is automatically updated in the Centrelink system on the
Referral Summary. This also applies if the job seeker is exited from
DES. Once an initial appointment is booked for the job seeker using the
Online Diary, referral details will be displayed in the job seeker's
record.

If the job seeker has been placed by a DES provider, but the correct DES
status is not displaying, the details may not have been sent to the
system correctly. If the placement is confirmed by the DES provider, the
Employment Systems Helpdesk should be contacted to request the TT155
transaction be resent. The Resources page has a link to contact details.

Where a job seeker was referred to a DES provider but the referral did
not result in a placement, an issue will flag on the job seeker's record
for action.

If an outcome is received that indicates the job seeker is no longer
receiving assistance, the referral is finalised. Payment eligibility
should be checked if available information shows the job seeker has been
exited because of an employment outcome. The record should also be
checked to see that earnings are coded for the job seeker.

Services Australia actions if DES referral action is not successful

If Services Australia has attempted to refer an eligible job seeker to
DES but the job seeker is not successfully placed in the DES program,
staff should ensure:

-   the attempted referral is documented on the job seeker's record,
    including the reason why the referral was not successful, and
-   the problem is reported to ICT for follow up

Change of address and DES provider referral

Where a job seeker has moved to a new location, they will receive a
message from the Department of Social Services requesting them to
consider whether it is appropriate to transfer to a provider closer to
their new address. If the job seeker wants to change their provider,
they call the Department of Education Skills and Employment to request
the transfer.

The Resources page contains a link to the Jobsearch website and contact
details for the Department of Education, Skills and Employment.

Related links

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Reviews of Disability Employment Services (DES) participation

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Direct registration with a provider for disability employment assistance
services

Searching for disability employment service providers

Determining when an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) is required

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Checking and actioning Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) reports

Work Assist

New Enterprise Incentive Scheme (NEIS)

Assessing proper notification and reasonable notice

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
