
Quality Assurance for Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports 008-06040090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Quality Assurance (QA)
process to ensure a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report is of a high
quality and delivered in line with the requirements of the Department of
Education, Skills and Employment and Department of Social Services
(DSS).

On this Page:

Information in the JCA report

The Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report is completed after the Assessor
conducts the JCA.

The JCA report captures relevant information discussed in the interview
and records the customer's individual barriers, support needs and their
ability to work. It may be used as a guide to determine income support
eligibility, mutual obligation requirements, Participation Requirements
and/or eligibility for employment and related services.

Quality Assurance (QA) and report integrity

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports may be scrutinised, queried or
challenged by customers, Employment Service Providers (ESP), the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment, Department of Social
Services (DSS), external auditors or appeal tribunals and courts. The
content of reports may require justification in a range of forums
therefore reports must be of the highest quality and provide clear
justification for all determinations or opinions provided within the
report.

Assistant Directors monitor the quality of the reports for all Assessors
in their team on a quarterly basis. All Assessors will have 2 reports
reviewed each quarter (either 1 Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
report and 1 JCA report or 2 ESAt reports), as well as any reports that
may be randomly reviewed as part of the Assessment Services Branch
Quality Assurance model.

Quality report writing considerations

Fundamental errors and inappropriate wording need to be avoided as they
may jeopardise the reputation of the agency or cause unwarranted
distress to a customer. Additionally Assessors should:

-   Ensure that the length of the report and detail it contains is
    appropriate for the referral type
-   Use Scripts appropriately
-   Where appropriate, use their own descriptions to add justification
    to their report
-   Clearly note the source of evidence, for example, differentiate
    between customer self-report, medical evidence and assessor
    observation
-   Use correct grammar and plain English so that all readers can
    understand the report
-   Use acronyms only if universally recognised. Acronyms considered
    universally recognised are: GP, Dr, IQ, MRI, CT, ECG, DSP, JCA,
    ESAt, DES-ESS, DES-DMS, TAFE, States (NSW, QLD, VIC, NT, WA, SA,
    TAS). These acronyms do not require defining
-   Expand any localised, unique or state-based acronyms on the first
    instance (e.g. CAT - first defining use needs to be expanded to
    Crisis Assessment Team (CAT)). Then future entries can just state
    CAT. Ensure phrases that discuss potential assessment outcomes are
    not used

QA framework

The nationally consistent Quality Assurance (QA) framework assures:

-   reports meet policy requirements and result in appropriate referrals
    for customers
-   individual and organisational areas for continuous improvement are
    identified, reported and followed up, and
-   complaints are handled in a proactive manner and feedback is sought
    from customers and other stakeholders on a planned basis

The QA framework is designed to provide internal and external assurance
of the quality of assessments provided by Assessment Services, and
provides a clear and user friendly structure to assist all relevant
staff to engage in continuous quality improvement.

Assessment and quality rating

The Assessment Services Quality Team is responsible for the development
and maintenance of a standardised report checking template, referred to
as the Assessment Services Quality Control Tool. This template is used
by the Quality Panel and Assistant Directors to undertake quality audits
of reports as required.

The Assessment Services Quality Control Tool focuses on content issues
such as the correct assessment and reporting of, medical conditions,
program of support participation, work capacity, employment support
referral recommendations, as well as the application of the impairment
tables and general report congruence.

Reports must achieve an overall rating of 80% or more to be considered
as meeting a satisfactory quality standard.

Fundamental errors and other errors

Fundamental errors occur where the report contains significant issues
that may jeopardise the reputation of the agency or cause unwarranted
distress to a customer (for example, errors which result in an
inaccurate assessment of the customer's eligibility for income payment).
Fundamental errors will result in the report failing to reach the
minimum the quality standards for JCA reports.

Other errors identified in a report may be unclear wording or less
significant errors which don't constitute a fundamental error. These
other errors will impact on the quality of the report but will not lead
to an unsatisfactory quality rating, unless there are many such errors.

Fundamental error types include:

-   Incorrect recommendation for income support
-   Assessor personal opinions or assumptions
-   Inappropriate details concerning personal trauma/torture
-   Inappropriate details concerning criminal convictions
-   Disparaging comments about previous ESAT / JCA report / AAT / HPAU
    reports
-   'Release of Assessment' tick-box not selected for customer with
    limited insight
-   Comments which may attract legal or media attention
-   Use of incorrect customer name within report
-   Propaganda
-   Inclusion of staff surname (past or present staff)
-   Naming of specific illicit substances used - these can only be
    recorded if on the medical report

The Resources page contains examples of specific fundamental errors and
details on how to use more appropriate wording.

National support staff

Staff from the Assessment Services Quality Team are responsible for
compiling:

-   Quarterly National Quality Assurance Summary Report sent to the
    Department of Education, Skills and Employment and Department of
    Social Services (DSS), and
-   Performance reports sent to Directors highlighting best practice
    approaches and areas for further improvement. This is forwarded to
    the Assessment Services Branch National Manager

Self-reflection and individual review

An essential aspect of a Quality Assurance (QA) framework is ensuring
staff performing Job Capacity Assessments (JCA) take responsibility for
the quality of their own work. Assessors should fully understand the
review process and be familiar with:

-   the Assessment Services Quality Control Tool and supporting
    documents
-   the Department of Education, Skills and Employment and DSS policy
    and procedural guidelines to ensure that reports are meeting
    requirements

Assessment of report quality and training and coaching of staff

The Quality Assurance (QA) framework must be introduced as part of the
induction/training plan process for new Assessors to ensure they are
familiar with the formal and informal requirements.

Report writing quality guidelines

Reports must be free from the use of inappropriate information and it is
crucial that they are of a high quality and are written appropriately to
withstand any scrutiny. The essential report writing level would achieve
a report that is free from major grammatical and typographical errors,
substantiates opinions and claims and presents details that are clearly
distinguished and attributed to:

-   Assessor's observations
-   claims made by the customer, and
-   other information derived from the medical evidence

The report needs to reflect an assessment of the customer's barriers to
participation in work and the interventions and assistance needed to
improve their future work capacity. The report should provide the
necessary information to inform the nature of employment or
pre-employment services required, and to assist service providers to
tailor a program to the customer's needs.

The Resources page contains examples of specific fundamental errors and
details on how to use more appropriate wording.

Related links

Assessment Services

Inconsistencies in a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
