
Identifying barriers to participation for Disability Support Pension (DSP) 008-03090020

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document helps Service Officers understand barriers to economic
participation some Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers may face.
These barriers may impact the customer's capacity to participate in
employment and activities which may help to prepare them for work.

On this Page:

Factors which may create barriers to participation

Some of the factors which may create barriers to participation for a DSP
customer are:

-   Personal perceptions of their medical condition: What may be a
    relatively minor issue to others may have significant impact on the
    customer, for example, changes to appearance, such as scars
-   Lifestyle changes: Medical conditions may cause significant changes
    to a customer's lifestyle, for example, financial cost (medication,
    reduced income) or loss of mobility
-   Psychological impact: Emotional reactions, self-esteem and
    confidence could be affected
-   Trauma: Some customers are incapacitated through a traumatic event
    (for example a car accident) or may be experiencing painful or
    extensive treatment

Stigmas, misunderstandings and personal perception

Stigmas and misunderstandings are major barriers for people with
disability undertaking or seeking work. Terminology such as 'disorder'
and 'handicapped' to describe people with disabilities are likely to
cause offence, and should be avoided.

It is important the person's impairment is seen as only one
characteristic of the individual and does not imply any general lack of
ability. Using positive language is a powerful tool which helps to break
down barriers.

The customer’s own perceptions may also be a barrier. The customer may
have unrealistic expectations about the impacts of their condition,
their prospects for recovery, and their physical or mental abilities.
Customers will often focus on what they cannot do, rather than on what
they can do.

Assessing a customer's medical condition to identify barriers

A DSP customer's barriers to participation may not be immediately
evident. Just because a condition is not physically evident (for example
mental health condition), it does not mean its impacts are less
debilitating than conditions that may be physically obvious (for example
loss of limb).

For DSP customers, Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports and Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt) reports provide valuable information about
the nature of their medical condition, barriers to participation, work
capacity, and suitable referrals and interventions. For more
information, see Understanding Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports.

Customers interested in employment assistance

For DSP customers who are interested in volunteering for employment
services, referral for an ESAt is generally a helpful first step, to:

-   assess the impacts of conditions on their capacity to work
-   assess barriers and interventions, and
-   recommend suitable services that are most likely to help them build
    capacity, prepare for work and re-engage with the workforce

For more information, see Referring a Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customer volunteering for employment assistance for an Employment
Services Assessment (ESAt).

DSP customers can also directly register with Disability Employment
Services or other providers, who will talk to them about the types of
services they can offer. If required, the DES provider can also refer
the customer for an ESAt to assess suitable services. For more
information, see Direct registration with a provider for disability
employment assistance services.

Related links

Identifying Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers with
participation requirements

Conducting interviews for Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers
with participation requirements

Disability Support Pension (DSP) Participation Plan

Compulsory work focused activities for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers with participation requirements

Disability Support Pension (DSP) participation requirements compliance
model

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
