-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information for Mobility Allowance (MOB) Medical
Reviews. These reviews ensure customers have continuing eligibility.

Lodgement of MOB reviews

MOB reviews lodged at a service centre must be scanned on the same day
the documents are received.

Review selection

Customers are selected for a Mobility Allowance Medical Review (MA002R)
only if they have been:

-   previously assessed at new claim, or
-   as part of a previous review as having an inability to use public
    transport without substantial assistance for an extended period (one
    year or more)

Medical evidence must be provided to assist in determining if the
customer's inability to use public transport without substantial
assistance is permanent, for an extended period (one year or more) or
there is no inability to use public transport.

Issue and return of medical reviews

The customer has 21 days to return the medical review form. If the form
is not returned within 21 days of the:

-   first request, a second request is automatically sent allocating
    another 21 days
-   second request, payment is automatically suspended
-   suspension, MOB is automatically cancelled

Outcome of the review

The customer's MOB may be continued, if they still have a disability
that prevents them from using public transport:

-   without substantial assistance
-   permanently, or
-   for an extended period of time

An extended period of time is a period of one year or greater. If the
inability to use public transport is permanent, no medical reviews is
issued after the time the permanent inability is recorded on the
customer's record.

If the customer no longer has a disability or if they are able to use
public transport, cancel their MOB payment.

If there is insufficient medical information provided to make a
determination about continuing eligibility, the customer may need to
provide more information.

The Resources page contains links to the forms online.

Related links

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Assessing medical evidence for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Mobility Allowance (MOB) reviews

Mobility Allowance (MOB) Employment/Training Reviews

Accepting paper Mobility Allowance (MOB) claims, reviews and claims for
Advance Payment

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

Service Components by number

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
