
Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical condition affecting their vision 008-01030100

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure of how customers may register or
cancel a registration for receiving alternative letter formats. All
Centrelink customers with a disability or medical condition affecting
their vision can choose to receive Centrelink letters in a format they
can access. At this stage, the service is restricted to letters only,
not forms or flyers.

On this page:

Letter formats

Eligible customers can receive their letters from Centrelink in 1 of the
following formats:

Read over the telephone:

-   the customer is contacted by phone during business hours and advised
    that Centrelink has sent them a letter
-   the letter is read to the customer and a receipt number is provided
-   if applicable, the customer will be advised of any due dates for
    upcoming reviews, forms or appointments
-   if the first attempt to contact the customer is not successful, a
    limited number of attempts may be made on another day and at a
    different time of the day
-   the original letter is still sent to the customer

Converted to a larger font (Arial size 18 pt) - the original unformatted
letter is also sent with the converted letter

Converted to compact disc (CD):

-   the customer must have access to a screen reader
-   rich text format is used
-   the original unformatted letter is sent with the CD

Converted to Braille:

-   a copy of the letter is converted to Braille by Vision Australia
    Foundation
-   it may take approximately 2 weeks before the customer receives the
    converted letter. The original unformatted letter will be sent to
    them and may be received before the converted letter

Fillable PDF forms:

-   can be completed by customers electronically using dropdown boxes
    and fillable fields
-   are available on the Services Australia website
-   Mobility Allowance (MOB) reviews form can be emailed to a customer
    on request

Contacting customers by phone

Identifying letters, converting the format and notifying customers is
done centrally.

If the customer is to be contacted by phone and the initial contact
attempt is unsuccessful, try contacting them on a different day or time.
Make contact on as many consecutive days as possible and before any due
dates (such as appointments, date to return form or dates the payment
will be affected from).

Only contact customers who have chosen to convert letters to a larger
font, compact disk or Braille, if the letter has information that is
considered urgent, important or will affect a payment.

Registering for the service

Customers interested in this service can access:

-   the Services Australia website
-   their local service centre
-   the Centrelink Disability, Sickness and Carers Line, or
-   the Centrelink Older Australians Line

To register for the service, a customer must agree to have their postal
address recorded as per the address on Office Locator > Canberra Smart
Centre > Notes.

This address enables relevant letters to be identified and re-formatted
to meet the customer’s request. The Accessible Letters Manager has no
legal authority for the customer's payments or eligibility, it is purely
an administrative solution to provide this service.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator for the Accessible
Letters service, contact details for Accessible Letters Team (for
fillable forms) and the Services Australia website.

Related links

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

Providing services to customers with disabilities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
