
Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415 or SU683) 008-09050050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines use of the Centrelink Medical Certificate (SU415
or SU683) as proof of incapacity. Customers with a medical condition
preventing them from working or studying can lodge a valid medical
certificate to seek an exemption from or to reduce their mutual
obligation requirements. ParentsNext participants may also provide a
medical certificate for a medical exemption. Medical certificates can be
provided as part of a claim, or to show continuing entitlement to an
income support payment.

Medical certificate requirements

Job seekers and ParentsNext participants lodging a medical certificate
with Services Australia are encouraged to provide the approved
Centrelink Medical Certificate form (SU415). Customers can advise their
treating health professional to complete the fillable SU415 form
available on the agency's website. The SU415 is not for customers to
access or download.

Medical practitioners can also lodge online form (SU683) via the Health
Professional Online Services (HPOS) system.

Note: other valid medical certificates can be accepted by Services
Australia but must include the required information for an assessment to
be made.

Acceptance of medical certificate

All job seekers who have compulsory mutual obligation requirements,
including job seekers with a partial capacity to work, can lodge a valid
medical certificate seeking an exemption from, or reduction of their
requirements due to a temporary incapacity for work.

Lodgement of a medical certificate does not automatically exempt a job
seeker from their mutual obligation requirements. An assessment must be
undertaken to determine if a temporary incapacity exemption can be
applied.

A valid medical certificate for the purpose of determining an exemption
from mutual obligation requirements can only be accepted if it is
completed by a treating medical practitioner and all the following
information is provided:

-   the treating medical practitioner's diagnosis (name or description
    of condition)
-   the treating medical practitioner's prognosis (how long the
    condition and symptoms are expected to persist). This may be
    'Unknown' or 'Uncertain'
-   whether the job seeker is incapacitated from looking for work or
    study
-   the period for which the job seeker is incapacitated for work or
    study

For the purposes of completing medical certificates in relation to
income support payments, a medical practitioner is a person with
recognised medical qualifications, such as a general practitioner,
physician or surgeon, who is registered as a medical practitioner with
the Australian Health Practitioners Regulation Agency (Ahpra).

Note: for customers who reside in rural or remote areas where there is
limited access to doctors, medical evidence can be completed by a
Community Nurse.

ParentsNext participants

Assessment of a medical certificate or medical evidence for ParentsNext
participants is different to job seekers who are in receipt of a
participation payment.

Suspected fraud

If the available information suggests the job seeker has supplied
medical evidence that was not completed by a treating health
professional or has been amended after a medical practitioner completed
it, contact the medical practitioner to clarify.

If the medical practitioner advises they never issued the certificate or
the information is different, discuss with immediate supervisor and
complete a Suspected Fraud referral if appropriate. Escalate to Level 2
Helpdesk if further assistance is required.

Process the medical certificate as per normal procedures. Do not
document specific details of the allegation(s) on the job seeker's
record. Escalate to Level 2 Helpdesk if further assistance is required.

Using information contained in the medical certificate

For guidance to determine if:

a temporary incapacity exemption may be granted for a job seeker, see
Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

the nature of the medical condition and/or the impact of treatment (for
example, chemotherapy to treat cancer) would clearly affect their
capacity to work for a period longer than 13 weeks, job seekers may be
eligible for a temporary incapacity - serious illness exemption which
may be granted for up to 52 weeks, see Exempting a job seeker from
mutual obligation requirements for serious illness

job seekers (excluding Community Development Program participants) are
not eligible for an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements
where the reason for the exemption was wholly or mainly caused by their
substance misuse (including dependence), see Mutual obligation
requirement exemptions

the customer is a ParentsNext participant (check the Customer Summary or
navigate to the ParentsNext Summary page in Customer First), see
ParentsNext exits and exemptions

a Disability Support Pension (DSP) recipient:

-   with participation requirements wishes to lodge a medical
    certificate because they are seeking an exemption from their
    requirements, see Identifying Disability Support Pension (DSP)
    customers with participation requirements
-   without participation requirements enquires about lodging a medical
    certificate, see Identifying Disability Support Pension (DSP)
    customers with participation requirements for medical certificate
    coding via Medical Certificate guided procedure

Employment Services Assessments (ESAt)

Job seekers requiring an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) to assess
the impacts of their medical condition(s) on their work capacity must
provide current medical evidence before the ESAt referral is made. This
includes Youth Allowance (YA) and ABSTUDY students and Australian
Apprentices who may be referred for an ESAt to assess partial capacity
to work for the payment of Youth Disability Supplement.

A medical certificate may be used as a form of medical evidence for an
ESAt. However, job seekers who are not claiming an exemption from their
mutual obligation requirements should be asked to provide a Verification
of Medical Conditions (SU684) form completed by their treating medical
practitioner wherever possible.

The Resources page contains a link to forms and the National Business
Gateway.

Related links

Mutual obligation requirement exemptions

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Expiry and renewal of medical certificates for payments with mutual
obligation requirements

ParentsNext exits and exemptions

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Job seekers with a partial capacity to work or a temporary reduced work
capacity

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Assessment Services

Health Professional Online Services

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
