
Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) 008-01040020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to determine a customer’s eligibility for
EMEP.

On this page:

About EMEP

The EMEP is paid to eligible customers with medical needs (or their
carers who live at the same residence):

to cover the additional costs of running:

-   each item of essential medical equipment, and/or
-   medically required heating/cooling

every 12 months based on the customer’s initial grant date. Customers
will not have to lodge a new claim each year to continue to receive the
payment

Once granted, EMEP is:

-   automatically paid every 12 months on the grant date anniversary
-   paid until the customer loses qualification or there is a change of
    circumstances

For the payment amount, see  Rates and thresholds > Essential Medical
Equipment Payment (EMEP).

Note: EMEP is subject to the Consumer Price Index (CPI). On 1 July each
year, EMEP rates increase in line with the CPI. All claims made on or
after this date will receive the applicable rate of EMEP.

Eligibility requirements

Eligible customers

A claim for EMEP can be made by a:

person with medical needs (equipment user). To be eligible to claim, the
equipment user must:

-   use essential medical equipment (see the Resources page for
    alternative names), and/or medically required heating/cooling, and
-   hold or be listed on a qualifying concession card

carer of the eligible equipment user. To be eligible to claim, the carer
must:

-   live at the same residential address as the equipment user
-   provide care and attention on a regular and ongoing basis for the
    eligible equipment user.
-   hold or be listed on a qualifying concession card

Note: non-concession card carers can still claim EMEP if the equipment
user holds, or is listed on a qualifying concession card.

To qualify for payment, other requirements also apply:

-   proof of medical needs
-   energy account and payment
-   not exceed maximum EMEPs in a 12 month period
-   dependent child status
-   reside in Australia
-   live in a valid residence
-   different residences (if applicable), and
-   shared equipment at same residence (if applicable)

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
EMEP forms and customer eligibility scenarios.

Related links

Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Change of circumstances for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Proof of energy reviews for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
