
Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims 008-01040030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Essential Medical Equipment
Payment (EMEP) claims. EMEP claims are processed in the ISS system.

On this page:

Processing claims

EMEP claims are assessed in relation to the customer’s current
residential address. Customers only need to claim EMEP once for their
current residence and qualifying essential medical equipment and/or
medically required heating/cooling. If the customer acquires further
qualifying medical equipment, they will need to lodge a new claim for a
new assessment.

Once it is granted:

EMEP remains current

current EMEP customers will:

-   be automatically paid every 12 months on the grant date anniversary,
    and
-   continue to get payments until they lose qualification

When there is a change in circumstances, for example a change in
residential address:

-   the customer loses qualification
-   the customer must lodge a new claim
-   a new anniversary date is set according to the date of grant of the
    new claim

Note: medical evidence/information provided for the initial EMEP claim
cannot be more than 2 years old.

Once eligibility for EMEP is established, proof of medical needs is not
required again if:

-   the customer changes address but the new claim is for the same
    person with the same medical equipment/requirements
-   a new carer claims, with no other changes to medical requirements

All EMEP online and paper claims are processed using the Staff Process
Claim workflow. After completing the workflow, the customer's
eligibility for payment is assessed. Any further processing is completed
manually to finalise the claim.

Incorrect payment of EMEP will cause overpayment

Granting a claim for a customer who is already EMEP current without a
change in circumstances:

-   resets the anniversary date, and
-   causes the customer to receive an incorrect payment before the 12
    month anniversary date

Staff must not overpay EMEP.

If a current customer lodges another EMEP claim for the same essential
medical equipment less than 12 months from the most recent payment of
EMEP, Service Officers must only grant the claim if the customer has:

-   claimed for another item of essential medical equipment they are not
    currently being paid EMEP for
-   had a change of circumstances, or
-   lost qualification, for example by moving address

Service Officers must cancel the EMEP new claim activity (not the EMEP
payment).

This includes when a customer lodges a new claim in a new financial
year, the customer is not entitled to receive another EMEP for the same
essential medical equipment less than 12 months after their previous
EMEP has been paid.

See the Resources page for eligibility scenarios.

Online claims

Initial processing includes searching for submitted online claim
activities, indexing the claim where this has not occurred, and checking
that all required information and supporting documentation has been
requested.

The workflow is used to index the claim if necessary and to upload claim
information into the indexed MEP NCL activity

Encourage customers to claim online. When they submit the claim, the
What you must do page lists the supporting documents needed.

There are multiple benefits for claiming online including less
information to provide. Any information that has previously been
provided by the customer is pre-populated (from their Centrelink record)
into their online claim.

EMEP is a legacy online claim currently available in Centrelink online
account. It is only accessible in Customer First. Assisted Customer
Claim cannot be used for EMEP.

Nominees cannot claim EMEP online for a customer. Issue a paper claim to
correspondence nominees.

Paper claims

If the customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim,
they can lodge a  paper claim for EMEP:

Claim for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (SA440):

-   customers must use this form if they use 1 or more items of
    essential medical equipment
-   the SA440 is a  combined  form (and includes the Medical
    Practitioners - Essential Medical Equipment Payment - Medical
    confirmation (SA449))
-   the SA440 form is available on the Services Australia website

Medical Practitioners - Essential Medical Equipment Payment - Medical
confirmation (SA449):

-   medical practitioners must use this form to confirm and certify the
    customer’s need for essential medical equipment and/or medically
    required heating or cooling in their home
-   the SA449 form is available on the Services Australia website

Essential Medical Equipment Payment – Equipment User Declaration
(SA450):

-   this consent form must be signed by the person who uses the
    essential medical equipment
-   the form authorises EMEP to be paid to the person’s carer
-   the SA450 is available on the  Services Australia website

Claim for Essential Medical Equipment Payment - Multiple Claim (SA451):

-   customers must use this form to claim for multiple items of
    essential medical equipment and/or multiple equipment users who live
    at the same residence
-   each equipment user listed on the SA451 is considered an individual
    claim and each claim is assessed and processed separately
-   the SA451 is a  combined  form (and includes the SA449)

the SA451 form is available on the Services Australia website

Use the Staff Process Claim workflow to:

-   index the EMEP new claim activity in Customer First
-   key claim data from the scanned SA440, SA451 and/or SA449
-   upload claim information into the indexed EMEP new claim activity

Customer advice

An automatic letter will be sent to the customer to advise the outcome
of their claim. If the claimant has died since lodging the claim a
manual grant or rejection letter must be issued.

Reviews and appeals

Customers can apply for a review of the decision to reject or cancel
EMEP.

EMEP is paid under social security law.

Note: EMEP claims may be reassessed where all outstanding requested
documents have been provided within 13 weeks of the rejection notice.

Related links

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Change of circumstances for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Essential Medical Equipment Payment
(EMEP)

Reviews and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
