
Business Service Wage Assessment Tool (BSWAT) payments 008-02030000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document provides information on the Business Services Wage
Assessment Tool (BSWAT) payment scheme.

On this Page:

BSWAT payment scheme

The Business Service Wage Assessment Tool (BSWAT) payment scheme
provided a one-off payment to eligible customers with an intellectual
impairment whose wages were assessed and paid using BSWAT. The scheme
commenced on 1 July 2015 and ceased in December 2018.

Eligibility for BSWAT payment scheme

To be eligible for the payment scheme, a person needed to have:

-   an intellectual impairment, which includes an intellectual
    disability, autism spectrum disorder, dementia, or impaired
    intellectual function as a consequence of an acquired brain injury
-   had their wages assessed using BSWAT, or a training wage while
    waiting for a BSWAT wage assessment, and
-   required daily support within an Australian Disability Enterprise
    (ADE) workplace to maintain employment

The payment scheme was voluntary, and participants were required to seek
independent financial counselling and legal advice, paid for by the
Australian Government to help them make an informed choice.

Impacts of the BSWAT payment on income support payments

The BSWAT payment was a taxable payment, reportable to the Australian
Taxation Office (ATO).

If the customer was receiving a payment administered under the Social
Security Act 1991 (such as Disability Support Pension), the BSWAT
payment was exempt from the income test. However, it may have affected
customers due to the Assets test or Income Deeming.

If the customer was receiving payments under other Acts (for example A
New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999) they may
have been impacted because BSWAT payments were treated as income.
Further, if they had Child Support requirements, the BSWAT payment may
have effected their child support obligations.

Public information

The BSWAT Payment Scheme measure was delivered through the Department of
Social Services (DSS).

The Resources page contains a link to the Department of Social Services
for more information.

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
