
The Impairment Tables 008-03040050

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Impairment Tables and their usage in
determining eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP). On January
1 2012, revised Impairment Tables were introduced and are used to assess
all DSP new claims lodged and DSP medical reviews commenced on or after
this time.

On this Page:

Using the Impairment Tables

The Impairment Tables focus on ability and are function-based rather
than diagnosis-based. They are used to assess the impact of the
impairment on normal functions as they relate to work performance and to
assign a rating consistent with the identified level of such an impact.

The Impairment Tables are used by both Job Capacity Assessors (JCA) and
Government-contracted doctors (GCD) to assess the functional impact of
impairments resulting from medical conditions. The References page
includes a link to the Impairment Tables.

Assessment of Continuing Inability to Work (CITW) and use of the
Impairment Tables is not required if the person satisfies manifest
eligibility criteria.

For Disability Support Pension (DSP) qualification, both the minimum
qualifying impairment threshold of 20 points and continuing inability to
work criteria must be met and are of equal importance. Achieving an
impairment rating of 20 points or more does not mean the person
qualifies for DSP but indicates the impairment-related qualification
criterion has been satisfied.

Each individual Impairment Table contains a set of instructions to be
followed when applying that specific table. These instructions are set
out in the introduction to each table and:

-   specify body functions to which that table should be applied
-   specify which practitioner can diagnose
-   instruct that self-reported symptoms (by the person who is being
    assessed) must be supported by corroborating evidence
-   provide examples of corroborating evidence that can be taken into
    account when applying that table, who can provide it and where
    appropriate, an indication of conditions commonly associated with an
    impairment assessable under that table

There is no Impairment Table specifically dealing with pain. Chronic
pain is a medical condition and where it has been fully diagnosed,
treated and stabilised, any resulting impairment is assessed using the
table that is relevant to the function affected. Chronic pain may affect
a number of different body functions and table(s) are selected
accordingly.

In all Impairment Tables, each level of functional impact has a
corresponding rating expressed in points in accordance with a
consistent, generic scale that has been adapted from the World Health
Organisation International Classification of Functioning, Disability and
Health (WHO ICF).

This generic scale is as follows:

-   no functional impact - 0 points
-   mild functional impact - 5 points
-   moderate functional impact - 10 points
-   severe functional impact - 20 points
-   extreme functional impact - 30 points

Medical evidence

New Disability Support Pension (DSP) customers are required to supply
current medical evidence such as clinical records, test results and
specialist reports to support their claim. Customers do not need to
provide a Medical Report completed by their Treating Health Professional
with their claim. The Claim for Disability Support Pension (SA466) form
contains a medical evidence checklist to help customers understand the
requirements.

A Claim for Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist
(SA473) is also available on the Services Australia website.

Customers with a terminal illness can lodge a Verification of terminal
illness (SA495) form which is included at the end of the Claim for
Disability Support Pension for a Terminal Illness (SA494) and available
on the agency’s website.

Customers currently on DSP and undergoing a medical review may be
required to supply current medical evidence in the same way as for a DSP
new claim, or they may be issued with a Medical Report (SA012R) for
their Treating Health Professional to complete.

Job Capacity Assessors

Assessors will use the Impairment Tables to assign an impairment rating
if they are undertaking:

-   a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA), or
-   an Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) which is subsequently
    'upgraded' into a JCA

Government contracted doctors (GCD)

GCDs will undertake a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) if the JCA
indicates medical eligibility for DSP. The GCD will use the Impairment
Tables to assign an impairment rating to assist in the determination of
medical eligibility for DSP.

When an impairment rating can be assigned

For a condition to be assigned an impairment rating under the Impairment
Tables, the condition must be:

-   fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised, and
-   in light of available evidence, more likely than not to persist for
    more than 2 years

Temporary conditions, and permanent conditions that are not fully
diagnosed, treated and stabilised cannot be rated using the Impairment
Tables.

Self-reported symptoms

In assessing impairment, self-report of symptoms alone cannot be taken
into account unless there is corroborating medical evidence of the
person's impairment. The introduction to each Impairment Table provides
examples of suitable corroborating medical evidence and who can provide
it.

Corroborating evidence may include, but is not limited to additional
reports or letters from the person's treating doctor(s) or specialists,
reports from previous examinations or assessments, results of diagnostic
tests, reports from other health professionals or reports from other
sources such as mental health workers or drug and alcohol counsellors.

Non-medical factors

Impairment ratings should reflect the level of work-related impairment
due to the medical conditions and not due to non-medical factors such as
age, geographical location or caring responsibilities. Individual
Impairment Tables may contain descriptors that may take account of
certain non-medical factors but they are an exception rather than the
rule.

Use of aids, equipment and assistive technology

The Impairment Tables require a person's impairment to be assessed when
the person is using or wearing any aids, equipment or assistive
technology the person has (in their possession) and usually uses.

Some of the Tables specify a particular impairment rating when such
assistance is used.

The Resources page contains links to the User Guide and Tables with an
overview of the Impairment Tables and a summary of changes of note from
the 1993 version of the Impairment Tables to the Impairment Tables
applying from 1 January 2012.

Related links

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Reports

Assessing Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
