
Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) 008-04030090

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Australian Disability
Enterprises (ADE), previously known as Disability Supported Employment
(DSE), Business Services or sheltered employment.

Services provided by ADE

ADE services are funded by the National Disability Insurance Agency
(NDIA) under Part II of the Disability Services Act 1986. These services
employ and support people with disabilities, injuries or illnesses often
in specialist working environments.

ADEs are generally not for profit organisation that play an important
and valuable role in providing supported employment opportunities to
people with moderate to severe disability across Australia. ADEs offer
similar working conditions to other employers and an opportunity for
people with disability to contribute and connect to their local
community. ADEs provide a wide range of employment opportuning including
packing, assembly, production, recycling, screen-printing, plant
nursery, garden maintenance and landscaping, cleaning services, laundry
services and food services.

Eligibility assessments for ADE

Services Australia plays no part in assessing eligibility to work at an
ADE.

Eligible National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participants
receive funding through their NDIS plan to support them to work at an
ADE.

Refer enquiries about working at an ADE to the National Disability
Insurance Agency (NDIA).

Job seekers with mutual obligation requirements

ADE is an approved activity, which means that customers receiving a
participation payment such as Disability Support Payment (DSP) with
participation requirements (under 35 years of age), Jobseeker Payment
(JSP) or Youth Allowance (YA) satisfy their mutual obligation
requirements while they are participating in the program.

Referral to ADE

Access for eligible NDIS participants to work as supported employees in
ADEs is funded through the participant's NDIS plan.

The person must be deemed eligible, through the nature of their
disability, to participate in the NDIS.

After the eligibility assessment, the participant receives an NDIS plan.
Typically, the plan will include funds based on the reasonable and
necessary support needs of the participant.

Should the participant have employment goals, they may choose to work in
an ADE. If this is the case, they can independently, or with support,
approach an ADE with a view to supported employment. If agreed, the ADE
can access funding through the participant's plan to support them in
their supported employment.

Staff must document if the customer is participating in ADE, based on
advice from the provider or the NDIA.

DSP customers with participation requirements

DSP customers under the age of 35 will automatically be excluded from
having participation requirements if they report ADE employment income.

If ADE employment stops, and the customer still meets other DSP
participation requirements criteria, they may be required to attend DSP
participation interviews and sign a DSP Participation Plan.

Employer Electronic Reporting (EER)

Customers employed with an ADE employer may have their employment income
reported by the ADE employer through the Employer Electronic Reporting
(EER) process. This process removes the need for vulnerable customers to
report their employment income individually, to ensure correct payment
under the relevant income test.

ADEs may report a customer's employment income to Services Australia via
a secure transfer mechanism. The employment income data is automatically
applied to the customer's record.

Services Australia can receive employment income information from ADE
employers any day in the fortnight because of the Electronic Earnings
Reporting (EEO) channel type.

Customers are required to complete the Employer Reporting - Customer
Consent (SS407) form to allow the ADE employer to provide the customer's
employment details through EER. There will be a FLASH DOC on every
customer's record participating in EER. This alerts Service Officers not
to update or alter the customer's ADE employment information.

The ADE employer signs a Privacy and Security Agreement, to allow
Services Australia to receive this information. The stimulus (STM) is
put to OFF because the customer no longer has to report.

Direct questions relating to employer reporting and the coding of
customer records to the National Business Gateway.

The Resources page contains contact details for National Business
Gateway and link to Employer Reporting - Customer Consent (SS407) form

Related links

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) referrals

Disability wage subsidies

Employment Assistance Fund

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Work Assist

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Compliance action initiated by Community Development Program (CDP)
providers

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Community Development Program (CDP)

Business Service Wage Assessment Tool (BSWAT) payment scheme

Common types of Australian visas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
