-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to do when:

-   a customer has ceased work or reduced their hours of work, and
-   their DSP is suspended, or cancelled, because they had returned to
    work

It also helps to identify if the customer can have their DSP restored or
needs to reclaim.

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Check eligibility for MOB when a customer contacts in relation to
reporting employment income, changing jobs or starting work.

See Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers.

Eligibility if working up to 30 hours per week

DSP customers can work up to 30 hours per week and stay on DSP as long
as they remain eligible, this includes meeting the income test.

There may be some exceptions to this rule for people paid under an
international agreement, or outside Australia.

Restoring payment

Where DSP was suspended or cancelled, due to a valid work return to work
reason code, the customer's DSP can be restored within 2 years of the
date of effect (DOE) of the suspension or cancellation if:

-   they cease working 30 hours per week, or
-   their hours drop below 30 hours per week, and
-   their employment income does not preclude payment

All non-medical eligibility rules for DSP must be met to restore
payment. For example, the income and assets tests.

From 1 January 2023, suspension of a customer's DSP can occur for up to
2 years if their:

-   partner is getting DSP or Age Pension, and
-   partner's employment income precludes the customer's payment

The suspension reason code is EPP. Restoration of a customer's DSP can
occur within 2 years if their partner's employment income no longer
precludes payment.

Customer must have notified starting work

To be eligible for the 2 year suspension, customers must notify Services
Australia they have started work within 14 days of starting. When the
customer notifies of their return to work, DSP is suspended/cancelled
using one of the valid return to work reason codes.

If the agency is made aware the customer has returned to work without
advising, or outside 14 days, DSP is cancelled using a different reason
code. If the customer does not have a valid return to work code, DSP
cannot be restored.

If a DSP customer did not notify of their return to work and then ceases
work, they need to lodge a new claim if they wish to retest their
eligibility for DSP.

Alternative payment while DSP suspended/cancelled

During the suspension or deemed suspended period, customers can receive
an alternative income support payment if:

-   they are not qualified for DSP due to the number of hours they are
    working, and
-   their income does not preclude them from another payment

This payment must be cancelled if DSP is restored.

Customer has employment income with reduced hours

When the customer has employment income and still qualifies for DSP:

-   If under Age Pension age, Working Credit may allow the customer to
    keep some of their income support payment while they are working
-   If over Age Pension age and getting a pension (excluding PPS), they
    may be eligible to the Work Bonus

Related links

Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Initial contact and identification of services for people with a
disability

Identifying entitlements and services for the customer (CLK)

Commencing or returning to work Disability Support Pension (DSP)

General 14 day notification provisions

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Working Credit

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years, with no dependent children and with affecting income at 19
September 2009

Income Test for Disability Support Pension customer who is under 21
years with no dependent children

Income Test for single pension customers

Income Test for partnered pension customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
