-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information which helps determine whether
Mobility Allowance (MOB) is payable to a customer whilst they are
overseas and for how long. It also explains the actions to be taken by
the Service Officer and the customer on their departure from Australia.

Leaving to live in another country

If the customer advises they are leaving Australia to live in another
country, qualification for MOB ceases from the date of departure.
However, the existing period of grace provision of one further payment
will apply.

If cancelled customer returns to Australia they would need to prove they
are an Australian resident in order to be re-granted, especially if they
had been cancelled as they have ceased residing in Australia.

Temporary absence

MOB is payable for temporary absences for up to 6 weeks providing they
remain qualified - for example, during holidays from work/training.

No period of grace extension can be applied at the end of the maximum
portability period. For detailed information about the period of grace,
see Cancellation and Period of Grace for Mobility Allowance (MOB).

The person's qualification may continue for less than the maximum
portability period - for example, if their period of leave is only 4
weeks; or their portability for JobSeeker Payment (JSP) is for 2 weeks
then MOB portability is restricted to that period of time.

Continuation of MOB

To continue receiving MOB, a person with a disability must maintain
their base qualification for MOB and be continuing to be involved in a
qualifying activity such as:

-   training
-   employment
-   a combination of gainful employment and training
-   voluntary work
-   receiving JSP, Youth Allowance (YA) or Austudy, while satisfying the
    relevant mutual obligations requirements or Activity Test
    requirements
-   receiving JSP, YA (job seeker) or Disability Support Pension (DSP)
    and satisfying the requirements for the higher rate of MOB
-   be looking for work as part of a CETP program
-   they must also satisfy the need to travel for this activity and be
    unable to use public transport without assistance, this being the
    Mobility Allowance travel test

Note: if the customer is paid at the higher rate, then the higher rate
is payable during the portability period.

Qualification reviews

There are also annual qualification reviews and continuing qualification
for MOB must be established at pre-departure interviews.

Australian resident status

Australian resident status would be in question if the pattern of travel
suggested the person is actually residing overseas. Continuing
qualification for continuing employment or training would also be in
question if the person had a pattern of long absences with continual
short returns. The person may no longer qualify for payment.

Portability interview

The Portability Script - Departures and Returns will correctly assess
the customer's entitlement to payment while overseas and record details
on the customer's record. If the customer advises in advance, the
departure will still be recorded but the absence will not be assessed
until the customer actually leaves Australia. If the script is available
coding the absence from Australia should be done using the script.

Portability period

A customer's portability period starts on the day they leave Australia.
For portability purposes, a customer is not considered to be inside
Australia for any part of the day they departed Australia, regardless of
the time of departure. If the customer is travelling outside Australia
on a cruise the date of departure is the date the ship leaves the last
Australian port.

The day a customer returns to Australia is not included as part of their
absence as they are considered to be inside Australia on that day
(regardless of the time of return) and therefore no longer affected by
portability. If they leave and return on the same day (for example,
airline crew) this is not considered a departure from Australia for
portability purposes.

Notification of intended departure and return

The Department of Home Affairs will generally advise Services Australia
when a Centrelink customer leaves or returns to Australia. The
portability of the payment is automatically assessed by the system,
regardless of whether the customer notified or not. Note: Department of
Home Affairs datalink activities should not be cancelled.

In many cases, customers do not need to advise the department they are
leaving Australia temporarily, or have returned from a temporary
absence.

However, there are particular situations where customers should advise
of a departure before leaving Australia or contact when they have
returned to Australia.

[] In most cases, customers can notify of their departure from Australia
via the Travelling outside of Australia service within their Centrelink
online account. If a customer's circumstances are more complex they will
be prompted to contact the department.

The Services Australia website lists situations when customers must
advise they are leaving Australia. The Resources page has a link.

The Resources page contains examples to assist with portability
decisions, and links to the Services Australia website for information
about payments while outside Australia and travelling overseas with
Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) medicine.

Related links

Austudy customer going overseas

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Qualification for Mobility Allowance (MOB) and rates

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Restoration of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) customer going overseas

Travelling with or sending medicines overseas

View/Update overseas travel online

Youth Allowance (YA) customer going overseas

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
