
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the Supported Wage System (SWS). It was developed
in close consultation with employer, trade union, disability peak bodies
and specialised employment agencies for people with disabilities,
illnesses or injuries.

Supported wage system and employment

The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, Social Services
assess eligibility for SWS. Where required, Services Australia may
assist DSS by confirming if a job seeker meets impairment criteria for
Disability Support Pension (DSP).

Most people with an illness, injury or disability participate in the
open workforce at full award rates of pay. Some people who are unable to
obtain and/or maintain employment at full award rates due to the effects
of a disability on their workplace productivity.

People can choose to access a reliable process of productivity-based
wage assessment and workplace-specific assistance to help them gain or
maintain jobs in the open workforce. For example, an eligible person who
wants to participate in the SWS may be independently assessed as having
a productivity level of 70%, compared to the productivity of co-workers
who are performing the same (or similar) duties, and receiving a full
award wage. The SWS - eligible worker and the employer can agree to
ongoing employment with a rate of pay at 70% of the full award rate.

The SWS operates within the normal State and Federal industrial
relations regulatory frameworks. SWS participants have the same
employment conditions as their co-workers who receive a full award wage.
The assessed percentage of productivity applies to the wage rate only.
All other employment conditions - such as the length of annual and long
service leave and access to training apply according to the appropriate
award or enterprise agreement. Payment of these conditions is at the
pro-rata award wage rate.

SWS eligibility

A person is eligible to participate in the SWS if:

-   the job is covered by an award, industrial agreement or legislative
    provision which allows employment for pro-rata wages under the SWS,
    and
-   the person is an Australian citizen or a permanent resident, and
-   the person is at least 15 years of age, and
-   the person has no outstanding workers compensation claim against the
    current employer, and
-   the person meets impairment criteria for DSP, i.e. has a rating of
    20 points or more under the Impairment Tables, or meets manifest
    eligibility criteria for DSP. Continuing Inability to Work (CITW) is
    not assessed

Assistance for employers

Assistance may also be available to employers.

-   If the employee is starting in a new job, a payment of $1,000 can be
    made to offset the cost of employing a worker with a disability
    under the SWS. If the employer has received a wage subsidy for the
    placement then the $1,000 is not available
-   Funding of up to $5,000 may also be available for essential
    workplace modifications - or special or adaptive equipment that may
    assist people with disability, illness or injury in a job. This
    funding is separate to SWS and is available through the Workplace
    Modifications Scheme administered by the DSS. Funds are also
    available for specialised assistance and/or training at work. These
    funds are usually paid to a disability employment service which
    provides the support

SWS and Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Customers receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), JobSeeker Payment
(JSP), Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) or Parenting Payment (PP) and
working 15 or more hours per week under SWS can qualify for the higher
rate of MOB if they also meet the base qualifications for MOB.

Participation requirements for DSP customers under 35

DSP customers do not have participation requirements if they participate
in SWS. When SWS stops, if the customer meets the DSP participation
requirements criteria they may be required to attend DSP participation
interviews and sign a DSP Participation Plan. They will also be required
to include a compulsory activity in their Participation Plan.

More information

More information on SWS is available by phoning DSS - Assessment Team
(free call from anywhere in Australia). The Resources page has a link to
contact details.

A job seeker or their advocate seeking entry into the SWS should be
directed to DSS in the first instance. DSS will seek assistance from
Services Australia to confirm if a job seeker meets impairment criteria
for DSP.

Related links

Supported Wage System (SWS) medical assessment process

Coding income from the Supported Wage System (SWS)

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Disability wage subsidies

Employment Assistance Fund

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Work Assist

Commencing or returning to work or self-employment Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Assessment Services

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
