
Disability Support Pension (DSP) severely disabled assessments for International Agreements 008-03120010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the criteria for a customer to be considered
severely disabled to receive DSP under an international social security
agreement, and how the assessment is made.

Agreements

Agreements may allow customers to be granted DSP when they would not be
able to lodge or be entitled autonomously, or continue to be paid if
they are no longer entitled when they move from their country of
location if they are going to an agreement country that covers DSP.

Arrangements under the Agreements with the Netherlands and New Zealand
may require a severely disabled assessment to be made for the purpose of
a claim for an invalidity pension from those countries.

Generally a customer must be severely disabled to be paid DSP under an
agreement.

Note:

-   there may be other conditions that need to be met before a customer
    can be granted DSP under an International Social Security Agreement
-   customers must also meet the transfer requirements before they can
    transfer to an agreement to continue to be paid

Once a customer is paid under an agreement, they are subject to the
provisions of the agreement including altered portability conditions or
rate of payment.

Assessment for severely disabled

An assessment as to whether a DSP customer is considered severely
disabled is generally needed when the customer needs to use an
international social security agreement. Severely disabled assessments
can only be made by specialist officers in International Services (CIS).

A customer may need a severely disabled assessment:

-   when their entitlement ceases after leaving their country of
    location and the customer is going to an agreement country that
    covers DSP
-   when claiming DSP under an international agreement, or
-   for foreign pension invalidity claims from the Netherlands or New
    Zealand

Medical information required

In general, severely disabled assessments may be made on the basis of
any current and valid assessment of the customer's work capacity.

If possible, portability cases in Australia are first assessed under the
'no future work capacity' portability provisions. If required, severely
disabled decisions may be made using the information obtained in that
process.

Agreed forms for DSP new claims outside Australia under agreements are
detailed in the relevant country file in International Social Security
Agreements.

Medical assessments for Australian DSP claims or portability purposes
may be requested from agreement country authorities via Agreement
liaisons, NZ CICs and exchange of information.

Agreed forms and processes for medical assessments for foreign pensions
are detailed in Foreign pension medical assessments.

Requirement for JCA and DMA

DSP claims

Claims under agreements made inside Australia use the normal claim
process including referral for a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) and
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

Claims under agreements made outside Australia have specifically agreed
forms and a process for medical assessments and are not required to
undergo a JCA or a DMA.

Transfers to agreements

In general, if a severely disabled assessment is required, the customer
is to be referred for a JCA unless:

-   the customer has been assessed by CIS as severely disabled within
    the previous 2 years and has had no change in circumstances since,
    or
-   the customer meets the manifest criteria for DSP, or
-   there is a current and valid assessment of the customer's work
    capacity

Under agreed arrangements, medical assessments may be undertaken in some
agreement countries. This will usually mean significant delays in making
the severely disabled decision.

A DMA is not required where an assessment is being made for a customer
currently receiving DSP. DMAs are only required for DSP new claims or
review of original decision of a claim.

Foreign pension assessments

Severely disabled decisions required for foreign pensions from the
Netherlands and New Zealand generally arise from Australian new claims
where sufficient medical evidence is available, including a JCA.

A DMA is not required where an assessment is being made for a customer
currently receiving DSP. DMAs are only required for DSP new claims or
review of original decision of a claim.

Where recent medical evidence is not available, Centrelink International
Services (CIS) is responsible to obtain sufficient information for the
assessment to be made. Referral to the Health Professionals Advisory
Unit (HPAU) to complete the agreed form may also be required.

The Resources page contains links to the International Programme and
International Services (CIS) intranet pages.

Related links

Transfers to international social security agreements

Claims for Australian payments under International Agreements

Foreign pension medical assessments

International Social Security Agreements

Coding departures and returns for customers leaving Australia

Disability Support Pension (DSP) customer going overseas

Access to scanned medical information for Assessment Services

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
