
Cancellation and rejection codes for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) 008-01040060

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for cancelling or rejecting Essential
Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP).

On this Page:

Cancellation and rejection of EMEP

Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) can be rejected or cancelled
at the claimant, claim, equipment user, or medical equipment level. This
is because a customer can claim EMEP for multiple equipment users (as a
carer and equipment user), and for more than 1 item of medical equipment
or medically required heating/cooling being used at their current
residence.

The system service reason is MEP.

EMEP paid after cancelled or rejected claims

EMEP is an annual lump sum payment. When an initial EMEP is granted, a
subsequent EMEP will be paid each year on the anniversary date of the
original claim, provided that there is no change in circumstances. If
EMEP is current, this means at least 1 anniversary date is set up. A
customer can claim EMEP for multiple equipment users.

If a customer’s claim for EMEP is rejected due to a specific equipment
user, item of medical equipment or medically required heating/cooling
not meeting the eligibility requirements, the customer may still be
granted EMEP in relation to a different item of medical heating/cooling,
equipment, or equipment user.

If a customer is receiving multiple payments for EMEP, they may remain
current on EMEP even if a specific equipment user no longer qualifies
the customer for an EMEP, or if an item of medical equipment or
medically required heating/cooling is no longer used.

Cancellation and rejection codes

Specific codes are used when a decision is recorded on a customer's
record to assess their claim, or to cancel their payment. A description
of the code is used in correspondence with customers when explaining the
reason for cancellation or rejection.

Customers can request a review of the decision to reject or cancel EMEP.
EMEP is paid under social security law.

EMEP can be restored if it has been cancelled incorrectly.

The Process page contains a list of cancellation and rejection codes for
EMEP and protocols for restoring EMEP if it is cancelled.

The Resources page contains a link to mySupport.

Related links

Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Proof of energy reviews for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
