
Change of circumstances for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) 008-01040040

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the process for updating changes of circumstances
for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) customers.

On this page:

About EMEP

The EMEP is paid to eligible customers with medical needs (or their
carers who live at the same residence):

to cover the additional costs of running:

-   each item of essential medical equipment, and/or
-   medically required heating/cooling

every 12 months based on the customer’s initial grant date. Customers
will not have to lodge a new claim each year to continue to receive the
payment

Once granted, EMEP is:

-   automatically paid every 12 months on the grant date anniversary
-   paid until the customer loses qualification or there is a change of
    circumstances

For the payment amount, see  Rates and thresholds > Essential Medical
Equipment Payment (EMEP).

Note: EMEP is subject to the Consumer Price Index (CPI). On 1 July each
year, EMEP rates increase in line with the CPI. All claims made on or
after this date will receive the applicable rate of EMEP.

Current EMEP customers

EMEP claims are made in relation to the customer’s current residential
address. Customers only need to claim for EMEP once for their current
residence and qualifying medical equipment.

Qualified customers are paid EMEP every 12 months on the anniversary
date of the customer’s initial grant date. This payment will be paid
automatically until the customer loses qualification or there is a
change of circumstances.

EMEP may cancel if a change of circumstances occurs for the equipment
user, their carer, the medical equipment being used or if the claim is
not valid (such as duplicate identical claims). Cancellation means that
the EMEP will not be paid to the customer on the EMEP 12 month
anniversary date.

If a current EMEP customer completes a new claim for another item of
qualifying equipment and/or medically required heating/cooling they are
currently not being paid EMEP for, it will not replace their previous
anniversary date(s). The person will have multiple anniversary dates and
EMEP will be paid on the 12 month anniversary of each respective claim
grant date.

See Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP).

Duplicate claim submitted in the same financial year

If the customer has lodged a duplicate claim less than 12 months from
the previous EMEP and within the same financial year and there is no
change in circumstances:

-   process the claim, which automatically rejects PAC due to a claim
    previously being paid for the same address
-   include the details of any outbound contact attempt in the rejection
    DOC

Make one attempt only to contact the customer to explain:

-   the EMEP claim they lodged on [lodgement date] cannot be paid
-   this is because they are already current for EMEP and receive this
    payment every 12 months from their original claim
-   when their next payment is due (anniversary date)
-   they can submit a new claim if they have a change in circumstances.
    For example, if they use a new item of medical equipment or change
    address

See the Resources page for eligibility scenarios.

Duplicate claim submitted in the new financial year

If the customer has lodged a duplicate claim form less than 12 months
from the previous EMEP and the claim is submitted after the end of the
financial year and there is no change in circumstances, Service Officers
must cancel the EMEP new claim activity (not the EMEP payment).

See Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims to
cancel the EMEP claim activity for duplicate EMEP claims.

See the Resources page for eligibility scenarios.

New EMEP customers

A new claim will only need to be lodged if the person with medical needs
(equipment user) or their carer:

-   needs to claim for another item of qualifying essential medical
    equipment and/or medically required heating/cooling they are
    currently not being paid EMEP for
-   had a change of circumstances, and/or
-   lost qualification

The EMEP new claim is required because:

-   EMEP is paid to assist with increased energy costs at a particular
    residence due to running qualifying essential medical equipment
    and/or medically required heating/cooling
-   if the customer moves from this address, a new claim must be lodged
    for the new residence

Proof of medical needs is not required for a new claim if the customer
changes address and the new claim is for the same:

-   qualifying essential medical equipment, and
-   medical condition as claimed for the previous residence

Note: medical evidence/information provided for the initial EMEP claim
cannot be more than 2 years old. See Claiming Essential Medical
Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Reassessing EMEP

To reassess EMEP, record the following changes:

change in residential address:

-   this includes when the equipment user or their carer enters or is
    admitted into, an aged care facility, residential rehabilitation
    centre, hospital, medical facility, or is held in a detention centre
    or prison
-   recording a change of address or correcting an address will auto
    cancel EMEP. End date the link with the equipment user if the carer
    applied for EMEP and has moved residence or changed address
-   if a customer's address is corrected, set up a manual review on the
    anniversary date in the following year

an item of qualifying essential medical equipment that is no longer used
by the equipment user (EMEP can continue for other essential medical
equipment being used at the current residence)

the equipment user withdraws their consent for the EMEP to be paid to
their carer (the equipment user should be invited to claim EMEP)

the equipment user or their carer no longer contributes to the energy
account for the current residence

the equipment user or their carer goes overseas permanently

death of the customer or equipment user

Related links

Claiming Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Eligibility for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Processing Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP) claims

Proof of energy reviews for Essential Medical Equipment Payment (EMEP)

Cancellation and rejection codes for Essential Medical Equipment Payment
(EMEP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
