-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines when a job seeker participating in Disability
Employment Services (DES) can be placed by a DES provider on an
allowable break from the program.

Allowable breaks from DES overview

Allowable breaks apply only to job seekers who have already commenced in
DES. They do not apply to job seekers who are awaiting referral and are
not yet placed in the program.

Job seekers may be placed on an allowable break from DES for a number of
reasons. The DES provider always makes the decision about granting an
allowable break.

During the period of the break, the job seeker remains connected to the
provider but is suspended from participation in the program.

For job seekers with mutual obligation requirements the provider's
decision will generally depend on whether the job seeker has been
granted an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements. Job
seekers with an exemption from their mutual obligation requirements may
be permitted an 'allowable break' from DES for the duration of the
exemption.

For a job seeker who does not have mutual obligation requirements, the
provider can approve an allowable break with no requirement for action
by Services Australia. In most cases, sufficient information about the
customer's mutual obligation requirements status should be available to
the provider via the Employment Services System (ESS) to allow them to
make a determination about whether to grant an allowable break. However,
the provider may contact Services Australia to determine if a job seeker
with mutual obligation requirements has an exemption and, if so, the
duration of the exemption.

Depending on the type of exemption granted, an allowable break may be
granted automatically, or at the job seeker's request.

Services Australia's role in granting exemptions

Job seekers participating in DES may be granted an exemption from their
mutual obligation requirements by Services Australia.

Services Australia's decision to grant (or not grant) an exemption is
made according to normal legislation and policy guidelines for the type
of exemption being sought. The fact that the job seeker or the provider
may also be seeking an allowable break has no bearing on the decision
whether to grant an exemption.

Program of Support for Disability Support Pension

A person claiming DSP from 3 September 2011 who is not manifestly
eligible and does not have a severe impairment, will need to show that
they have actively participated in a Program of Support (POS), as well
as satisfying the other elements of the Continuing Inability To Work
test (being unable to work or be retrained for work within the next two
years because of an impairment). The Job Capacity Assessor will assess
whether the person has actively participated in a POS, including the
impact of any 'allowable breaks'.

The Resources page contains a link to the Workforce Australia website.

Related links

Eligibility criteria for participation with Disability Employment
Services (DES)

Mutual obligation requirements

Program of Support (POS) requirements for Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
