
Providing services to customers with disabilities 008-01030000

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to consider when helping customers with a
permanent and diagnosed disability or medical condition.

Disabilities and medical conditions

Service Officers should be aware of the disabilities and medical
conditions that may impact customers including:

-   musculo-skeletal conditions
-   mental health conditions
-   intellectual disabilities
-   Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)/ acquired immune deficiency
    syndrome (AIDS)
-   acquired brain injury
-   vision loss
-   deaf, have hearing loss or, have a speech disability
-   childhood disabilities
-   common medical conditions for aged customers
-   developmental disorders

Understanding the challenges faced by customers with disability

Many customers with a disability or medical condition face barriers and
challenges in life. Having an understanding of these barriers and
challenges will ensure that Service Officers can help customers and
manage issues that may arise.

When providing services for people with a disability or medical
condition, focus on what people can do, rather than what they cannot do.

Customers with the same type of disability may have different functional
abilities, limitations and methods of coping. Many customers with a
disability or medical condition operate independently and require little
or no support. Others, however, may require constant care and attention
and may also have a nominee acting on their behalf.

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessments (JCA)

Employment Services Assessments (ESAt) and Job Capacity Assessments
(JCA) help in determining the extent of a customer’s work capacity,
barriers to participation, referrals to appropriate services, and where
applicable, assessment of medical conditions under the Social Security
(Tables for the Assessment of Work-related Impairment for Disability
Support Pension) Determination 2011 (the Impairment Tables).

The objective of the ESAt/JCA is to provide a comprehensive assessment
of a customer's capacity to work. It examines barriers to participation
and how these barriers are being addressed or need to be addressed. It
assesses a customer's work capacity and recommends referrals to
appropriate services.

Role of a Service Officer

Being aware of a customer's disability and being able to understand how
medical conditions can affect them helps in providing appropriate
assistance. Service Officers do not need to have an extensive medical
knowledge but rather are expected to have a general understanding and
awareness of disability issues. They need to be aware of suitable
services and assistance that may be offered to the customer.

Participation needs to be viewed as a positive outcome for the customer.
Encouraging participation and focusing on ability as well as disability
assists in supporting people choosing to stay actively engaged and
thereby reducing long-term dependence on income support.

Payments and support services

A Service Officer should be aware that there is a wide range of support
services and payments for customers with disability or medical
conditions and for their carers, including:

-   Australian Disability Enterprises
-   Disability Employment Services
-   Supported Wage System
-   Disability Support Pension
-   Mobility Allowance
-   JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Incapacitated)
-   Carer Payment
-   Carer Allowance
-   Continence Aids Payment Scheme
-   Alternative letter format for vision impaired customers
-   Social work services
-   Community Engagement Officers
-   People with disability Services Australia website
-   Australian Government’s JobAccess website

The Resources page contain a links to contact details for hearing loss
services, links to the Service Australia website and external websites.

Contents

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Related links

Accepting and disclosing information

Assessment Services

Continence Aids Payment Scheme (CAPS)

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Employment Services Assessment (ESAt) Referral

Using the National Relay Service (NRS)

Interpreter Services for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Specialist officers and other internal supports for customers

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

Referral to external specialists/services

Support services for carers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
