
Online Claim for Mobility Allowance 008-05010030

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how a customer can make a claim for Mobility
Allowance (MOB) online and the requirements to verify their inability to
use public transport without substantial assistance.

It includes:

-   what a customer needs to do to start their online claim
-   accessing a started claim
-   what happens after they submit their online claim and the documents
    required to assess the claim

Customer not capable/does not have technology to claim online

If a customer is unable or unsuitable to complete an online claim for
MOB, issue them the MOB paper claim. See Coding a paper claim form
(MA001) for Mobility Allowance.

Customer contacts about claiming MOB

Customers can claim MOB online at any time if they have an active
Centrelink online account. They can access the Payment and Service
Finder on the Services Australia website to check if MOB is an
appropriate payment for them, and to start the claim. They can also
start their claim directly by accessing their Centrelink online account
through myGov.

If they do not have an active account, they may need to confirm their
identity at their local service centre to create a Centrelink online
account and link it to their myGov account if:

-   they don’t have a Services Australia confirmed identity status, or
-   a Digital Identity status recorded

See Identity Confirmation.

Staff should help customers create a Centrelink online account and link
it to myGov. This will allow them to claim MOB and get Centrelink mail
online through the myGov Inbox. Service centre staff can help customers
with their online claim on a Self Service Terminal.

The online claim process helps to make sure complete and accurate claims
are submitted. Claims can only be submitted after all mandatory
questions are answered.

Customers are advised online that they should submit their claim as soon
as possible to be paid from the earliest possible date.

For customers turning 16, the MOB online claim allows them to submit an
early claim. If a customer or their nominee contacts to discuss their
intention to claim MOB before the customer turns 16, they are to be
advised that the online claim can be submitted when they turn 15 years
and 9 months, but will not be processed until they turn 16.

Nominees cannot submit mobility claims online on behalf of a customer.

Customers who advise they are getting a package of support from the
National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) are not eligible to get MOB.

For a MOB online claim for an activity requiring travel, a customer can
only submit the claim on or after starting their activity.

If the customer needs help with their online claim, the Service Officer
can view the details of the online claim in Viewing and processing
Online Claims and Assisted Customer Claims (ACC).

Starting an online claim

Customers will have known data pre-filled on their claim. For example,
relationship details. They will only have to confirm existing
information or provide corrected data.

After they create a Centrelink online account and link it to myGov,
customers can start an online claim for MOB:

sign into myGov and select Centrelink

from the MENU, select Payments and claims > Claims > Make a claim

from Make a Claim, select Get started in the Disabled, ill or injured
category

select Apply for Mobility Allowance

-   the Digital Assistant appears so the customer can get help or ask a
    question

answer the streaming questions on the Check your eligibility for
Mobility Allowance page to check if they are claiming the most suitable
payment for their circumstances. If the customer is not eligible for MOB
based on their answers to these questions, the online claim will advise
them:

-   why they may not be eligible and refer them to the Payment and
    Service Finder, or
-   advise them to contact the agency to discuss a more suitable
    payment.

They can select Back to return to the Make a Claim page to test their
eligibility for another claim type.

For more information, see Step 1 in the Mobility Allowance (MOB) online
claims table on the Process page.

Completing the online claim

Customers need to answer the questions in the sections on the Claim
navigation pages. The questions are based on their circumstances.

Customers can select Save and Exit in any claim page and their response
will save so they can continue with their claim later.

Customers can cancel a started online claim that they have not yet
submitted.

Submitting the online claim

Customers must accept a declaration before they can submit their claim.
This is a legal declaration and removes the need for a signed claim
form.

The customer’s claim information and details from My profile will show
on the Review your claim page. If they have not completed all required
details, a red Update required message will appear against the section
with missing information. Next is not enabled until required updates are
made. Update will navigate to My profile to make the required changes.
On completion, they select Return to your claim to go back to the Review
your claim page.

If documentation is required, it is requested on the Next Steps page
after the claim is submitted. Customers will have continuing access to
their Next Steps page during the life of the claim to check
documentation required to finalise their claim.

Customers can use the Upload documents service to provide further
information or documents for their claim.

After submitting their claim, customers are given:

-   the date they need to provide all supporting documentation
-   a Claim ID

Customers also have the online option to voluntarily cancel or withdraw
their online claim.

If customers contact about their online claim and the status is ‘draft’,
use Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) to submit it. For more details, see
Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims.

Documents and information required

The customer sees the Next Steps page when they submit their claim. The
page lists the documentation required to finalise the claim. The
documents required will vary depending on their responses to the
questions throughout the claim. The customer will have continuing access
to the Next Steps page in their online claim to check the documents
required, until their claim is finalised.

When a customer submits a claim, they must provide:

-   a Medical Report - Mobility Allowance (MA002), where the customer’s
    disability, or any information about the disability already held by
    Services Australia does not clearly indicate they require
    substantial assistance to use public transport
-   If the customer is required to provide a medical report, the Next
    Steps page will include a link to a fillable PDF version of the
    MA002. The customer has the option to print the form for their
    Health Professional (HP) to complete. The HP can also access the
    fillable PDF version of the MA002 from the Services Australia
    website

Proof of hours

Proof of hours is required if the customer is working, undertaking
training, doing voluntary work, or a combination of work or training.

Rate of MOB

When MOB is claimed, the customer’s eligibility will be assessed to
determine if they are to get the standard or higher rate of MOB.

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website,
Digital Support Products, forms and information on common online claim
staff workflows, finalisation and follow up.

Related links

How customers create a myGov account and link services

Using myGov accounts

Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Payment rates and thresholds

Rates for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Withdrawal of claims

Cancel or withdraw an online claim

Viewing and processing online and assisted customer claims

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
