
Mobility Allowance (MOB) Employment/Training Reviews 008-10030020

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about Mobility Allowance (MOB)
service profiling reviews that ensure the customer has continuing
eligibility. This procedure explains how to help customers complete the
form and assess their continuing eligibility for MOB when an employment
and/or training review is returned.

Mobility Allowance Review forms

Customers who are selected for review are automatically issued a paper
Review of Mobility Allowance (MA003) form. If the form is not returned
within 21 days of the first and second request, MOB is suspended. If
there is no response, MOB is automatically cancelled.

Visually impaired customers can ask for an accessible (electronic)
version of the review form via the Disability, sickness and carers line.
Customers who:

-   use assistive technology can download, complete and submit the PDF
    form by the due date
-   are unable to use assistive technology, can receive the review form
    via email. Service Officers can email the Accessible Letters Team to
    request a fillable Mobility Allowance review form be sent to the
    customer

Assessment for ongoing eligibility is based on form responses

Customers are assessed for ongoing eligibility for either the standard
or higher rate MOB based on their review form responses. The customer
(or their appointed nominee) must:

-   complete all questions, and
-   sign (including electronic signature)

Lodgement of MOB reviews

Review forms that are lodged at a non-processing service centre must be
scanned on the day of receipt. Scanning the form automatically:

-   removes the review activity from the Future Activity List (FAL)
    screen, and
-   allocates the work item for processing

The Resources page contains links to online forms and contact
information.

Related links

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Identifying a package of services for vision impaired customers

Mobility Allowance (MOB) reviews

Mobility Allowance (MOB) Medical Reviews

Completing a Review of Mobility Allowance (MA003)

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Rate of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Cancellation and Period of Grace for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Accepting paper Mobility Allowance (MOB) claims, reviews and claims for
MOB Advance Payment

Verification of Mobility Allowance (MOB) activities

Service Component Search (PQCS) and Service Component National Search
(PQNS) screens

Service Components by number

Using the National Relay Service (NRS)

Interpreter Services for customers who are deaf or hard of hearing

Providing services to customers with disabilities

Recording and correcting employment income details

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
