
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains how to review the circumstances of customers,
restore their payment if they are eligible and re-engage them.

Eligibility for manual intervention

The manual intervention process is used to review vulnerable customers’
circumstances when their income support payment is suspended or
cancelled for a minimum of 6 weeks because of an auto suspension or
cancellation activity.

The process is triggered by a combination of the income support payment
type, the suspension or cancellation code, and the period since
suspension or cancellation reason.

The process applies to customers receiving these payment types:

-   Age Pension
-   Carer Payment (CP)
-   Disability Support Pension (DSP)
-   Special Benefit (SpB all provisions)

Customers who are  living permanently overseas  are not eligible for the
manual intervention process. Cancel any Manual Follow-ups (MFUs)
allocated for these customers.

Manual intervention process

If a customer is eligible for the manual intervention process, a Manual
Follow-up (MFU) activity generates and allocates via Workload Manager
(WLM).

Investigate the customer record to identify:

inappropriate suspensions or cancellations. These are cases where the
required information has been lodged and no other customer action is
needed

indications of vulnerability and risk:

-   a history of mental illness, homelessness or a risk of becoming
    homeless, customers who are frail aged or disconnected from
    community supports
-   other circumstances such as vulnerability indicators, nominee
    arrangements, weekly payment arrangements and/or a history of
    incidents of aggression may indicate further investigation is
    required

If there is evidence of a customer being vulnerable and at risk, make 2
 genuine attempts to contact  the customer and/or nominee. If registered
for SMS messaging issue the pre-call SMS before attempting contact.
Where a nominee arrangement exists, attempt to contact the nominee
first, and if unsuccessful then attempt to contact the customer. For
customers without phone numbers, issue a Q164 letter asking them to
contact Services Australia within the  appropriate timeframe for their
location.

If contact with the customer is successful, discuss the reason for the
suspension with the customer or nominee. If possible, restore the
payments in this contact.  If the Service Officer requires extra
documentation or details, before restoring the income support payment,
discuss this during the contact with the customer or nominee. Take the
chance to make sure the customer is linked to appropriate local supports
as needed. Nominee  arrangements should also be discussed with the
customer where appropriate.

If the initial attempt to contact the customer is unsuccessful, or
contact was successful but the customer has not provided the extra
documentation within the requested timeframe, try to contact the
customer a second time.

Note:  if the customer may be at risk of harm or immediate danger,
escalate to the Service Centre Manager straight away.

Escalation of vulnerable and at risk customers

If the second attempt to contact a vulnerable and at risk customer is
unsuccessful, escalate the case to the Service Centre Manager.

The role of the Service Centre Manager in this process is to review the
customer circumstances with the Service Officer and other relevant
specialists such as social workers to:

-   assess the level of risk for the customer
-   confirm all reasonable action has been taken, or
-   facilitate the engagement of the most appropriate resource for the
    customer’s circumstances to re-engage them. For example, a social
    worker, Community Engagement Officer (CEO), Indigenous Services
    Officer (ISO) or Customer Critical Response Team (CCRT)

Reconnection strategies will depend on the level of risk associated with
each customer’s case. The  Resources  page contains examples of
reconnection strategies.

The Service Centre Manager may engage different resources throughout the
process to attempt reconnection. Once contact with the customer is
successful, discuss the circumstances of the suspension of their income
support payment. If possible, restore the income support payment at the
first point of contact.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Age Pension

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection reason codes for Newstart System
(NSS)

Restoration of payments (CLK)

Payment of arrears after reassessment and stopping a payment

Nominees

Disclosing information to a nominee

Correspondence returned to Centrelink 'Whereabouts unknown'

Requesting information (CLK)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
