
Selective Application of Data (SAD) 008-18012400

-   Background
-   Process
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information on the Selective Application of Data
(SAD) screen or function available within the new Disability Support
Pension (DSP) claims in Customer First and Process Direct.

SAD screen or function

The SAD screen or function is used to update information from a DSP
claim, where the claim is not ready to be finalised. A new claim
activity may hold provisional data that must be updated on the
customer’s record.

SAD function presents a list of provisional data (referred to as Tasks)
that can be transferred to a new or existing secondary activity.

All provisional tasks will be preselected. Service Officers must review
and deselect tasks that should not immediately apply to the customer’s
record. Deselected tasks remain as provisional data within the primary
activity.

Note: if the same task selected on the customer's record also displays
on the partner and/or child record, select both tasks for transfer.

Service Officers can use the SAD function to finalise a defined range of
tasks within the new claim activity to:

-   ensure provisional data is applied promptly for the correct
    assessment of other income support payments the customer (or their
    partner) may be receiving, and
-   minimise another activity (such as employment income reporting) from
    being locked due to existing provisional data. Locked activities
    then need to be cancelled and reindexed to enable other updates to
    be processed

Information coded on a customer's record via the SAD function stays
provisional until the activity is recorded as completed or finalised.

The Resources page contains frequently asked questions on transferring
activities via the SAD function.

Related links

Streaming a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Assessing eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
