
Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP) 008-03050000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the eligibility criteria for DSP. It helps staff
support customers making a claim. A customer's eligibility for DSP needs
to be assessed when they claim DSP or during a review.

Alternative payments and services

Some customers who are considering claiming DSP may not be eligible.
They may need to be encouraged to claim JobSeeker Payment (JSP).

Customers claiming JSP may indicate they have an injury or illness that
limits their work capacity. This may be permanent or temporary. These
customers are assessed through the Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)
process. The ESAt can be upgraded to a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) if
the medical evidence shows they are likely to be eligible for DSP. They
can be invited to claim DSP once the upgraded JCA is submitted.

Eligibility criteria

To be eligible for DSP, a person must:

have turned at least 15 years and 9 months and be under Age Pension age
when they claim

satisfy the residence criteria

meet the relevant income and asset test

be manifestly medically eligible, or

have a fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised physical, intellectual or
psychiatric condition which attracts at least 20 points under the
Impairment Tables, and

-   have a Continuing Inability To Work (CITW). This includes active
    participation in a Program of Support if applicable, or
-   be participating in the Supported Wage System (SWS)

Staff should encourage customers to complete the DSP Pre-Claim Guide on
the Services Australia website. This will help customers to better
understand the eligibility rules for DSP. This may assist the customer
with deciding whether to make a DSP claim or not.

Fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised

To be eligible for DSP, unless manifestly eligible, a customer must
first show through medical evidence that they have at least 1 condition
that can be assessed as fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised.

For a condition to be assessed as fully diagnosed and treated, the
following are considered:

-   if the condition was examined by an appropriately qualified medical
    practitioner
-   if there is supporting evidence of that condition
-   what treatment or rehabilitation has occurred in relation to the
    condition, and
-   if treatment is continuing or is planned in the next 2 years

A condition is considered fully stabilised if the customer has:

undertaken reasonable treatment for the condition. Any further treatment
is unlikely to result in significant functional improvement to a level
enabling them to undertake work in the next 2 years, or

not undertaken reasonable treatment and either:

-   significant functional improvement to a level enabling them to work
    in the next 2 years is not expected, or
-   there are medical or other compelling reasons for them not to
    undertake reasonable treatment

Impairment Ratings and Tables

To be eligible for DSP, unless manifestly eligible, a customer’s
permanent, fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised condition must be
assigned an impairment rating of at least 20 points on the Impairment
Tables.

There are 15 function-based Impairment Tables. They focus on assessing
the impact of impairment on normal functions as they relate to work
performance and with a rating assigned consistent with the identified
level of impact.

The permanent, fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised condition is
assessed against the relevant Impairment Table to determine the
functional impact, with a rating assigned accordingly. For example, a
permanent, fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised mental health
condition would be assessed under Table 5 - Mental Health Function.

In all Tables, each level of functional impact has a corresponding
points rating. This generic scale is as follows:

-   no functional impact - 0 points
-   mild functional impact - 5 points
-   moderate functional impact - 10 points
-   severe functional impact - 20 points
-   extreme functional impact - 30 points

These conditions cannot be rated using the Impairment Tables:

-   temporary conditions
-   permanent conditions that are not fully diagnosed, treated and
    stabilised

Where an assessment of impairment is required for a permanent, fully
diagnosed, treated and stabilised condition, the customer will be
referred for a Job Capacity Assessment

Continuing Inability to Work (CITW) criteria

The determination of impairment ratings and CITW are separate
assessments based on different criteria. They are of equal importance
when assessing eligibility for DSP.

The assessment of CITW is part of the process to determine if the
customer is medically eligible for DSP.

A customer has a CITW if their impairment alone prevents them from
undertaking both of the following:

-   any work for 15 or more hours per week for at least the relevant
    minimum wage for at least 2 years
-   educational, pre-vocational, vocational, or work related training
    (including on-the-job training) is unlikely to enable them to do any
    work for 15 or more hours per week for at least the relevant minimum
    wage, within 2 years independently of a program of support

A customer claiming DSP after 3 September 2011 who is not manifestly
eligible or does not have a severe impairment must also show they have
actively participated in a Program of Support (POS).

Medical evidence required for a DSP claim

Customers must supply current medical evidence to support their DSP
claim. This can include clinical notes, test results and specialist
reports. Depending on the medical condition, more specific medical
evidence may also be required.

The Claim for Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist
(SA473) provides details of what medical evidence customers must
provide. This information is in the Claim for Disability Support Pension
(SA466), is included in the DSP online claim and is on the Services
Australia website.

While customers no longer need to provide specific forms completed by
their treating health professional(s) detailing the impact of their
medical condition(s), they must supply current evidence with their
claim. If they do not provide evidence their claim may be rejected.

The Disability Support Pension Medical Evidence Checklist for treating
health professionals (SA478) form helps treating health professionals
provide relevant medical evidence to support the customer's claim for
DSP or medical review. The form provides relevant information about
medical eligibility and the assessment process.

Customers with a terminal illness can lodge a Verification of terminal
illness (SA495) form, which is included at the end of the Claim for
Disability Support Pension for a Terminal Illness (SA494) and available
on the agency’s website.

Support is available to customers who may have difficulty obtaining
medical evidence, such as:

-   vulnerable customers. For example, people who are homeless or living
    in a remote community
-   customers at risk. For example, People suffering from an undiagnosed
    mental health condition and disengaged from health services.

DVA pension recipients

DSP customers getting a Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) Disability
Compensation Payment at the Special Rate - Totally and Permanently
Incapacitated (TPI) paid under the Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986, can
provide their Special Rate decision letter to verify their current DVA
status.

DVA issues this letter to eligible customers when granting their
Disability Compensation Payment at the Special Rate. It contains details
of the impairment rating and work capacity as determined by DVA.

The letter is suitable evidence to support manifest medical eligibility
for DSP.

DSP customer reaches Age Pension age

To qualify for DSP, a new customer must be under Age Pension age when
they claim.

When a current DSP customer turns Age Pension age, they may choose to
remain on DSP or transfer to Age Pension.

For example:

-   If they would be subject to the sharers rate of Rent Assistance if
    they transferred to Age Pension, they may choose to stay on DSP
-   If they do not satisfy the residence requirements for Age Pension,
    they may remain on DSP if eligible

DSP is generally a non-taxable payment until a customer reaches Age
Pension age. DSP becomes taxable if the customer chooses to remain on
DSP after turning Age Pension age.

Pension Supplement

DSP customers (excluding those aged under 21 without children) may be
eligible for the Pension Supplement.

Claim requirements when impairment rating is assessed in an existing report

A current and valid Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) may be used to assess
medical eligibility for DSP. This applies to new claims and reviews of
medical eligibility.

If a customer has been referred for an Employment Services Assessment
(ESAt), the Assessor may upgrade the ESAt to a JCA if there is enough
medical evidence to confirm the customer may meet all medical
eligibility criteria for DSP.

The report can be used to assess eligibility for DSP if the customer
then claims. In these cases, an extra JCA is not needed as part of the
DSP claim process if the JCA report is still a current and valid
assessment of the customer's work capacity. However, a Disability
Medical Assessment may be required to verify the customer's medical
eligibility for the claim.

Payments during claim period

If there is a delay finalising a claim for DSP, the customer can
continue on their current income support payment provided they remain
eligible for that payment.

If the customer is receiving JobSeeker Payment (JSP) or Youth Allowance
(YA), they may be exempted from their mutual obligation requirements
while the DSP claim is being assessed.

If the customer is not receiving an income support payment, they can
apply for JSP within the DSP online claim and Assisted Customer Claim or
if lodging a paper DSP claim form consider inviting a claim for JSP or
YA (Provisional).

DSP customers (except customers who are permanently blind and exempt
from the income and asset test) are subject to:

-   a Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP), and/or
-   an Income Maintenance Period (IMP)

Customers getting another income support payment who are serving a
SWPP/IMP and deemed eligible for DSP may still be precluded from
payment.

The Resources page contains links to forms.

Contents

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)?

Transferring to Disability Support Pension (DSP) (Blind)

Age/Disability Support Pension on the basis of blindness: Request for
Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013)

Related links

Assessing Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Assessing permanent blindness

Assessment Services

Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Granting Disability Support Pension (DSP) (manifest)

Initial contact and identification of services for people with a
disability

JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional)

Program of Support (POS) requirements for Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

Rates of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Supported Wage System (SWS)

The Impairment Tables

What is medical evidence for disability payments?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
