[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the requirements for medical and sensitive
information to be stored and accessed for carers and disability
customers.

Medical Information File Envelope (MIFE) customer file

The MIFE provides a single place on a customer’s file to store all
prescribed documents about:

-   their disability and work capacity
-   medical documentation of the care receiver for those on CP, and
-   any information of a sensitive nature. The eMIFE is to be
    established as soon as any medical or sensitive documents are
    received. All of the person's medical or sensitive evidence must be
    scanned and stored in the eMIFE

Carers will often be providing care for customers on Disability Support
Pension (DSP). The customers DSP record will contain a MIFE and the
carer’s record will have a second MIFE with the care receiver's details.

Medical and sensitive information is stored and scanned in a person's
MIFE and the electronic MIFE (eMIFE). A variety of  medical and
sensitive information can be scanned and stored on the eMIFE.

Digital medical forms such as the Centrelink Medical Certificate form
(SU415) are automatically attached to the customer’s record when they
are successfully submitted and are accessible in the eMIFE.

When the customer is referred for an ESAt or JCA, Service Officers must
check that all relevant information has been scanned from the historical
MIFE and attached to the person's file, prior to making the appointment.
If historical information is required, forward a request to the Records
Management Unit (RMU) to scan the required medical or sensitive
information.

The Assessor is then able to access the relevant information via the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations using Employment
Services System (ESS) as part of the assessment process. MIFE
information is accessible after an appointment has been booked in the
Online Diary. Information of a sensitive nature is scanned and attached
to the eMIFE. It may be available to a Government-contracted doctor
(GCD) conducting a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA).

The MIFE should be removed from the file for the purposes of independent
audits.

Information stored on the MIFE

Medical or sensitive information to be scanned and stored on the eMIFE
can include (but is not limited to):

any of the following reports:

-   DSP Medical Assessment Recommendations (SA479)
-   Medical reports, treating doctors reports, health professional
    assessments, etc. relating to Carer Allowance and/or Carer Payment
    (not including claim forms)
-   Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

all Medical Certificates (SU415)

Consent to disclose medical information form (SA472)

Claim for Disability Support Pension (SA466). Note: only the 'Medical
Details' section must be placed in the MIFE

Verification of terminal illness form (SA495)

any of the following review forms:

-   Medical Report Disability Support Pension Review (SA012R)
-   Carer Payment and Carer Allowance medical review forms

the following Unreasonable to Live at Home forms:

-   SY015 - Youth Allowance Unreasonable to Live at Home Statement by
    Young person
-   SY016 - Youth Allowance Unreasonable to Live at Home Statement by
    Parent(s) or Guardian(s)
-   SY017 - Youth Allowance Unreasonable to Live at Home Statement by
    Independent Third party

Specialist Assessor reports from Assessment Services and social workers

other medical or sensitive reports, such as those from:

-   pathologists
-   radiologists
-   other health professionals

any other information considered to be of a sensitive nature

Adding to claimant or recipient records

When medical/sensitive documents are lodged with Services Australia and
they are determined to be suitable for scanning, they are scanned at the
place of lodgement.

Digital medical forms

Digital medical forms such as the Centrelink Medical Certificate form
(SU415) are automatically attached to the claimant or recipient's record
when they are successfully submitted, and are accessible in the eMIFE.

Access to information

Services Australia staff who access medical information as part of their
duties can access the eMIFE at all times. Information:

-   can be accessed via the Services Australia systems and the
    Department of Employment and Workplace Relations using Employment
    Services System (ESS)
-   is clearly labelled with a workflow warning preventing inappropriate
    or accidental access to medical information

Records Management Unit

Historic paper copies of the MIFE and the Sensitive Information Envelope
(SIE) will continue to be stored at the local Records Management Unit
(RMU) until back scanning of the information has occurred. If historical
information is required, forward a request to RMU.

Related links

Access to scanned medical information for Assessment Services

Scanning Centrelink medical/sensitive documents using an MFD

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
