
Assessing permanent blindness 008-03040030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what to consider when assessing a claim for
permanent blindness for the purpose of qualifying for Disability Support
Pension (DSP) (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind). It explains the
differences and benefits of blind pensions. A person who is assessed as
permanently blind does not have to demonstrate a Continuing Inability to
Work (CITW) for DSP.

Guidelines for assessing permanent blindness

To be eligible for a DSP (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind), the customer
must be permanently blind.

A customer is regarded as permanently blind when their vision is
impaired as a result of a combination of visual problems to the extent
they have no suitable vision.

The following guidelines are applied. A person must have one of the
following:

-   Visual acuity on the Snellen Scale after correction by suitable
    lenses must be less than 6/60 in both eyes. The Resources page
    contains information on whether other ratings on the Snellen Scale
    qualify a customer as permanently blind
-   Constriction to within 10 degrees of fixation in the better eye
    irrespective of corrected visual acuity
-   A combination of visual defects resulting in the same degree of
    visual impairment as that occurring in the above points

The Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) requests this
information.

A customer can ask to be assessed against the eligibility criteria for
permanent blindness at any time.

Evidence required

The customer must provide a report from their treating ophthalmologist.

A Request for Ophthalmologist/Optometrist Report (SA013) is preferred.
However, any report which provides the information requested by the
SA013 is acceptable.

An optometrist can complete the report but it must clearly state it is
supported by a report from the treating ophthalmologist and provides
details about this ophthalmologist report.

Taxability

DSP (Blind) is non-taxable for customers under Age Pension age.

Continuing Inability to Work not required

Customers receiving these payments are not subject to a Continuing
Inability to Work (CITW) requirement.

Benefit status display

DSP (Blind) and Age (Blind) display on the benefit status line as DSB
and AGB.

Medicare levy exemption or reduction

Customers getting Age Pension (Blind) or DSP (Blind) may be eligible for
a Medicare levy exemption or reduction.

A Medicare levy exemption or reduction letter will automatically be sent
to identified customers.

Accessible letters

Letters are available in alternate formats for customers receiving DSP
(Blind) or Age Pension (Blind). They can choose to receive their letters
from Services Australia in one of the following alternative formats:

-   read over the telephone
-   converted to a larger font
-   converted to Rich Text or Plain Text Format and sent on a computer
    disk
-   converted to Braille

At this stage, the service is restricted to letters only, not forms or
flyers.

Income and assets

The basic rate of DSP (Blind) and Age Pension (Blind) is not subject to
the income or assets tests. However, both payments are subject to
compensation provisions.

If the customer has a partner, who is not blind and who claims or gets
Centrelink payments, income and assets for both the customer and partner
must be advised. Only the DSP (Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) customer
will be exempt from the income and assets tests. The partner's payment
will be assessed using their combined income and assets. Details of
combined income and assets are reviewed.

If claiming Rent Assistance (RA) or Family Tax Benefit (FTB), DSP
(Blind) or Age Pension (Blind) customers must advise income and assets.
If not claiming FTB, RA is assessed under the income and assets tests
for blind customers.

FTB and any RA that is paid with FTB are assessed normally under the
income test for family assistance payments.

Variable income

If income is variable, Age Pension or DSP blind customers are not
profiled as 2 weekly reporters. However, their partner may be profiled.
If this is the case, the customer can be manually placed onto 2 weekly
reporting. The customer can receive the Reporting Statement in an
alternative letter format. This will allow the customer or their partner
to report their income through the different reporting channels.

If the customer provides their income details for RA or for their
partner's claim and the employed person is:

-   under Age Pension age and on DSP (Blind), they can accrue and
    deplete working credits
-   over Age Pension age and getting a pension (excluding PPS), they may
    be entitled to the Work Bonus. Note: the Work Bonus is not used in
    the customer's transitional rules calculation, however the Work
    Bonus will still be used in the comparison calculations and partners
    may still benefit by the reduction in total income

Compensation and direct deduction foreign pensions affect blind pensions
in the same way as they do non-blind payments. If a customer is entitled
to compensation or a foreign pension, medical reviews are set at the
time of grant.

Claiming DSP or Age (Blind)

If a customer is getting DSP or Age Pension and they are assessed as
permanently blind, they will be transferred to DSP (Blind) or Age
Pension (Blind).

DSP (Blind) and Age Pension (Blind) payments are not income or assets
tested.

If the person gets any other payment or no payment at all, they must
make a claim for either DSP or Age (Blind), depending on their
circumstances.

The Resources page contains a link to SA013 form and information on
Snellen Scale ratings.

Related links

Alternative letter formats for customers with a disability or medical
condition affecting their vision

Assessing Age Pension claims

Assessing Age Pension (Blind) claims

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming and re-claiming Age Pension

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

The Medicare levy exemption or reduction letter

Income and Assets tests for blind customers

Qualification for Age Pension (Blind)

Rent Assistance (RA)

Transfer to Age Pension (Blind)

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
