
Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) referrals 008-02010000

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about the Australian Disability
Enterprises (ADE), previously known as Disability Supported Employment
(DSE), Business Services or sheltered employment.

Services provided by ADE

The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) under Part II of the
Disability Services Act 1986 funds the ADE services. These services
employ and support people with disabilities, injuries or illnesses often
in specialist working environments.

ADEs are generally not for profit organisations that play an important
and valuable role in providing supported employment opportunities to
people with moderate to severe disability across Australia. ADEs offer
similar working conditions to other employers and an opportunity for
people with disability to contribute and connect to their local
community. ADEs provide a wide range of employment opportuning including
packing, assembly, production, recycling, screen-printing, plant
nursery, garden maintenance and landscaping, cleaning services, laundry
services and food services.

Eligibility assessments for ADE

Services Australia does not assess a person’s eligibility to work at an
ADE.

Eligible National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participants
receive funding through their National Disability Insurance Scheme
(NDIS) plan to support them to work at an ADE.

Refer enquiries about working at an ADE to NDIA.

DSP customers with participation requirements

DSP customers under the age of 35 are exempt from participation
requirements while they report ADE employment income.

If ADE employment stops, and the customer still meets other DSP
participation requirements criteria, they may be required to attend DSP
participation interviews and sign a DSP Participation Plan.

Referral to ADE

Services Australia staff do not make referrals to ADE.

Prior to the rollout of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS),
Disability Employment Assistance (DEA) program was the Australian
Government’s supported employment program. The DEA program ceased on 31
March 2021. The majority of supported employees have transitioned to the
NDIS, with ADEs claiming funding from NDIS participant plans.

Further information about supported employment under the NDIS can be
found on their website, including information on the new NDIS pricing
framework introduced on 1 July 2020 and NDIS eligibility requirements.

Eligibility to work in an ADE is now restricted to those NDIS
participants who have an employment goal indicated in their NDIS
approved plan and related funding.

The person must be deemed eligible through the nature of their
disability to participate in the NDIS.

After the eligibility assessment, the participant, through the NDIA
receives an NDIS plan. Typically, the plan will include funds based on
the reasonable and necessary support needs of the participant.

Should the participant have employment goals, they may choose to work in
an ADE. If this is the case, they can independently, or with support,
approach an ADE with a view to supported employment. If agreed, the ADE
can use funding through the participant's plan to support them in their
supported employment.

Employer Electronic Reporting (EER)

Customers employed with an ADE employer may have their employment income
reported by the ADE employer through the Employer Electronic Reporting
(EER) process. This process removes the need for vulnerable customers to
report their employment income, ensuring correct payment under the
relevant income test.

ADEs may report a customer's employment income to Services Australia via
a secure transfer mechanism. The employment income data is automatically
applied to the customer's record.

Services Australia can receive employment income information from ADE
employers any day in the fortnight because of the Electronic Earnings
Reporting (EEO) channel type.

Customers are required to complete the Employer Reporting - Customer
Consent (SS407) form to allow the ADE employer to provide the customer's
employment details through EER. There will be a FLASH DOC on every
customer's record participating in EER. This alerts Service Officers not
to update or alter the customer's ADE employment information.

Note: ADE employers are responsible for submitting the Customer Consent
form. Therefore, if issued directly to a customer tell them to lodge it
with their employer

The ADE employer signs a Privacy and Security Agreement, to allow
Services Australia to receive this information. The stimulus (STM) is
put to OFF because the customer no longer has to report. Direct
questions relating to employer reporting and the coding of customer
records to the National Business Gateway.

The Resources page contains contact details for National Business
Gateway, NDIS website and the Employer Report - Customer Consent (SS407)
form

Contents

Customer consent to submit earnings via Employer Reporting service

Supporting the Employer Reporting service for Australian Disability
Enterprises

Australian Disability Enterprise (ADE) employers registering for the
Employer Reporting service

Australian Disability Enterprises (ADE) pay files for Employer Reporting
Service

Employer Reporting service Manual Follow Up (MFU) activities

Related links

Disability employment assistance services and programs

Disability wage subsidies

Employment assistance for people with a disability

Disabled Australian Apprenticeship Wage Support

Work Assist

Supported Wage System (SWS)

Participation requirements for Disability Support Pension (DSP)
customers under 35 years of age

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
