
Assessing eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) 008-03030130

-   Background
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to process Disability Medical Assessment
(DMA) reports completed by a Government-contracted doctor (GCD) and DMA
referrals returned as 'unable to complete'.

Locating a submitted DMA report

When a DMA report is submitted to Services Australia by a GCD, a work
item is generated and allocated to a staff member through Workload
Manager.

Possible DMA outcomes

The Delegate reviews and accepts the DMA report if appropriate. There
are 6 possible DSP eligibility outcomes from a DMA report, which
include:

manifestly eligible for DSP

medically eligible for DSP with:

-   no amendments (compared to the Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report)
-   some minor adjustments to the medical condition/s and impairment
    rating/s (compared to the JCA report)
-   major changes to the medical condition/s and the impairment rating/s
    (compared to the JCA report). For new claims, this may require
    further assessment of whether the customer has actively participated
    in a Program of Support (POS), and/or work capacity

not medically eligible for DSP

medical eligibility cannot be determined as the customer could not be
contacted, did not attend or failed to participate in the DMA

Quality of DMA report

When a DMA report has been submitted by the GCD, the Delegate needs to
review and action the DMA report.

The Delegate must not accept a DMA report that contains any quality
issues or does not assess all the customer's medical conditions
identified in the JCA report.

It is critical that Delegates ensure the quality of the DMA report is
satisfactory before accepting it, whether it does or does not support
medical eligibility for DSP. The acceptance of the DMA report, may be
the final manual touchpoint in the claim process due to the auto
finalisation process. If there are errors in the DMA report, and the
report is accepted, this may result in an incorrect claim outcome for
the customer.

The DMA report is a standalone document that shows the GCD has assessed
the customer's medical condition/s, independent of the JCA. The report
must include enough relevant information and justify the customer's
functional ability and impairment ratings, if applicable, to allow the
Delegate to confidently make an appropriate decision about the person's
medical eligibility for DSP.

Check the JCA report to ensure it is complete, consistent and correct
before accepting the DMA report. Quality issues not picked up by the
Delegate may result in incorrect claim outcomes for customers.
See Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Report

The system will auto-accept the JCA report when the DMA report has been
accepted.

When a DMA referral has a status of finalised, it cannot be returned
back to the GCD via Process Direct or Customer First for any amendments.
If an issue has been identified after a report has been accepted, a
report can still be returned to a GCD for review. Only return a DMA
report (after it has been accepted) in consultation with a Service
Support Officer (SSO) as this impacts the claim outcome.

Contributing GCD assessments

For some DMA referrals, multiple GCDs are involved in assessing the
customer's medical conditions. In these cases, the customer has their
DMA assessment conducted by the Primary GCD based on the medical
condition with the highest functional impact/combined functional impact
as indicated in the DMA referral. A Contributing GCD completes
assessment of secondary medical conditions as needed.

The DMA report (SA467) clearly identifies which GCD has assessed each
medical condition.

Accepting a DMA report

DSP new claims that require a DMA may be subject to the automatic
finalisation of claim process when the DMA is accepted. Delegates must
check all coding for the claim is completed prior to accepting the DMA
Report.

Finalising DSP claims

Once the DMA report is accepted, the system will attempt the auto
finalisation of claim process.

Note: staff must not return to the customer's record after accepting the
DMA report, unless the claim is allocated via Workload Manager for
action. Returning to a customer's record will interrupt the auto grant
process and cause errors that may prevent the system from populating
data and finalising the claim.

For auto-processing to occur, complete all required steps before
accepting the DMA report. This includes claims (excluding DSP Blind
customers exempt from the income and asset test) where the start date is
to be moved due to the customer receiving a final employment income
payment which results in DSP not being payable in the first entitlement
period. See the Process page for steps required.

The Resources page contains letter text for deceased customers and for
customers who may be entitled to Family Tax Benefit (FTB), manual action
required when the system cannot finalise a DSP claim, system detected
keywords, and links to Disability Pension and Parenting Payments Branch,
Assessment Services, GCD contact, Level 2 Policy Helpdesk, Smart Centre
Critical Response Team.

Related links

Assessing a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) after a Job
Capacity Assessment (JCA)

Assessing Continuing Inability to Work (CITW)

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Report

Digital images of medical reports electronically lodged by Treating
Health Professionals (THP)

Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) referrals

Locating digital images via Document Tools in Customer First

Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in
psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence

Rejecting a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP) including
manifest rejections

Release of Disability Support Pension (DSP) Medical Assessment reports

Streaming a new claim for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

The Impairment Tables

Understanding Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) reports

What is medical evidence for Disability Support Pension (DSP)?

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
