
Rejecting a Mobility Allowance (MOB) claim 008-05020030

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

For Mobility Allowance National Team (AMW) staff only

This document outlines the process to follow when a new claim for
Mobility Allowance (MOB) is to be rejected.

MOB qualifications

To receive MOB, a customer needs to meet all eligibility requirements, including:

-   

    being qualified for MOB payment, and

-   MOB is payable (this includes not receiving a funded package of
    support under the National Disability Insurance Scheme)

If a customer claiming MOB, does not meet all MOB eligibility
requirements, their claim is to be rejected. A letter must be sent
advising of the reason for the rejection, as well as their review and
appeal rights. When a MOB claim is rejected, the customer can ask for an
explanation of the decision and/or apply for a formal review. For more
information, see Reviews and appeals.

All information from the claim is to be recorded. This ensures the
correct rejection code is used and the correct rejection letter is
issued. The MOB system automatically rejects the claim if a field is
left blank or non-qualifying information is coded. Before finalising an
assessment, staff must ensure the claim rejection outcome is correct.

In most cases, the rejection codes cannot be coded manually onto the
customer's record.

Residence related reason

Claims rejected for a residence related reason may be due to information
the customer has provided or visa, citizenship and movement information
provided directly from the Department of Home Affairs immigration
datalink. For more information, see Residence assessment for customers
claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB).

Manual action

In some cases, manual action will be required to reject the claim. For
example, if a customer:

-   meets all the eligibility criteria for MOB, but cannot verify the
    hours they work, study or undertake voluntary work
-   lodged in inappropriate or incorrect claim

If the claim is rejected manually:

-   all information provided with the claim must be manually updated on
    the customer's record
-   a manual advice letter must be issued to the customer explaining the
    reasons for the rejection and their review and appeals rights.

Customer withdraws claim

Customers who withdraw their claims voluntarily do not have the claim
rejected but withdrawn. See Withdrawal of claims.

Related links

Online Claim for Mobility Allowance

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Mobility Allowance
(MOB) including Period of Grace reasons

Processing claims for Mobility Allowance (MOB) in Process Direct

Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Accepting paper Mobility Allowance (MOB) claims, reviews and claims for
Advance Payment

Withdrawal of claims

Review and appeals

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
