
Payability of Disability Support Pension (DSP) for customers who are in psychiatric confinement for a criminal offence 008-03060000

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information to assess a customer's eligibility
for Disability Support Pension (DSP) where the customer is confined in a
psychiatric institution because they have been charged with a criminal
offence.

DSP not payable

DSP is not payable to a customer who is:

-   in prison
-   undergoing psychiatric confinement because they have been charged
    with an offence, and is not undertaking a course of rehabilitation,
    or
-   currently serving a term of imprisonment for any crime, regardless
    of whether this is the basis for psychiatric confinement

If a person in these circumstances:

-   lodges a DSP new claim, reject their claim
-   is currently receiving DSP, suspend their payment (and cancel after
    a maximum of 2 years). See Prison admission process and claims
    during incarceration

For example, a person who is serving a custodial sentence for an offence
is relocated to psychiatric confinement because they have been charged
with (but not convicted of) another offence, and are now undertaking a
course of rehabilitation. This person cannot be paid DSP as they are
still serving a custodial sentence for conviction of an offence, and are
regarded as being in prison.

If DSP is suspended due to a person being in prison or psychiatric
confinement, DSP is cancelled after 2 years if payment is not restored
in that time. The person must be notified in writing of the decision to
suspend or cancel payment. If DSP has been cancelled, the customer must
lodge a new claim if they wish to reapply for DSP upon their release
from prison or psychiatric confinement.

Date of effect of suspension or cancellation

The date of effect of suspension or cancellation for a customer who is
imprisoned or in psychiatric confinement will be the day after the
customer entered custody. The customer does not lose eligibility until
he/she has spent the whole day (midnight to midnight) imprisoned.

DSP may be restored from the date of their release from prison or
psychiatric confinement. On the day of the customer's release, they may
apply for an early payment (of up to 7 days) of their first pension
instalment. Customers may also qualify for a Crisis Payment.

DSP payable in some circumstances

DSP is payable in very limited circumstances for people in psychiatric
confinement who:

-   have been charged with, but not convicted, of an offence, and
-   are undertaking a course of rehabilitation

This includes people in psychiatric confinement who:

-   are undergoing a period of custody pending trial or sentencing for
    an offence (mental fitness for trial being assessed)
-   have been found unfit for trial by reason of mental impairment, or
-   have been found not guilty with no conviction recorded due to their
    mental impairment
-   have been found guilty but not been convicted as their mental
    fitness to be sentenced is being assessed

DSP may also be payable to people participating in:

-   an early release program, or
-   a program of Community Service Order nature

DSP is also payable to people who are confined to a psychiatric
institution but not in connection with a criminal charge (even if they
are not undertaking a course of rehabilitation). For example, a person
who is a danger to themselves and/or others, but who has not been
charged with committing an offence.

Eligibility for DSP must be reviewed regularly, and immediately
reassessed if there is any change in their circumstances.

Determining new claims for customers in psychiatric confinement

When determining DSP new claims for any customer in psychiatric
confinement because they have been charged with a criminal offence, the
Customer Critical Response Team (CCRT) must be satisfied the customer is
not currently serving a custodial sentence for conviction of an offence,
regardless of the reasons they are in psychiatric confinement.

The SA379 form will assist the CCRT in determining the reasons a
customer is currently in psychiatric confinement. This form must be
completed by an authorised representative of the relevant correctional
authority/facility.

The SA379 form includes questions to identify customers who cannot be
paid DSP as they are currently serving a term of imprisonment for a
crime. The form requests details about:

-   the reasons the customer is confined, and
-   if the customer is serving a term of imprisonment for a crime,
    regardless of why the customer is in psychiatric confinement (this
    information must be checked in all cases)

If an old version of the form is provided to support an application for
payment for a customer in psychiatric confinement related to a criminal
offence, the correctional authority/facility must be asked to confirm if
the customer is serving a term of imprisonment for any crime.

Service Officers must ensure the relevant facility is provided with the
current form version for future claims.

A Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) must not be requested if it is not clear
whether DSP is payable because of the circumstances of the customer's
lawful detention. The claim must be manifestly rejected without a JCA if
DSP is not payable because the customer is currently serving a custodial
sentence for conviction of an offence.

When to request an SA379 (Customer in Psychiatric Confinement) form

An SA379 (current version) must be completed in all cases where a
customer is seeking to be paid DSP while in psychiatric confinement
related to a criminal offence, including:

-   all new claims
-   all applications to restore or continue payment when a customer
    enters psychiatric confinement
-   any significant change of circumstances, for example if a customer
    is moved to a new institution
-   after a customer has been receiving DSP or any other payment for 12
    months in psychiatric confinement and circumstances have not been
    reviewed in that time
-   after verbal advice has been received from the psychiatric
    institution about a change in the customer’s circumstances, or
-   if a review of eligibility is being conducted

Return of SA379 (Customer in Psychiatric Confinement) form

The completed SA379 must be scanned onto the customer's record. This
information is actioned by:

-   CCRT - where the customer is lodging a DSP new claim while in
    psychiatric confinement, or
-   DSP Processing Service Officers (DIS) - reviews for restoration and
    continuation of payment for a customer in psychiatric confinement

If the customer is eligible for DSP while in psychiatric confinement:

-   the Pensions Disability Information (PDI) screen must be updated to
    reflect the customer is in psychiatric confinement
-   a future review must be set for no later than 12 months to assess if
    the customer's circumstances have changed

Course of rehabilitation

The effect of section 23(9) of the Social Security Act 1991 is that
section 1158(b) of the Act does not apply to a person who is in
psychiatric confinement because they have been charged, but not
convicted of an offence during a period when the person is undertaking a
course of rehabilitation.

For a customer to be undertaking a 'course of rehabilitation' for the
purposes of sub-section 23(9) of the Act, they must be undertaking a
planned series of activities that may include medical and other
treatments directed towards improving the person's physical, mental
and/or social functioning.

Note: people charged with an offence (but not convicted because of their
mental impairment) who are placed under mental health orders in
psychiatric institutions (for example, secure psychiatric
hospitals/wards or in the 'mainstream' prison while awaiting transfer to
a psychiatric institution) generally undertake a course of
rehabilitation as a rule, rather than the exception.

Evidence required when the customer is undertaking a course of rehabilitation

Appropriate evidence must be obtained from the relevant correctional
authority to decide if a customer is undertaking a course of
rehabilitation, such as:

-   the Customer in Psychiatric Confinement (SA379) form, and/or
-   alternative equivalent evidence about the customer's participation
    in a course of rehabilitation may also be accepted, such as a letter
    from the correctional authority

The SA379 should be completed by, or verified with, a Health or Allied
Health Professional such as a Medical Practitioner, Registered Nurse or
social worker. Make this clear to the correctional authority/institution
when sending a request. This does not necessarily mean the form has to
be completed by a health professional, but the contact details of the
person responsible for the plan must be provided.

Scan the completed SA379 onto the customer record.

When written advice is provided by a correctional authority/facility
(certified by a health or allied health professional) stating a person
is undertaking a course of rehabilitation, Services Australia staff
should accept this advice without further investigation.

Payability of other income support payments

Contact the Disability Helpdesk for advice about payability of payments
other than DSP for customers who are confined in psychiatric
institutions due to being charged with an offence but not convicted
because of their impairment.

The Resources page contains a link to the Customer in Psychiatric
Confinement (SA379) form and the contact details for
Government-contracted doctors (GCD) and the Disability Helpdesk.

Related links

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Disability Support
Pension (DSP)

Suspension of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Restoration of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Cancellation of Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Prison admission process and claims during incarceration

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
