
Claiming Mobility Allowance (MOB) 008-05010000

-   Background
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information relating to claiming Mobility
Allowance (MOB). This includes claims for a lump sum advance of MOB.

Eligibility for MOB

MOB is paid to people unable to use public transport without substantial
assistance because of a disability, illness or injury, and need to
travel to and from home for paid work, voluntary work, study or training
or to look for work. See Eligibility for Mobility Allowance (MOB).

Completing a new claim for MOB

[] Customers must complete and lodge a claim for MOB to be paid MOB. If
customers have an active Centrelink online account, they can claim MOB
online. If a customer is deemed unable or unsuitable to complete an
online claim, for example is visually impaired, they can access an
accessible / electronic version of the Claim for Mobility Allowance form
(MA001) on the Services Australia website. They can use assistive
technology to complete the form. If they do not have suitable technology
to complete an online claim or the electronic version, issue the MA001
paper claim. The Resources page contains a link to the MA001.

Customers can refer to the information booklet attached to the MA001.
The information booklet is available on the agency's website.

Completing the MOB claim for advance payment

MOB customers can receive a 6-month advance (13 fortnightly payments) on
their payments once in every 12-month period. Repayment is limited to
automatic fortnightly recovery. Additional repayments cannot be accepted
from customers during this period.

For a customer on the higher rate of MOB and eligible for an advance,
the maximum advance amount is calculated at the higher rate. MOB
customers receive a Health Care Card (HCC). Dependants of MOB customers
are not entitled to concessions on the HCC, they must test their own
eligibility.

Accepting claims

All MOB claims and reviews are processed by the Mobility Allowance
National Team (AMW).

When customers lodge the MA001 or Claim for Mobility Allowance Advance
Payment (MA007) at a Service Centre, the documents are accepted and
scanned.

The Resources page contains a link to the Claim for Mobility Allowance
form (MA001).

Contents

Accepting paper Mobility Allowance (MOB) claims, reviews and claims for
MOB Advance Payment

Online Claim for Mobility Allowance

Lump sum advance payments of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
