
Suspension of Mobility Allowance (MOB) 008-05070010

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the suspension of MOB. Before suspending a
customer's payment, take care to establish that the customer is not
eligible for payment and that there is a legislative basis to suspend
the payment.

Suspension of MOB

Payments may be suspended if a customer is temporarily not qualified for
payment or the payment is not payable as a result of:

-   failure to comply with the requirements for payment, or
-   information not being accurate (such as a valid address or bank
    account details)

Reasons for suspension

Reasons for suspension of payment include (but are not limited to):

-   a direct credit payment was returned from the financial institution
-   the customer failed to reply to correspondence
-   the customer's mail has been returned to Centrelink - 'whereabouts
    unknown'

Payments must only be suspended if:

-   The appropriate requests for information/action were issued to
    customers prior to any suspension action being considered. The
    notices must include details as to the information/action required,
    the timeframe for response (noting that this must be reasonable),
    the consequences of non-compliance, and the reference to the
    relevant Act that the request has been made under, and
-   The appropriate time for response has passed. If a decision to
    suspend payment is made a manual advice is to be issued. This advice
    must clearly outline to the customer the reason their payment was
    suspended, the date of effect and the payment type together with the
    relevant section of the legislation. The advice must also include
    the customer’s review and appeal rights

If a decision to suspend payment is made then swift action should be
taken to advise the customer to avoid placing them in financial
hardship.

MOB will automatically suspend if a customer fails to return a review or
provide verification that has been requested. When staff investigate a
customer’s continuing qualification for MOB the payments may be
suspended at any time while investigations are underway. Once MOB has
been suspended for three months, it should be cancelled.

Customer contact

Before a payment is suspended, information must be requested from the
customer under the appropriate section of the Social Security
(Administration) Act; section 63, 67, 68, or part 5, division 1. The
decision maker must be satisfied that there is sufficient evidence that
the customer is either, temporarily not qualified for the payment or the
payment is not payable.

For further information see Requesting information.

Nominee arrangements

If the customer has a correspondence nominee, contact must be attempted
with the nominee before the payment is suspended.

Notification of suspension

Customers must be advised of the decision to suspend their payment. If
an automatic letter is not issued by the system a manual Q134 or Q999
letter must be sent and include:

-   the reason for the suspension
-   date of effect
-   the information or documentation required to enable payments to be
    restored
-   reference to the relevant act, and
-   the customer’s review and appeal rights

When the payment is suspended additional appropriate actions are also
required, for example issue letter, code manual review, and DOC the
decision.

Unfavourable decisions

When making an unfavourable decision, speak to the customer:

-   explain the decision
-   give them a chance to provide more information, and
-   advise their review and appeal rights

Customer contacts after suspension

Explain the reason for suspension. Explain what is required or what
documents are required so that payment can be restored.

The Resources page contains an attachment that outlines the legislative
basis for suspending payments.

Related links

Cancellation and Period of Grace for Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Cancellation, suspension and rejection codes for Mobility Allowance
(MOB) including Period of Grace reasons

Restoration of Mobility Allowance (MOB)

Change of circumstances for Mobility Allowance (MOB) customers

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
