[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to use the information in a JCA report.

Using a JCA report

Information in a JCA report may be used to determine:

-   a customer’s eligibility for certain income support payments
-   their work capacity, and
-   their mutual obligation requirements

In very clear-cut cases, manifest grants may be determined without the
need for a JCA.

Referral for a JCA

JCA referrals are generally only required for:

-   customers claiming or receiving Disability Support Pension (DSP), or
-   assessment of an impairment rating

The JCA reports includes an assessment of the customer’s capacity to
work, and ability to meet their mutual obligation requirements if
applicable.

Impairment Table changes from 1 April 2023

From 1 April 2023, a new version of Impairment Tables was introduced.
The new Tables are used to assess a customer's medical eligibility for
all DSP claims lodged on or after this date. See The Impairment Tables.

Temporary conditions are likely to persist for less than 2 years

Assessors will record a condition as persist for less than 2 years if it
is verified by medical evidence and is unlikely to last longer than 2
years.

Medical conditions likely to persist for more than 2 years - not Diagnosed, Reasonably Treated and Stabilised (DTS)

For a condition to be assessed as likely to persist for more than 2
years for partial capacity to work status or Employment Service Provider
assistance, medical evidence must confirm the expected duration of the
condition.

There is no requirement for the condition to be Diagnosed, Treated and
Stabilised (DTS) for this assessment, although DTS conditions are also
taken into account.

Medical conditions likely to persist for more than 2 years - DTS

If a customer has a medical condition likely to persist for more than 2
years and DTS, a JCA report can be used to help determine medical
eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP) by assessing that
condition under the Impairment Tables.

Any impairment rating recommended by the JCA needs to be confirmed by a
Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) conducted by a Government-contracted
doctor (GCD) before the claim can be granted.

The Assessor/GCD will use medical evidence to determine if a customer's
medical condition/s are DTS.

To be medically eligible for DSP, a customer who does not meet the
manifest eligibility criteria also needs to meet Program of Support
requirements and have a Continuing Inability to Work if their condition
is not assessed as severe.

DTS conditions with a rating of 20 points or more using a single
impairment table are considered to be severe and may qualify the
customer medically eligible for DSP.

If the assessor assigns 20 points or more, but it is a total across more
than one impairment table, their medical condition(s) is not assessed as
severe. The customer may also need to have/be engaged in a Program of
Support (POS) to be eligible for DSP.

POS is part of an overall assessment of continuing inability to work
(CITW).

A person has a CITW if:

-   their impairment alone prevents them from working for 15 or more
    hours per week at or above the relevant minimum wage, for at least 2
    years, and
-   their impairment means educational, pre-vocational, vocational, or
    work related training (including on-the job training) is unlikely to
    enable the person to do any work for 15 or more hours per week where
    wages are at or above the relevant minimum wage, within 2 years,
    independently of a Program of Support (POS)

Identifying if an invitation to claim DSP is required

An impairment rating, recorded in the impairment section of the report,
can be assigned by the Assessor for all JCA referral reasons.

The customers should be invited to claim DSP if the report indicates the
following and they are not claiming or getting DSP:

-   manifest medical eligibility
-   an impairment rating of 20 or more
-   they have actively participated in a Program of Support (POS) or are
    not required to meet program of support requirements, and
-   they have baseline and with intervention work capacity of less than
    15 hours per week

Note: following a JCA, a Disability Medical Assessment (DMA) conducted
by a Government-contracted doctor (GCD) is required to verify their
medical eligibility for DSP. If required, a DMA referral will be made
after a customer lodges a claim. If the customer is eligible on manifest
grounds, a DMA is not required. Invite the customer to claim DSP.

The DSP invite to claim guided procedure can be used to invite suitable
JobSeeker Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment Single (PPS), or Youth
Allowance (YA) customers to claim DSP.

If a customer declines an invitation to claim DSP and the Service
Officer believes the customer may lack insight into their condition,
they should consult with senior staff to explore alternative approaches.

Partial Capacity to Work

Customers are considered to have a partial capacity to work if they are
not eligible for Disability Support Pension (DSP) but are assessed as:

-   having an impairment that prevents them from working, and
-   unable to be trained for work for at least 30 hours a week for at
    least the relevant minimum wage independently of the Program of
    Support (POS) within the next 2 years

If a customer with a partial capacity to work is receiving JobSeeker
Payment (JSP), Parenting Payment (PP) or Youth Allowance (YA) they may
have reduced mutual obligation requirements, and be entitled to
Pharmaceutical Allowance (PhA) and a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC).

Related links

Initial contact by a customer who is ill, injured or has a disability

Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) Referral

Checking and actioning a Job Capacity Assessment (JCA) report

Assessing a job seeker’s mutual obligation requirements based on
Employment Services Assessment (ESAt)/Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
reports

Eligibility for Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Customers claiming JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA)
(Incapacitated)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
