
JobSeeker Payment (JSP) and Youth Allowance (YA) (Provisional) 008-02080000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

This procedure is under review. An Operational Message about this
content exists.

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines how to assess payment of JSP and YA (job seeker)
while a customer's Disability Support Pension (DSP) claim is assessed.
Payment of JSP or YA (job seeker) under these conditions 'provisional'
and includes customers already receiving JSP or YA when they claim DSP.
Customers may be eligible for Parenting Payment (PP) depending on the
age of their youngest child.

Participation payment

Customers receiving a participation payment under ‘provisional’
conditions do not have to meet mutual obligation or participation
requirements if:

-   they have submitted a DSP claim, and
-   the claim is not yet finalised

Claiming options

JSP (Provisional)

Within the DSP online claim, a customer can select JSP assessment
without needing to lodge a separate claim. They would be required to
book a participation interview at the end of the claim submission
process. This will create separate JSP and DSP claims on the customer’s
record.

YA (Provisional)

Customers who want to claim YA (due to their age) must lodge a separate
online claim. They cannot claim YA through their DSP online claim.

If a customer is unable or unsuitable to claim online, use the Assisted
Customer Claim (ACC) or issue a paper claim.

Similar to the online claim, a DSP ACC can create a JSP claim. However,
customers cannot claim JSP or YA using the Claim for Disability Support
Pension (SA466) paper claim and Claim for Disability Support Pension for
a Terminal Illness (SA494).

Eligibility criteria

The qualifications for JSP (Provisional) and YA (Provisional) are
essentially the same as for JSP and YA, but with the following
additions:

the person must have an outstanding DSP claim, and

they must meet at least one of the following residential requirements:

-   they must have been an Australian resident at the time the illness
    or injury occurred
-   they must have had 10 years qualifying Australian residence, or a
    qualifying residence exemption, or
-   they were born outside Australia, and when the illness or injury
    first occurred, they were the dependent of an Australian resident,
    and later they became an Australian resident themselves while still
    the dependent child of an Australian resident

The criteria above applies equally to customers:

-   already receiving JSP/YA when they claim DSP, or
-   newly claiming JSP/YA ‘provisional’ at the same time as, or after
    claiming DSP

JSP/YA (Provisional) conditions do not apply when the DSP claim has been
rejected and the customer is awaiting the outcome of a formal review of
the decision by an Authorised Review Officer (ARO) or a review of the
decision by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT).

Explain to JSP/YA (Provisional) customers:

-   waiting/preclusion periods that may apply
-   customer obligations, JSP/YA (Provisional) customers are statement
    reporters and normally profiled as 4 weekly reporting frequency
    unless they (or their partners) have casual employment income
-   income and assets tests
-   working credit
-   compliance with participation requirements
-   concession cards information

Start date and preclusion periods

If a customer:

-   is assessed as eligible for JSP/YA (Provisional), ensure the start
    date is correctly assessed, taking into account any potential
    waiting or preclusion periods
-   has recently finished work, they must provide an Employment
    Separation Certificate completed by their employer, to ensure
    correct assessment of the start date and any payment preclusion
    periods
-   has voluntarily left their job, consider the impacts of the
    customer’s medical conditions when making the decision on whether to
    apply an Unemployment Non-Payment

Note: different processes apply for customers in vulnerable
circumstances, see Intent to claim and vulnerable customers.

Job seeker registration and classification

If a customer claims JSP/YA, registration as a job seeker is compulsory
and the Job Seeker Classification Instrument (JSCI) is necessary.
Referral to an Employment Services Provider is voluntary for these
customers.

Customers who are meeting their mutual obligation requirements through
either part time work, approved study or voluntary work (Centrelink
managed) and have the exemption coded, may wish to continue with these
activities. Coding the exemption does not impact these activities.

If a new Employment Service Assessment (ESAt) is flagged, do not make an
ESAt referral while the DSP claim is undetermined. See Actioning a
pending JSCI initiated ESAt activity.

DSP claimant - JSP/YA (Provisional) mutual obligation exemption

Customers assessed as eligible for JSP/YA (Provisional) are exempt from
their mutual obligation requirements for the period during which their
DSP claim is being determined.

The 'Claiming DSP' exemption reason is to be recorded on the Activity
and Exemption Summary (AEX) screen on the customer’s record. This action
must generally be taken for all JSP/YA recipients who are claiming DSP,
including those already receiving JSP/YA at the time of claim. This
applies for an initial 13 weeks, but tell the customer the exemption
will end when their DSP claim is finalised. The exemption can be
extended for a further 13 weeks at a time if the customer’s DSP claim
has not been finalised when the exemption is due to expire, or has
expired. The exemption must remain in place until the claim is
finalised, regardless of how long the claim takes to assess.

The DSP exemption is end-dated when the DSP claim is finalised, even if
the customer has:

-   applied for a formal review of the decision, or
-   provided new medical evidence for a reassessment, or
-   the SME identifies an error in the original decision recommendation

Removal of ‘Claiming DSP’ exemption or not applied

Provider managed job seekers

A ‘claiming DSP’ exemption may be removed at a customer’s request, to
support their participation in Program of Support (POS). Before removing
an exemption, check if the customer has already asked the provider if
they can start or continue participating on a voluntary basis while the
exemption remains in place. This action avoids any compliance penalties.

If the customer has already exhausted avenues to participate, or insists
on removing the exemption, tell the customer that:

-   they may be subject to compliance penalties if they fail to comply
    with their Job Plan or attend provider appointments, and
-   they can contact Services Australia at any time if they want to have
    the exemption applied again, while their DSP claim is being assessed

If the customer requests a ‘Claiming DSP’ exemption be removed or not be
applied:

-   record their request and the advice provided to the customer in a
    DOC
-   end-date the exemption, if already applied
-   offer help with referral to an Employment Services Provider if they
    wish to volunteer

Centrelink managed job seekers

Customers who are Centrelink managed (due to their part time work,
approved study or voluntary work) can continue these activities even if
they have the ‘claiming DSP exemption’ coded.

Program of Support (POS)

Customers claiming DSP must have actively participated in a POS to be
eligible, unless they have a severe impairment or are manifestly
eligible (such as where they have a terminal illness).

If asked, tell customers claiming DSP that the duration where they are
not engaged with an Employment Services Provider, may not be counted as
participation in a POS.

Special Category Visa (SCV) holders

A non-protected SCV holder does not qualify for JSP/YA (Provisional). If
an exemption type of 'DSP' is recorded within a JSP or YA new claim for
a non-protected SCV holder the claim will be rejected. Likewise, if an
exemption type of 'DSP' is recorded on a current JSP or YA record for a
non-protected SCV holder the JSP or YA will be cancelled.

Service Officers are to consider whether it is more appropriate for a
non-protected SCV holder to be granted another type of exemption such as
Temporary Incapacity, if eligible, otherwise, the customer will need to
satisfy their mutual obligation requirements. Consideration could be
given to reducing their job search requirements.

After DSP eligibility has been assessed

If the customer’s DSP claim is:

granted, JSP/YA will be cancelled and the transfer from JSP or YA will
be actioned

not granted, the 'Claiming DSP' exemption is automatically end dated:

-   the customer can continue to receive JSP or YA subject to meeting
    relevant mutual obligation requirements
-   consider the customer's eligibility for other payments such as
    Parenting Payment (PP) or Carer Payment (CP)

If the customer applies for a formal review of the decision to reject
their DSP claim, the 'Claiming DSP' exemption cannot be applied while
the review is being completed.

Consider recommendations made in the Job Capacity Assessment (JCA)
completed as part of the DSP claim, including mutual obligation
requirements for any period of Temporary Reduced Work Capacity (TRWC).

If the customer’s DSP claim is manifestly rejected without a JCA, an
ESAt is required to determine the customer’s ongoing work capacity to
ensure their mutual obligation requirements are appropriate.

The Resources page contains a link to Office Locator and DSP claim
forms.

Related links

Assessment of a medical certificate to determine exemption from mutual
obligation requirements for a temporary incapacity

Assessment Services

Calculating the start day for an incapacitated customer

Claiming Disability Support Pension (DSP)

Eligibility for JobSeeker Payment (JSP)

Eligibility for Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker)

Identifying people with a partial capacity to work

Job Seeker Compliance Model

Processing JobSeeker Payment (JSP) claims

Managing compliance with compulsory requirements

Mutual obligation requirements exemptions

Prioritising Disability Support Pension (DSP) claims for terminally ill
customers

Processing Youth Allowance (YA) (job seeker) claims

Program of Support (POS) requirements for Disability Support Pension
(DSP)

Targeted Compliance Framework

Youth Allowance (YA) qualifications for students and Australian
Apprentices

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
