
Care Load reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) 009-08060010

-   Background
-   Process

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines reviews for CP (child) when a care receiver has a
Care Load review.

Carer reviews

The purpose of carer reviews is to:

-   establish that the care receiver's care needs continue to qualify
    the carer for payment
-   establish that the carer continues to provide care and attention for
    CA or constant care for CP
-   determine if there are any changes in the carer's and/or care
    receiver's circumstances

To be selected for Care Load Review, a carer must be paid Carer Payment
for a mainstream care receiver under 14 years and 9 months of age. A
Care Load Review will be conducted no more than once annually.

If the carer is also paid Carer Allowance for the child, this will be
reviewed at the same time.

The care load reviews consist of the following profiles:

-   profile 427 - Is considered to be 'high risk' based on the
    predictors of risk
-   profile 428 - Is considered to be 'medium risk' based on the
    predictors of risk

Carers who transfer to Carer Payment 'long-term' after being paid Carer
Payment for 'short term care' or 'episodic care' will be reviewed 6
months after they transfer.

Review process

At the initial contact, the following forms are issued to the carer:

-   Review of Carer Payment and Carer Allowance - Care Needs Assessment
    for a child under 16 years - SA416, and
-   Review of Carer Payment and Carer Allowance Medical Report (for a
    child under 16 years) - SA418

The carer has 21 days to complete the forms. If the carer fails to
respond within 21 days a reminder letter is sent with no forms enclosed.

If the carer fails to respond to the reminder letter within 21 days (42
days in total) payments are suspended. If no further response is
received within 13 weeks of suspension, payment will be cancelled.

Carers should be encouraged to return the Care Needs Assessment section
of the review as soon as possible, as recording the return of the Care
Needs Assessment will prevent the carers payment being suspended by
removing the activity from FAL.

Note: Child Care Load reviews, service components 427, 428 and 430, are
not able to be extended or deferred.

Wife Pension transfers to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Care Load reviews do not apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is
paid under grandfathering provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers.
However, CP (XWP) carers are subject to child medical reviews and adult
medical reviews for their CA care receivers.

If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled or changed to CA HCC only, CP (XWP) will automatically be
cancelled. A CP (XWP) carer loses qualification for CP (XWP) permanently
if they have a break in payment level CA entitlement. For more
information see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

CA only children

Carers receiving CA only and CA HCC only for a child or additional
children will not be selected for Care Load Reviews. These carers will
be reviewed under the Child Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA)
(child). For more information, see Carer Allowance (CA) (child) Health
Care Card (HCC) only reviews.

Manual reviews

The following Carer Payment (child) qualification types will have a Care
Load review completed manually:

-   combined care
-   multiple care
-   exchanged care

Carer Load Review exemptions

The following customer groups are exempt from this review:

-   Carers currently getting CP (XWP)
-   Carers paid Carer Payment and Carer Allowance for a child with a
    disability or medical condition on the List of Recognised Disability
    (LoRD) used to determine Carer Allowance eligibility
-   Carers paid Carer Payment for a child care receiver assessed under
    the pre 1 July 2009 'Profoundly Disabled Child - severe medical
    condition' criteria (non-behavioural condition)
-   Carers paid Carer Payment for a child care receiver assessed under
    Short Term or Episodic conditions
-   Children with an assessed Care Load score of >+ 300 and THP score >=
    4.00 and condition is 'relatively stable' or 'becoming worse over
    time'
-   Carers granted Carer Payment and Carer Allowance within the previous
    12 months for the child care receiver
-   Carers who have had a Care Load or Age Milestone Mandatory review
    within the previous 12 months

Related links

Age Milestone Mandatory reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and Carer
Allowance (CA) (child)

Medical reviews for children

Carer Payment (CP) (child) care receiver turning 16 years of age

Carer Allowance (CA) and Carer Payment (CP) reviews

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
