
Transfers to Carer Payment (CP) 009-04020000

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

This document outlines information to help with queries when a carer
transfers from another income support payment to Carer Payment (CP). It
outlines the eligibility and payability criteria for CP and what
documents are needed from the carer.

Eligibility and payability criteria

Before a carer transfers from another payment to CP, the carer must meet
the eligibility and payability criteria for CP, either for a:

-   care receiver aged under 16, or
-   care receiver aged 16 or over

This includes the limitations on absences from care.

The carer should also be considered for Carer Allowance (CA) if
eligible. If the carer qualifies for CP (child), they will be
automatically eligible for CA (auto), although carers should be
encouraged to apply for CA (child) for the following reasons:

-   While grants of CP (child) will automatically qualify carers for CA
    (auto), the same applies if CP (child) cancels - CA (auto) will
    cancel automatically at the same time as CP (child). The carer must
    lodge a new claim for CA if the child still requires and receives
    additional daily care due to their disability or medical condition
-   If a carer claims and is granted CA (child) their payment will
    usually continue if CP (child) ceases, for example due to a change
    in income/assets or hours of employment
-   If the carer claims both CP (child) and CA (child) and the claim for
    CP is rejected, they may still qualify for and be granted CA (child)
-   If the carer only claims CP (child) and the claim is rejected, a new
    claim for CA (child) is required

The care receiver must also be eligible under the relevant disability
assessment tool - the Adult Disability Assessment Determination (ADAD)
or Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination (2010).

If the care receiver is not on an income support payment, they must also
satisfy the non-customer Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test.

Carers Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT) - from CP (child) to CP (adult)

When a care receiver turns 16 years of age, they are considered an adult
for social security purposes. The Carers CTAT is the process of
transitioning care receivers from child to adult provisions.

Eligible carers are sent a CTAT invitation letter when their care
receiver turns 15 years and 9 months (or 17 years and 9 months if their
child care receiver has a terminal condition), advising they should
request a transfer by the due date if they want their entitlement to
continuation of payment to be assessed under adult provisions.

This is to transition eligible carers from child care receiver
provisions to adult care receiver provisions when the care receiver/s
turns 16 (or 18 years for CP with a terminal condition). It is not a new
claim process. It is a quicker and easier process for the carer
requiring less documentation than a new claim.

[] Carers who receive Centrelink letters to their myGov inbox receive
the invitation letter as well as a link in their myGov inbox. The link
takes them directly to the CTAT online service to complete.

Carers who are not subscribed to myGov but have a Centrelink online
account can create a myGov account and link it to their Centrelink
online account. A message as well as a link to their myGov inbox tells
them how to commence their online transfer.

Carers who do not wish to create a myGov account can select the Child to
Adult Transfer from the Tasks section in their Centrelink online account
or by going to the menu in their online account, selecting carers and
then selecting Child to Adult Transfer in the menu to commence their
online transfer.

The paper Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer
Allowance (SA432) and Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical
Report - For a person - 16 years or over (SA332A) forms will be
available online if required but will not be included with the
invitation letter. If the CTAT is lodged through the mail, it will be
scanned. The carer will also receive a notification asking them to
confirm all required documents have been lodged. For more on scanning
documents see Scanning a document.

For continuation of payment, the Child to Adult Transfer must be
submitted online (or if a paper form, lodged), before the child level of
entitlement is cancelled (that is, 16 years and 3 months or 18 years).
Paper forms lodged after the cancellation date will only be treated as a
claim contact (that is, CCD) from the date of receipt and a new claim
must be lodged. [] This can be completed online. See Claiming Carer
Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for online claims.

Carers who have had their CP suspended or cancelled will not be eligible
to request a transfer unless their CP child entitlement is
re-established.

For more information, see:

-   Carer Payment (CP) (child) Terminal illness
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Transfers to CP from another income support payment

A carer may be transferred from another payment to CP if:

-   qualification for the 2 payments is either overlapping or
    continuous, and
-   the carer is qualified for CP, either while they are still receiving
    the old payment or immediately after ceasing to receive the old
    payment

The original payment will cease to be paid when CP is granted. With a
transfer, the same payday code is maintained.

Grandfathering provisions for Parenting Payment (PP) ceased on 1 January
2013. There is no overall benefit in a customer remaining on PP.

If a customer is transferring from Disability Support Pension (DSP), the
grandfathering provisions must be explained to the customer before they
make the decision to cancel DSP. If the carer loses their entitlement to
CP in future, they may not be able to transfer back to DSP if they have
lost their grandfathered status (in that case they will have to meet the
new qualification rules for DSP).

Claim needed to transfer to CP

Carers wanting to transfer from another payment to CP must make a claim
for CP so their eligibility for CP can be assessed.

If the carer loses eligibility for the original payment, the CP claim
must be lodged within 14 days to make sure of continuity of payment.
This may be extended up to 13 weeks if the carer's medical condition was
the sole or dominant cause for not lodging within 14 days.

Care must be taken when a carer who is already receiving CP and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) contacts to claim CP and/or CA for a second care
receiver. Discuss with the carer if CP is more appropriate for the new
care receiver, depending on the carer and care receiver's circumstances.
If the new care receiver is suffering from a terminal medical condition,
it may be more appropriate to claim CP for the new care receiver.

Referral to specialist officers

A person who is taking on caring responsibilities may need to be
referred to a Centrelink specialist officer such as a social worker.

Documents required

Identity Confirmation requirements for transfers may vary depending on
the type of payment the customer is transferring from.

Concession cards

Customers are not automatically issued a new concession card when
transferring from 1 payment to another, even when they retain
entitlement to the same type of concession card.

The customer must request a new card. Any new card issued after the
transfer activity is processed will show the primary payment at time of
issue. This includes the annually reissued card, which is sent 1 month
before the expiry date of the current card.

Working Credit, Income Bank

Carers of workforce age receiving CP are eligible for Working Credit.

If a carer has had Working Credits, Student Income Bank or Australian
Apprentice Income Bank in the last 12 months, they may be able to
transfer them.

Seasonal Work Preclusion Period (SWPP)

A carer claiming CP may have to serve an SWPP.

Carers serving an SWPP who transfer from another payment to CP will also
be precluded from CP until their SWPP has ended. If a carer transfers
from a payment type that is not assessed for an SWPP, an SWPP assessment
may be needed.

The Resources page contains links to information on the Services
Australia Website about choosing between CP and Age Pension, mySupport
and additional information about transfers to CP from different payments
and the special conditions that apply.

Contents

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

Transfer from JobSeeker Payment (JSP)/Youth Allowance (YA) to Carer
Payment

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Calculating the start day for a transferee

Identity Confirmation

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged under 16

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) care receivers turning 16
years of age

Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged 16 or over

Social work services

Specialist staff for Indigenous customers

Working Credit

First Contact Concessions, Carers and Seniors (FCCCS) workflow

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
