
Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA) where previously re-granted after a cancellation due to exceeding respite bank 009-06010050

-   Background
-   
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedure when a carer exceeded their
temporary cessation of care (respite) and hospitalisation absences in a
calendar year and payment was cancelled. They reclaimed when eligible
(when the care receiver returned to their care) and were re-granted.
Later in the same calendar year, the care receiver enters respite care
again. As there are no allowable absences for respite care or for
hospitalisation remaining, the payments should be cancelled again.

CP (child) and/or CA (child)

While there is no limit to hospitalisation days for Carer Payment (CP)
(child) and Carer Allowance (CA) (child), the 63 day limit for respite
still applies to these carers. All absences must be coded. If the carer
is paid under the:

-   short term care or
-   episodic care provisions, the respite limit will be a pro-rata
    amount, based on the period for which CP (child) is being granted

Extensions to respite care

Extensions to respite care allowable absences can be made where there
are special and unusual circumstances surrounding the need for the
absence. Generally this would be a situation beyond the parent/carer's
control, necessitating an additional absence.

There is no discretion to extend beyond the allowable 63 days for an
appropriate special reason for hospitalisation, as there is with the
respite provisions. If the hospitalisation period exceeds the allowable
63 days, the carer may be eligible to access their respite days for that
calendar year (if they have any remaining).

The Resources page contains links to the Services Australia website for
publications for carers, and information about Commonwealth Carer
Respite Centres and Commonwealth Carelink Centres.

Related links

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Temporary cessation of care (respite) for more than 63 days

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance care receiver is absent from the
caring situation

Cancellation of Carer Payment (CP)

Coding a one-off absence for Carer Payment (CP)/Carer Allowance (CA)
when the care receiver is absent

Coding a regular absence for Carer Allowance (CA)/Carer Payment (CP)
when care receiver is absent

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
