
Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) for one adult or child care receiver 009-03050010

-   Background
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information in identifying the details the new
carer is required to provide when there is a change of care for Carer
Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is 1
child (only), or an adult.

On this Page:

Carer stops providing care for a care receiver

When a carer stops providing care for a care receiver, payment should be
cancelled. A person who wishes to receive CP and/or CA for a care
receiver who has recently come into their care must make a claim for CP
and/or CA.

While CA (auto) is automatically available to all carers receiving CP
(child), encourage claimants to claim CA (child) as there are advantages
to the customer in claiming CA (child) after a change of care.

If there is an existing link between the new carer and the care
receiver, whether current or non-current, it may be possible to re-use
the care receiver's medical data under the re-use provisions.

Note: if a carer is already getting CP for 1 care receiver and CA for 2
care receivers and the carer ceases to qualify for CP in respect of that
care receiver, and CP is cancelled, a re-claim is not required if the
carer wishes to receive CP for the current CA care receiver. In these
cases only, CP can be restored under Section 85 SSAA from the date
qualification is re-established. If this occurs, CP can manually be
‘restored’ as a new ‘claim’ and granted from DPT+1 of the previous CP
cancellation date. Forward any exceptional or complex cases to the Level
2 Carers Policy Helpdesk for advice.

Medical data

If the carer and care receiver have a link, the Carers [] online claim
and Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) will determine if the medical data can
be re-used.

If there is no link between the carer and care receiver, the Carers
online claim and ACC cannot establish if medical data can be re-used
(due to system limitations). The online claim and ACC will request the
medical information in all these scenarios.

A new medical report will be required if:

-   the claim is made within 6 months of the next scheduled medical
    review of entitlement, or
-   there is reason to believe the care receiver's medical condition has
    changed

A copy of all existing medical reports can be transferred to the file of
the new claimant. However, to ensure privacy principles are complied
with, care should be taken to delete any references to personal
information about the previous parent/carer. Details of the information
transferred should be noted on the record of both the new carer and the
care receiver.

The carer may wish to make a claim for CP for a new care receiver in the
following scenarios where the carer receives CA for:

-   2 adult care receivers and the adult care receiver they receive CP
    for passes away or permanently enters an institution, or
-   2 child care receivers and the child care receiver they receive CP
    for passes away or leaves their care

Dispute between carers

If there is a dispute between 2 carers over the care being provided, see
Change of care for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) customers

The Resources page contains a link to relevant carer forms.

Related links

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Child Disability Assessment Tool (CDAT) prior to 1 July 2010

Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Disability Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2010)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is claiming
or receiving CA only

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) when the care receiver is aged 16
years or over

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
under 16

Coding a paper claim for Carer Allowance (CA) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Cancellation of Carer Allowance (CA)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
