
Reassessment of CA Health Care Card (HCC) only enh1ment to payment level Carer Allowance (CA) for a child 009-03040040

-   Background
-   Process
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document explains the reassessment process required to change an
eligible carer from receiving a CA Health Care Card (HCC) only to
receiving payment level Carer Allowance (CA). This process can only be
undertaken by Carers Processing Service staff as it includes coding
information from forms provided by the carer.

On this Page:

Carer queries payment level CA eligibility

When a carer is current on CA (HCC only), they may become eligible for
payment level CA due to:

-   a change in the medical condition of the child care receiver, or
-   a reclassification of a child's disability, or
-   if they become eligible for Carer Payment (CP) child, as CA (auto)
    is automatically available to all recipients of CP (child)

The carer does not need to complete a new claim to be assessed for
payment level CA when they are CA (HCC only) current for the same child.
An online claim or Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is not required as the
carer is already current CA (HCC only) and subject to medical reviews
and reassessments.

A CA (HCC only) carer may contact Services Australia at any time to
query their eligibility for payment level CA. During the contact it must
be confirmed that the query is in relation to the child for whom they
receive the CA (HCC only), and not another child in their care. The
Service Officer should obtain information from the carer about the
change in the child care receivers’ condition. For example:

-   if the child's condition deteriorated
-   if the child has a new condition recently diagnosed
-   if the care load for the child has increased
-   whether the carer accurately answered the care load questions; that
    is, their responses may not reflect the level of required for the
    child’s condition

As the carer does not receive payment level CA, the reuse provisions do
not apply when a current CA (HCC only) carer wants to test their
eligibility for payment level CA.

Child Medical Reviews

Carers who are CA (HCC only) are reviewed at age milestones with the
existing Child Medical Reviews. Child Medical Reviews are automatically
commenced when the child care receiver reaches the following development
age milestones:

-   4 years and 8 months
-   10 years
-   13 years

The purpose of a CA (HCC only) review is to determine a carer’s ongoing
entitlement to CA (HCC only) or whether a carer is eligible for payment
level CA. If a carer qualifies for payment level CA after a Child
Medical Review, the start date of payment will commence from the date
the carer submitted the review forms. For more information, see Child
Medical Reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) (child).

Transfers from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

WP customers getting payment level CA who were not in a bereavement
period on 19 March 2020 were automatically transferred to CP (XWP) on 20
March 2020. WP customers who only had a CA (HCC only) on 19 March 2020
were not eligible to be transferred to CP (XWP). However, CP (XWP)
carers may have a CA (HCC only) for a child care receiver in addition to
payment level CA for other care receivers. If a CP (XWP) carer’s only or
last payment level CA is suspended or cancelled or changed to CA HCC
only, CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled.

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Lodgement of a new claim for payment level CA

If the carer submits a new claim for payment level CA when they are
current CA (HCC only), the claim is not to be rejected. The information
provided within the new claim is used for the reassessment from CA (HCC
only) to payment level CA.

Following reassessment, if a carer does not qualify for payment level CA
but remains entitled to CA (HCC only), the Service Officer must make an
outbound call to the carer to advise of the decision.

If the carer does not return any forms that are subsequently issued, a
DOC should be created on the record but the CA (HCC only) should not be
cancelled 'Failed to Reply to Correspondence (FRC)'.

Date from which payment level CA is made

When a carer notifies of a change in circumstances or a change is
identified, qualification for payment cannot be backdated beyond the
date the notification was received.

Note: the date of effect will be the date of the original decision if a
carer:

-   contacts within 13 weeks of being notified of the decision made
    (e.g. CA (HCC only) grant)
-   provides additional information to be used to review the decision,
    and
-   is subsequently eligible for payment level CA

Formal requests a review of decision

When a carer applies for a formal review of a decision to grant CA (HCC
only), and the outcome is entitlement to payment level CA, the date of
effect of the favourable determination will depend upon when the carer
applied for the formal review.

Related links

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA) (child) when a customer is claiming
or receiving CA only

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
