[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the situation where the Carer is absent from
caring situation.

On this Page:

Temporary cessation of care

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carers have up to 63 days
per calendar year where they can be temporarily absent from the caring
situation but still qualify for payment. Where a carer is in receipt of
both CP and CA, temporary cessation of care provisions operate
concurrently, not exclusively of one another. That is, the carer is
entitled to 63 days of temporary relief from care in the calendar year,
not 126 days.

Carer activities

Carers can participate in paid employment, self-employment, voluntary
work, education or training activities, and still qualify for Carer
Payment (CP) as long as the total time the carer is not providing
constant care (including travel time) does not exceed 25 hours per week.
Carers can work at home, provided they can still satisfy the care
receiver's need for frequent personal care or constant supervision.

Qualification for CP requires constant care on a daily basis for a
medically qualified person. The Social Security Act precludes
qualification where employment or training including travel time exceeds
25 hours per week.

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment (CP) (XWP)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not
apply to CP (XWP) - Carer Payment (CP) that is paid under grandfathering
provisions for ceased Wife Pension carers. However, Temporary Cessation
of Care (TCC) rules continue to apply to CA as normal.

However, when a CP (XWP) carer’s only or last payment level CA is
suspended or cancelled for any reason or changed to CA HCC only CP (XWP)
will be automatically cancelled. A carer loses their qualification for
CP (XWP) permanently if payment level CA is not reinstated without a gap
in entitlement.

Constant care, and the 25 hour rule do not apply to CP (XWP). Respite
codes that only relate to CP should not be recorded for any TCC days for
a carer receiving CP (XWP).

For more information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer
Payment (CP).

Reporting carer activities

[] Carer Payment carers can report their employment income, volunteer
work, training or study activities and the number of hours they worked
per week (including travel time) online, using the Report Employment
Income service. Carers can also access respite days via the service if
they temporarily exceed the 25 hours per week rule. The procedure
Reporting options available online contains further information.

Activities total more than 25 hours per week

Where a Carer Payment recipient ceases care for more than 25 hours per
week for paid employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or
training, their eligibility should be reviewed. It is likely that the
qualification of 'constant care' is no longer being met.

Contents

Carer Allowance (CA) carer is absent

Carer Payment (CP) carer is absent

Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self-employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
