
[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines payments and concession cards available for
people who provide personal care to a child or adult with a severe
disability or medical condition, or an adult who is frail aged.

Carer Payment (CP)

CP is an income support payment for carers who, because of the demands
of their caring role, are unable to support themselves through
substantial paid employment.

This payment is income and assets tested, both for the carer and the
person they care for.

To be eligible for CP, a carer must be providing constant care (care
each day for a significant period, equivalent to a normal working day).
Care must be provided in the home of the care receiver.

Note: the carer is not required to live with the care receiver.

There are provisions for a carer to continue to be paid CP during
temporary absences from care for respite and hospitalisation,

Carers granted CP for a child will also be paid CA (auto) for the child.
However, carers claiming CP for a child should be encouraged to also
claim CA (manual) in case their CP claim is rejected or cancelled. They
will then not have to claim CA separately.

For more information, see Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP).

Carer Allowance (CA)

CA is an income supplement for people who provide additional daily care
and attention for an adult or child with a disability or medical
condition, or an adult who is frail aged.

CA is not taxable or assets tested. There is an income test. To be
eligible for CA, the carer's and their partner's combined adjusted
taxable income must be under $250,000 a year. This includes deemed
amount from account-based income streams if the account holder is 60
years of age or older. The same income limit applies if the carer does
not have a partner.

The income test does not affect the rate of CA that is paid.

CA can be paid in addition to wages or an income support payment. The CA
income test does not apply to carers who are exempt from providing their
income details.

Care must be provided in a private home, generally the home of the carer
or care receiver.

Note: the carer is not required to live with the care receiver for CA
(adult).

CA for child care receiver provides 2 levels of assistance, depending on
the DCLAD score:

-   Health Care Card (HCC) only (in the name of the child)
-   fortnightly payment and HCC

CA for an adult care receiver (over 16 years of age) is a fortnightly
payment

CA can be shared between 2 carers (who are not members of the same
couple) if they both regularly provide care and attention to the same
care receiver.

There are provisions for a carer to continue to be paid during temporary
absences from care for respite and hospitalisation.

Carers enquiring about CA should be advised they may also be eligible
for CP. If the care receiver is aged 16 years or over, the care receiver
may also be eligible for an income support payment.

For information, see Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA).

Concession cards

Carer Payment (CP)

CP recipients automatically receive a Pensioner Concession Card (PCC),
unless they qualify under short term or episodic care provisions for a
child under 16 years of age in which case they receive a Health Care
Card (HCC).

Carer Allowance (CA)

CA recipients for adult care receivers do not automatically receive a
HCC. If they do not already have a PCC or HCC, they may test their
qualification for a Low Income Health Care Card (LIC).

All CA (child) care receivers are eligible for a HCC in their name in
addition to any PCC or HCC held by the carer.

If a (child) care receiver does not qualify their carer for payment of
CA, they may be entitled to a HCC only CA to help with the cost of
medications.

Full-time students may be entitled to and Ex-Carer Allowance (Child)
Health Care Card if they held a Carer Allowance HCC on the day before
they turned 16 years of age.

Ex CA (child) care receivers may be eligible for an Ex-Carer Allowance
(child) Health Care Card (EHC) when they turn 16 years of age.

Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP)

CAP is a one-off payment for families where, following a catastrophic
event involving a young child under 7 years of age, there is a period of
significant adjustment as a result of the care needs of the child. CAP
helps families with additional costs during the adjustment period
immediately after the diagnosis.

Claims for CAP must be lodged within 2 years from date of diagnosis of a
severe illness, medical condition or major disability following the
catastrophic event.

For more information, see Carer Adjustment Payment (CAP) for carers of
young children.

Carer Supplement (CS)

CS is an annual payment to help carers with the costs of caring for a
person with a disability or medical condition.

It is paid on 1 July to carers receiving an eligible payment which
includes CP and CA.

For more information, see Carer Supplement (CS).

Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

CDAP is an annual payment to help carers with the costs of caring for a
child with a disability.

It is paid to carers who received CA for a child under 16 for a period
that includes 1 July.

For more information, see Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment
(CDAP).

The Resources page contains links to information for carers on the
Services Australia website and a table comparing CP with CA.

Related links

Support services for carers

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP)

Eligibility for Carer Allowance (CA)

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Ex-Carer Allowance (child) Health Care Card (EHC)

Carer Supplement (CS)

Annual Child Disability Assistance Payment (CDAP)

Absences for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA)

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Pensions income and assets test

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Allowance (CA)

Circumstance Change Monitor (CCM)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
