
Carer Payment (CP) claims for care receivers aged 16 or over 009-04080000

-   Background
-   References

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for the lodgement, gathering of
information, and assessment of Carer Payment (CP) claims for care
receivers aged 16 years or over.

On this Page:

Caring for others

CP provides income support to people who provide constant care for an
adult with a qualifying Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score
and the care is provided in the care receiver's private home. The aim of
this program is to encourage the provision of care in the home rather
than in an institution.

Caring is a physically, emotionally and financially demanding role. The
payment of CP recognises the various financial, social and opportunity
costs borne by carers. The provision for up to 63 days of respite for
carers recognises the need for carers to have a break from their caring
responsibilities. There is an additional provision of 63 days for caring
responsibilities given while a care receiver is in hospital.

Care receiver is in respite

If a care receiver is in respite (not hospital) at the time a customer
lodges a CP and/or Carer Allowance (CA) claim, the carer does not
qualify for CP or CA and the claim should be rejected as the care
receiver is not in their care at the time of claim lodgement.

Temporary cessation of care provisions cannot be applied from date of
lodgement, as the carer has not yet qualified for CP and/or CA. If a
carer is using up to one day of the temporary cessation of care
provisions each week at claim, they may qualify for CP/CA at time of
claim.

A carer does not qualify for CP or CA until the care receiver returns to
the private home. If the care receiver later returns to the private
home, the claim can only be backdated to a date when the carer was
providing care in the private home (that is, to a date when the care
receiver was not in respite).

Qualification for CP

Qualification for CP for 16 years or over is based on the circumstances
of both the carer and the care receiver and the provision of constant
care. Customers need to submit an [] online claim or lodge a fully
completed and signed paper claim.

If a person is caring for an adult and a child, consider either:

-   CP claim (child) - caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2 children
    with a disability or medical condition (multiple care), or
-   CP claim - care provided for a disabled adult and that adult's
    dependent child

Constant care

A carer is said to provide constant care if they personally provide care
on a daily basis for a significant period during each day. The care may
be active, supervisory or monitoring. To provide care on a daily basis
for a significant period, a carer should reasonably be expected to
provide at least the equivalent of a normal working day in personal
care, as the policy intent of CP is to recognise that the carer is not
able to undertake substantial paid employment because of their caring
responsibilities. This includes circumstances where the carer or care
receiver is absent from the care situation for part of the day, but the
intensity of the care required and provided during the rest of any 24
hour period roughly equates to a normal working day.

The assessing Service Officer has the delegation to determine if
constant care provisions are satisfied, based on the medical report and
the ADAT carer questionnaire provided with the CP (adult) claim. The
constant care requirements are satisfied if the Treating Health
Professional (THP) medical report and ADAT carer questionnaire result in
a qualifying score for CP, or an assessment of terminal illness. There
are circumstances that could indicate constant care is not being
provided. Service Officers can take these into account when making a
determination.

If a carer has lodged a Carer Allowance Questionnaire (SA381) and they
are receiving or have claimed CP, the SA381 should not be used on its
own to determine if constant care is being provided. For example, if the
SA381 states that for CA the carer is not providing care and attention
on a daily basis, it should not be assumed that constant care is not
being provided for CP. The situation needs to be clarified before a
decision is made and the carer should be contacted.

Wife Pension transfers to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Wife Pension customers who were getting payment level Carer Allowance on
19 March 2020 qualify for CP (XWP) under grandfathering provisions as
long as payment level CA continues without a break. They are not
required to satisfy the normal CP requirements such as:

-   constant care
-   the 25 hour rule, or
-   CP reviews including the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Pensions income and asset tests continue to apply. Temporary Cessation
of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not apply to CP (XWP) but
all CA rules will apply to CA as normal.

When a CP (XWP) customer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason (including respite or hospitalisation) or
reduced to a zero rate due to Education, Training or Treatment (ETT), CP
(XWP) will automatically be cancelled.

A carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a
break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020.

Carers who are eligible for CP (XWP) may elect to claim CP (Standard) to
get certain benefits not available under CP (XWP). Carers can reclaim CP
after CP (XWP) has been cancelled and cannot be restored. For more
information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Contents

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Creating a Carer Payment link for paper claims (carer is not partner of
care receiver)

Creating a Carer Payment (CP) link for paper claims where the care
receiver is carer's partner

Related links

Initial contact by a carer

Claiming Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA)

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when care receiver aged 16 years or
over

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for a disabled adult and 1 or 2
children with a disability or medical condition (multiple care)

Claim for Carer Payment (CP) when care is provided for a disabled adult
and that adult's dependent child

Carer Payment (CP) for 2 or more carers in respect of the same care
receiver

Temporary Cessation of Care (respite) provisions for Carer Payment (CP)
and Carer Allowance (CA)

Hospitalisation provisions for Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance
(CA)

Calculating the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

Pension income and assets tests

Transitional rules for pension customers who were on payment at 19
September 2009

Work Bonus and balance for pensioners of Age Pension age

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
