
Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) child 009-08060090

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines the procedures to assist Carer Specialised
Assessment Team (CSAT) and Service Officers processing terminal illness
reviews for Carer Payment (CP) child.

On this Page:

CP (child) terminal illness reviews

For the purposes of CP (child), a terminal condition is where a child
under 16 years has a terminal condition and is not expected to live more
than 24 months.

Where a medical practitioner has certified the child care receiver is
terminally ill, they do not need to undergo the Disability Care Load
Assessment (child) Determination (DCLAD) as they are granted CP
automatically, provided they meet all other eligibility criteria. CA
(auto) is automatically payable for each child care receiver for the
period for which the carer is paid CP (child) for that care receiver,
where the carer is not already receiving CA (child) for the care
receiver/s under the standard CA provisions. This means CA (auto) may be
payable even if the standard provisions for CA (child) are not met. For
instance, the condition is expected to last for at least 6 months but
not 12 months, or the child is not a dependent child of the carer.

When a child care receiver turns 16 years of age they are considered an
adult for social security purposes. Carers current on CP (child) and CA
(auto) under the terminal illness criteria, will remain on CP and CA
(auto) and can remain payable up until the day before the care receiver
turns 18 years.

When the care receiver is 17 years and 9 months of age, the carer is
sent an invitation letter to complete an online Carers Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT), which is used for an assessment under CP and/or CA
(adult) criteria.

Carers subscribed to get their letters to their myGov Inbox are advised
in their invitation letter to select the link in their myGov Inbox. The
link takes them to the online CTAT.

Carers who are not subscribed to get their letters to their myGov Inbox
but have a Centrelink online account can create a myGov account and link
it to their Centrelink online account. They will get a message and a
link in their myGov Inbox that takes them to the online CTAT.

If the carer does not have a myGov subscription or Centrelink online
account, a paper invitation letter will include instructions of how to
register online. If the carer does not wish to use the online service
they will be advised to download the following forms from the Services
Australia website:

-   Child to adult transfer for Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance
    (SA432)
-   Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Medical Report for a person 16
    years or over (SA332A)

If the CTAT is not returned before the care receiver turns 18 years of
age and CP is cancelled the carer will need to lodge a new claim, this
can be completed online.

Before 1 July 2018

If CTAT paper forms were lodged before 1 July 2018 and CP was already
cancelled, they will be deemed as a new claim from the date they are
submitted. The additional 13 week backdating provisions which accepted
CTAT forms up to 13 weeks after the child level entitlement has ended
have been removed. Carers of children with a milestone age of 17 years
and 9 months on or after 2 December 2017 are no longer restored and
backdated to the date of cancellation.

Note: the extension of CP (child) until 18 years of age will only apply
to care receivers who were assessed by the Treating Health Professional
(THP) before turning 16. A grant of CP (child) can only occur after the
child turns 16, if the intent to claim has been lodged before the child
turning 16.

From 1 July 2018

Intent to claim provisions were amended on 1 July 2018 and only apply to
carers in vulnerable circumstances. See Intent to claim and vulnerable
customers.

CTAT paper forms lodged from 1 July 2018 (where CP has already been
cancelled), are deemed as a new claim from the date they are submitted.

Process for reviews

Child terminal illness reviews are generated 24 months after grant, and
every 12 months thereafter. Reviews generated 24 and 36 months after
grant will be assessed by a social worker from the Carer Specialist
Assessment Team (CSAT). Reviews generated after 36 months from grant
will be assessed by the Carer Processing Team (CD1).

Reviews appear as a Manual Follow-up (MFU) on the carer’s record. The
MFU activity will remain on the carer's record until the review is
completed. Carers receiving Carer Allowance (CA) as well as CP due to
caring for a child with a terminal illness will also have CA reviewed at
the same time.

Due to the sensitive nature of the review, CSAT will contact the carer
by phone at the first (24 months after grant) and second review (36
months after grant). The initial contact with the carer is to determine
whether the child's condition remains terminal or has changed. The
contact at 36 months by CSAT is to obtain an update of circumstances in
relation to the child’s medical condition and inform the carer of future
reviews.

For the initial reviews at 24 and 36 months, CSAT will provide a
recommendation to Carer Processing (CD1) if a review is required. The
recommendation by CSAT is sent as a CSAT Assessment Finalised Fast Note
with the keywords of ‘URGENT’ and ‘ACTCAR’ to CD1 for further action.
Carer Processing will review the CSAT recommendation, investigate the
record and make a determination as to whether a medical review is
required or the review activity finalised with no further action.

Continuing eligibility up to 18 years of age

When a child care receiver turns 16 years of age, they are considered an
adult for social security purposes.

Carers current on CP (child) and CA (auto) under the terminal illness
criteria, will remain on CP and CA (auto) up until the day before the
care receiver turns 18 years.

When the carer receiver is 17 years and 9 months of age, the carer is
sent an invitation letter to complete an online Carers Child to Adult
Transfer (CTAT), which is used to assess eligibility for CP and/or CA
adult.

CSAT assessment

Social workers provide information that contributes to decisions about
qualification. They do not make the final decision regarding
qualification. Information that a social worker can provide includes:

-   whether the carer can and does, provide the care receiver with the
    constant care required
-   the care receiver's personal care or supervision needs in the home
-   the level of care or supervision actually being provided by the
    carer
-   whether the carer has the physical and/or emotional capacity to deal
    with the care receiver's care needs
-   clarifying ongoing diagnosis, treatment and/or prognosis

Information provided by a social worker can contribute to a decision
about the review qualification, however, the delegate, not the social
worker, must make the decision about qualification under terminal
illness provisions.

In all instances, do not cancel payment(s) without contacting the carer
and/or Treating Health Professional (THP).

Note: the delegate should update the carer's record to include the
outcome/ recommendation of the social worker assessment.

For referrals to CSAT social workers via:

Customer First Social Work Guided Procedure:

-   Select CSAT Processing Team – Specialist Assessment > Child Terminal
    Review

Process Direct:

-   Select Referral > Referral Type > Social Work Referral > Referral
    Reason > CSAT Processing Team – Specialist Assessment > referral
    detail ‘Child Terminal Review’

Completion of a medical report

A Treating Health Professional (THP) must complete the medical report.
Contact and Provider number details must be included on the medical
report for Services Australia's verification purposes. The name of the
THP must be recorded on a DOC on the carer’s record, and include the
contact and provider number details.

The Resources page contains the Social Work Information System (SWIS)
and Social Work DOC templates.

Related links

Death of an adult or child care receiver and the effect on Carer Payment
(CP)

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Child to Adult Transfer (CTAT)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Terminal illness reviews for Carer Allowance (CA) adult

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
