
This document outlines a list of procedures that relate to assessing
eligibility for Carer Payment (CP).

Care receiver is aged under 16

CP (child) is a fortnightly income support payment for people who are
unable to support themselves through substantial employment due to the
demands of their caring role. It provides income support to people who
provide full-time personal care or supervision to a person with a severe
disability or severe medical condition in the person's private home,
rather than in an institution. Caring is a physically, emotionally and
financially demanding role. The payment of CP recognises the various
financial, social and opportunity costs borne by carers.

In certain situations, two or more carers may qualify for CP for the
same care receiver aged under 16. To qualify for CP for a care receiver
aged under 16 years the carer must:

Satisfy the residence requirements

Be personally providing constant care for a child with a severe
disability or severe medical condition with a qualifying DCLAD score in
the home of the care receiver

-   Note: the carer is not required to live with the care receiver
-   The carer may cease care for a maximum of 25 hours per week
    (including travel time) for the purposes of paid employment,
    self-employment, voluntary work, attending an educational
    institution or training, and still qualify for CP. Hours where the
    carer continues to provide care for the care receiver are not
    counted

Have income and assets below the maximum allowed under the pension’s
income and assets test

CP (child) qualification changes

Qualifications for CP (child) changed on 1 July 2009. See Eligibility
for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16 for:

-   pre and Post 1 July 2009 rules
-   grandfathering provisions for DCLAD 1 July 2020 when the Disability
    Care Load Assessment Determination (DCLAD) (2020) replaced the Child
    Disability Assessment Determination (CDAD) 2001 and DCLAD 2009
    determinations
-   grandfathering transitional rules for CP (child) customers who were
    current on 30 June 2009

Respite and hospitalisation

The provision for up to 63 days of respite for carers recognises the
need for carers to have a break from their caring responsibilities while
remaining qualified for payment.

There is no limit to the number of hospitalisation days for child care
receivers, however all absences must still be recorded. If the carer is
paid under the short term care or episodic care provisions, the respite
limit will be a pro-rata amount, based on the period for which CP
(child) is being granted.

Care receiver is aged 16 or over

CP provides income support to people who provide constant care for an
adult with a qualifying Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score,
in the person's private home. The aim of this program is to support the
provision of care for people with a significant disability in the home
rather than in an institution. Caring is a physically, emotionally and
financially demanding role. The payment of CP recognises the various
financial, social and opportunity costs borne by carers.

In certain situations, 2 or more carers may qualify for CP for the same
care receiver aged 16 or over.

If a care receiver is in respite (not hospital) at the time a carer
lodges a CP and/or Carer Allowance claim, see Complications to grants of
Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA).

To qualify for CP for an adult care receiver, the carer must:

Satisfy the residence requirements

Be personally providing constant care for an adult with a qualifying
ADAT score in the home of the care receiver

-   Note: the carer is not required to live with the care receiver
-   The carer may cease care for a maximum of 25 hours per week
    (including travel time) for the purposes of paid employment,
    self-employment, voluntary work, attending an educational
    institution or training, and still qualify for CP. Hours where the
    carer continues to provide care for the care receiver are not
    counted

Have income and assets below the maximum allowed under the pensions
income and assets test

Wife Pension transfer to Carer Payment CP (XWP)

Wife Pension customers who were getting payment level Carer Allowance on
19 March 2020 qualify for CP (XWP) under grandfathering provisions as
long as payment level CA continues without a break. They are not
required to satisfy the normal CP requirements such as:

-   constant care
-   the 25 hour rule, or
-   CP reviews including the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test

Pensions income and asset tests continue to apply. Temporary Cessation
of Care (respite and hospitalisation) rules do not apply to CP (XWP) but
all CA rules continue to apply to CA as normal.

When a CP (XWP) customer’s only or last payment level CA is suspended or
cancelled for any reason (including due to respite or hospitalisation)
or reduced to a zero rate due to Education, Training or Treatment (ETT),
CP (XWP) will automatically be cancelled.

A carer will lose qualification for CP (XWP) permanently if they have a
break in payment level CA entitlement after 19 March 2020. For more
information, see Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Age considerations

If the carer is under the normal school leaving age in their State or
Territory, it is necessary to check that the appropriate education
authority has given permission for the young person to leave school or
to reduce their workload. The school-leaving age differs depending on
the state or territory in which the person resides (not the location of
the school).

Carers of workforce age receiving CP are eligible for Working Credit. If
a carer has unused working credits or a Student Income Bank (SIB), they
may be able to restore them within 12 months.

Social Worker referrals

Although there is no age limit for carers, any carer aged under 18 or
over 80 years needs to be referred to a Centrelink Social Worker to
ensure that the carer has the physical and emotional capacity to provide
the level of care required, and also to provide information and
assistance in accessing support services.

If there are complications to grants of CP and/or CA due to the carer
being in respite, a Social Worker can provide information to help in
making a decision about qualification for CP.

A Social Worker can also help with determining the level of care in
situations where a care receiver also cares for a person and is in
receipt of CP: Social Worker assessment of care situations for CP and CA
claims.

The adult care receiver requirements

The adult care receiver must:

be either:

-   an Australian resident, or
-   a higher Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) score adult who is
    receiving a social security pension and CP may be granted to another
    person for the adult under a scheduled international social security
    agreement, and

be receiving a social security pension or benefit, or a Service Pension
or Income Support Supplement or Veteran Payment, or would receive one of
these payments if they have been an Australian resident long enough, or

have income and assets which satisfy the non-customer Care Receiver
Income and Assets (CRIA) test (noting that some assets are disregarded,
see Components of the Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) test, and

require care permanently or for a minimum of 6 months (as opposed to 12
months for Carer Allowance), or less than 6 months if the condition is
terminal

Datalink with Department of Home Affairs

A datalink with the Department of Home Affairs will where possible,
automatically populate residence details for customers from 1 September
1994 to date as well as citizenship and movement information for the
customer if they are available. Once a person is identified as a
Centrelink customer, Department of Home Affairs will advise of any
future changes to their visa subclass or if they, their partner or their
child leaves or returns to Australia.

For current CP carers, it may be necessary to update country of
residence, visa information or Australian citizenship details. For
assistance, see Activating the Department of Home Affairs datalink and
contingency procedures if datalink is unavailable.

Contents

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged under 16

Eligibility for Carer Payment (CP) when a care receiver is aged 16 years
or over

Residence assessment for customers claiming Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
