
Death of a carer (CLK) 009-03080000

-   Background
-   Process Summary
-   Process
-   References
-   Resources
-   Training & Support

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines what happens when the death of a carer is
reported to the Services Australia. This includes making decisions about
qualifications for bereavement payment.

Qualification and payability

The agency needs to check whether the carer was receiving Carer Payment
(CP) and/or Carer Allowance (CA) when they died. Entitlement to
bereavement payment can then be determined. The amount of bereavement
payment that may be payable depends on the carer's circumstances.

If the carer was a member of a couple and receiving an income support
payment, such as CP, the surviving partner may be eligible for a lump
sum bereavement payment (LBP) if they are a pensioner for LBP purposes
or a long term social security recipient.

CA is payable up to the day prior to the carer's death and is cancelled
from the date of death.

If the carer was not partnered or was partnered to a person not
receiving an income support payment, CP is paid for the entitlement
period in which they died. If the carer was partnered to a pensioner or
long term social security recipient, CP is payable for the bereavement
rate continuation period. The amount of CP paid after death will reduce
any LBP payable to the surviving partner.

Carer has passed away before new claim is finalised

If the death action has already been recorded on the deceased carer's
record, it may need to be undone to process the claim. See Undoing a
death action.

Note: the death action must be completed on the same day as the claim is
finalised. This will ensure the system generated letters, which are not
appropriate to send to a deceased estate, are not issued. Send a Q999
letter to the executor of the estate to advise them of the outcome of
the claim.

Deceased customer on reporting at time of death

If employment income for the last period:

-   are known, these must be recorded before stimulating the payment
-   are not known, the payment must still be stimulated

After the payment is stimulated, the customer should be taken off
reporting before recording the death action.

The Resources page contains links to forms and publications, example
text for Q999 letters and a link to the Services Australia website for
information on what to do when someone has passed away.

Related links

Social Work Services

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Suspension of Carer Payment (CP)

Suspension of Carer Allowance (CA)

Carer cancellation and suspension workflow for Carer Payment (CP) and
Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of a Parenting Payment customer, their partner or their child

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment

Processing a claim after the death of a customer

Replacing payment made to a deceased customer where payment was returned
from financial institution

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
