
Assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP) 009-04050000

-   Background

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines procedures for Service Officers when they are
assessing claims for Carer Payment (CP).

CP (child) for care receivers aged under 16

Qualification for CP (child) when a care receiver is aged under 16 is
based on the circumstances of both the carer and the care receiver,
information is provided by the child's Treating Health Professional
(THP) and the carer, to determine the level of care required and the
level of care provided.

In addition to the general qualification provisions, the child must be
assessed under the Disability Care Load Assessment (child) Determination
(DCLAD) (2010) and achieve a rating of 'intense'.

When CP (child) can be paid

Provisions where CP (child) can be paid if the carer provides constant
care on a daily basis in the home of the child they care for.

CP child

-   Where a parent or carer provides full-time personal care of
    supervision for a child aged under 16 with a severe disability or
    severe medical condition

CP combined care

-   Where a parent or carer provides full-time personal care or
    supervision for two to four children aged under 16 with a disability
    or medical condition, whose combined care needs are equal to that of
    one child aged under 16 with a severe disability or severe medical
    condition

CP multiple care

-   Where a parent or carer provides full-time care or supervision for a
    disabled adult and 1 or 2 children whose combined care needs are
    equal to that of one child aged under 16 with a severe disability or
    severe medical condition

CP more than 1 carer

-   Where a child with a severe disability or medical condition may
    qualify 2 carers for CP

CP short term or CP episodic care

-   Where a parent or carer provide care for a child with a severe
    disability or medical condition requires constant care for at least
    3 months but less than 6 months.

CP exchanged care

-   Where separated/divorced parents exchange care of two and up to four
    eligible children but not the same child/ren every day

CP terminal illness

-   Where a child under 16 years has a terminal condition and is not
    expected to live more than 24 months

Note: where a medical practitioner has certified the child care receiver
is terminally ill, they do not need to undergo the DCLAD child
assessment as they are granted CP automatically, provided they meet all
other eligibility criteria.

Carer Allowance (CA) (auto)

CA (auto) is available to all recipients of (CP) (child).

If CP (child) cancels, CA (auto) will cancel automatically at the same
time. The carer will need to lodge a new claim for CA (child) if the
care receiver still requires and receives additional daily care and
attention due to their disability or medical condition.

Grandfathering provisions for CP and CA (child)

Grandfathering provisions apply to carers who were current or suspended
on CP (child) or Carer Allowance (child) payments on 30 June 2010 and
granted under either DCLAD 2009 or CDAD 2001 provisions.

The Carer Payment Grandfather (CRGF) screen displays grandfathered CP
recipients.

Care Receiver Income and Assets (CRIA) Test

The CRIA test for CP is administered in addition to the pensions income
and assets test.

When carers are claiming CP for a child or adult care receiver,
eligibility is in part based on the care receiver's income and assets. A
carer may be paid or continue to be paid CP if the care receiver has
income and assets below the relevant limits. Some income and assets are
disregarded, see:

-   Applying the assets test component of the non-customer Care Receiver
    Income and Assets (CRIA) test
-   Applying the income test component of the non-customer CRIA test

The carer will have to meet all other qualification provisions in order
to be granted CP.

CP (adult) for care receivers over 16 years or over

Qualification for CP (adult) when a care receiver is aged 16 years or
over is based on the circumstances of both the carer and the care
receiver. Information is provided by the carer receiver's Treating
Health Professional (THP) and the carer completes the carer's
questionnaire, these are used to determine the level of care required.

In addition to the general qualification provisions, the carer must
provide constant care for an adult with a qualifying Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) score, in the care receiver's private home.

When CP (adult) can be paid

Provisions where CP (adult) can be paid if they provide constant daily
care in the home of the care receiver:

CP adult

-   Where a carer provides full-time personal care of supervision for a
    care receiver aged 16 or over with a severe disability or medical
    condition or someone who is frail aged

CP lower ADAT

-   Where a carer provides full-time personal care or supervision of a
    care receiver aged 16 or over with moderate care needs and has a
    dependent child who is either under 6 years, or is aged 6-16 years
    and is eligible for CA

CP more than 1 carer

-   Where a person with a severe disability or medical condition may
    qualify 2 or more carers for CP

If a carer receiver is in respite (not hospital) at the time a carer
lodges a CP and/or CA claim, see Complications to Grants of Carer
Payment and/or Carer Allowance.

Where the carer is caring for an adult and 1 or 2 children whose
combined level of care is equivalent to one qualifying child,
consideration should be given to CP multiple care.

Claim submission exceptions

It may not be reasonable for a carer to complete all their Required
Tasks before submitting their claim.

These include exceptions where certain vulnerabilities exist. Claim
submission exceptions apply to

-   a care receiver with a terminal illness who is not expected to live
    for more than 3 months and
-   a carer under 18 years of age

Carers submitting a claim for CP terminal illness may be submitted under
the exception category, where the claim cannot be rejected until 22 days
(14 days plus the additional 8 days) have been reached.

CP Terminal Illness

Where a Treating Health Professional (THP) has certified the adult care
receiver (16 years or over) is terminally ill, they do not have to
undergo the Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT) assessment. The care
receiver must be in the final phase of a terminal illness and is not
expected to live more than 3 months. Payment may be granted
automatically if the carer meets all other eligibility criteria

Carers receiving CP terminal illness for an adult care receiver (16
years or over) will be reviewed. For more information see Terminal
illness reviews for Carer Payment (CP) (adult)

Carers receiving CP terminal illness for a child care receiver (under 16
years) will be reviewed. For more information see Terminal illness
reviews for Carer Payment (CP) child

Procedures common to CP (child/adult)

Re-use and reclaim provisions

Re-claim provisions allow qualifying THP medical reports and Care Needs
Assessments previously supplied to be used for a CP and/or CA subsequent
claim.

Re-claim provisions are automatically assessed when a carer claims
online, Assisted Customer Claim (ACC) is used or the First Contact
Service Offer (FCSO) workflow is run.

Re-use provisions allow eligible THP medical reports and/or CNAs
previously supplied to be used for a subsequent claim. Information
previously gathered under the Adult Disability Assessment Determination
(ADAD 1999) or terminal condition assessment for CP (adult) and/or CA
(adult) may also be re-used. Re-use provisions for CP and/or CA child
and adult are automatically assessed when a carer claims online, ACC is
used or FCSO is run.

For more information, see:

-   Re-use and re-claim provisions for Carer Payment (CP) (child) and
    Carer Allowance (CA) (child) claims
-   Adult Disability Assessment Tool (ADAT)

Carer or care receiver has recently died after lodging a claim

If a carer or care receiver passes away before the claim is finalised,
additional coding is required within the claim to end-date any
Electronic Messaging (EM) subscriptions. For more information, see
Initial contact after someone has died.

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a carer would
also be assessed.

In some cases, this may involve undoing the death action on the carer or
care receiver's record, ensuring arrears/advices are inhibited and then
recoding the death action.

See Undoing a death action for further information.

Grant or rejection of claim

On completion of recording the claim all the carer's details will be
registered on the system and their record should be linked to the care
receiver's record. The system will process the information and will
grant or reject the claim accordingly.

Under some circumstances, claims lodged after the death of a carer would
also be assessed.

Rejecting a CP claim

A carer who has lodged a claim for CP and does not meet basic
eligibility qualification and payability for CP may have the claim
rejected. Sometime the claim lodged is an inappropriate or incorrect
claim. In all these circumstances, the claim is rejected.

If the carer:

-   withdraws a claim, this should be cancelled not rejected
-   claims CP and does not meet basic qualification criteria, the claim
    will be automatically rejected
-   claims and is rejected for a residence related reason based on
    information provided on their claim. In some cases visa, citizenship
    and movement information, which is provided directly from the
    Department of Home Affairs datalink, may cause the claim to be
    rejected. Where the datalink with Department of Home Affairs has
    provided the information this will take precedence over any
    conflicting information provided by the carer

When manually rejecting a claim, ensure that an advice is sent to the
carer giving reasons for the rejection, and detailing the steps in the
review and appeals process.

For a list of rejection codes, see Cancellation, suspension and
rejection codes for Carer Payment (CP).

For situations where claims have been lodged after the death of a carer,
see Claims lodged after the death of a carer.

Note: where a customer claiming CP is rejecting for income and assets
and they have lodged a claim for the Home Equity Access Scheme (the
Scheme), contact the Home Equity Access Scheme National team. Contact
via a Fast Note before rejecting the CP claim to determine whether carer
assessment details are required for the Scheme purposes. CAO Pension
Loans Scheme Fast Note is located under Fast Note - select Auto Text,
use Complex Assessment > Request for CAO action > CAO Pension Loans
Scheme.

CA recipients with existing recorded absences

When a carer applies for CP and they are already receiving CA and they
have an existing absence recorded on the system due to any of the
following reasons, the existing absence must be deleted and then
re-recorded so it can be taken into account for both CP and CA.

-   hospitalisation
-   respite care
-   education
-   training or
-   treatment

Backdating CP and/or CA claims when carer was not qualified

This procedure should be utilised when a claim is being considered for
backdating and there are periods where the carer was not qualified, for
example exceeding portability/respite, etc.

In these situations, the system would be unable to calculate the correct
arrears, the Service Officer must manually calculate the correct
arrears.

Bereavement assistance

Qualification for bereavement assistance depends on whether the carer
receives CP and/or CA. Before granting a claim for CP and/or CA, ensure
the carer is eligible during the bereavement period and that arrears are
not paid for more than 14 weeks from the date of death.

If the carer receives:

CA, bereavement assistance may be payable:

-   if the care receiver was a child
-   under certain circumstances if the care receiver was an adult

CP, bereavement assistance is payable

Note: Bereavement Payment for CA (adult) customers depends on whether
the carer receives other payment and their payment type.

Death of care receiver before the CP claim is finalised

In these situations, the death action on the care receiver's record
should not be actioned until the CP and/or CA claim is finalised. It may
be necessary to suspend the deceased care receiver's payment and inhibit
the advices, until the CP and/or CA claim is ready to be finalised. If
the date of death is not recent, it is important to calculate the
correct arrears owing and to zero out any arrears of CA past the date of
death to avoid overpayment.

If granting or rejecting a CP and/or CA claim for the carer of a
deceased care receiver, a manual Q888 must be issued.

The grant or rejection letter must be addressed to:

-   the Executor of the Estate (if applicable), or
-   the 'Estate of the Late <customer's name'

Code death action on care receiver's record

Once the CP and/or CA claim is granted (or rejected) and arrears have
been adjusted, the Service Officer can then code the death action on the
care receiver's record.

If the care receiver is a child, the death action should cancel the CA
and the system will assess the carer's eligibility for a lump sum
bereavement payment of CP and CA. It will also assess entitlement for CP
for the bereavement period.

If the care receiver is an adult and the carer is in receipt of:

-   CA only, the system will automatically cancel CA. The carer will not
    be eligible for a bereavement payment
-   both CP and CA, the system will automatically cancel CA and assess
    the carer's entitlement to CP during the bereavement period and
    eligibility for a lump sum bereavement payment for that care
    receiver
-   both CA and an income support payment (other than CP) that does not
    qualify them for a bereavement payment, the system will cancel CA at
    the end of the bereavement rate continuation period and assess the
    carer's eligibility for a lump sum CA bereavement payment
-   both CA and an income support payment that qualifies for a
    bereavement payment, the system will automatically cancel CA

The death action should generate an appropriate bereavement letter
ensuring the carer is sent a grant letter and a bereavement letter.

Death action has been processed prior to claim being finalised

If the death action has already been actioned on the care receiver's
record before the CP and/or CA claim is processed, the care receiver's
record should be resurrected, taking care not to pay arrears past the
date of death. Once the claim is finalised, the death action should be
recoded, taking care not to duplicate any lump sum bereavement payments
if already paid or to resend any letters that have already been sent.

Contents

Assessing Carer Payment (CP) when the care is shared

Assessing Carer Payment (CP) (child) when caring for 2 to 4 children
each with a disability or medical condition (combined care)

Coding the paper Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance Care Needs
Assessment for a child under 16 years (SA408 and SA394)

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (child) for a disabled adult and
one or two children with a disability or medical condition (multiple
care)

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) where the care receiver is
16 years of age or over

Coding a paper claim for Carer Payment (CP) for one care receiver or
combined care receivers under 16

Rejecting a Carer Payment (CP) paper claim

Completing the Carer Payment Income and assets details of the person or
child/children being cared for

Related links

Processing carers online and assisted customer claims

Complications to grants of Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer Allowance
(CA)

Carer Payment (CP) grant overlaps existing Carer Allowance (CA) absence

Death of care receiver before claim for Carer Payment (CP) and/or Carer
Allowance (CA) is finalised

First Contact Service Offer (FCSO) workflow

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
