-   Resources

[Expand/Collapse all sections]Expand all

This document outlines information about assistance available from
Services Australia upon the death of an adult or child care receiver
where CP is received.

Bereavement assistance

A CP carer is entitled to payment during the bereavement period, in
which time they will need to test their eligibility for another income
support payment if they still require assistance. They may also be
eligible for the Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP), depending on their
circumstances:

when an adult care receiver dies, the level of bereavement assistance
depends on whether:

-   the care receiver is single or a member of a couple
-   the partner was receiving an income support payment or not, and
-   the carer is paid CP (XWP)

when a child care receiver dies, the level of bereavement assistance
depends on whether or not the carer is paid CP (XWP)

when a child care receiver dies and they were in a short term or
episodic care situation, the CP (child) carer will receive the LBP and
continuation of CP during the bereavement period even if this exceeds
the date of the Medical Report, Medical Certificate end date, or end of
the episodic or short term care period

Two or more carers in receipt of CP

If a deceased care receiver had 2 or more carers in receipt of CP, each
carer is eligible for payment during the bereavement period and may also
be entitled to the Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP) depending on their
circumstances.

Two or more CP care receivers

The following applies to multiple care situations (where the carer
qualifies for CP based on the care needs of 2 or more CP care
receivers). For example, CP (child) is paid under Combined or Multiple
assessment, or CP (adult) is paid under lower Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) provisions.

For CP (adult) or CP (child) where the adult care receiver dies, both a
14 week bereavement period and the Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)
apply, depending on the situation. The partner lump sum bereavement
provisions apply if the adult was the carer's partner. Otherwise,
standard third party bereavement lump sum provisions will apply.

For CP (child) where a child care receiver dies, a 14 week bereavement
period and the LBP apply.

For CP (adult) paid under lower ADAT provisions where the dependent
child dies, see Death of a dependent child of a lower Adult Disability
Assessment Tool (ADAT) score adult.

Death of a care receiver after permanently entering an institution

When a care receiver permanently enters an institution, the carer ceases
to qualify for CP. However, payment of CP continues for 14 weeks from
the date of admission to the institution (regardless of the end date of
the short term or episodic care period for a CP child). If the care
receiver dies during the 14 week continuation period, and the CP
recipient and their care receiver were a couple, section 198AAA ceases
to apply and section 237 (qualification for bereavement payments) may
apply instead. That is, a 14 week bereavement period will commence if
all aspects of section 237 are met and the carer may be eligible for the
Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP).

If the care receiver and the CP recipient are not members of a couple,
the carer continues receiving CP for 14 weeks from the date of admission
to the institution but is not entitled to a further 14 week bereavement
period or a LBP.

Note: payment of CP does not continue for 14 weeks from the date of
admission to the institution for carers being paid CP (XWP). If their
last CA care receiver is permanently admitted to an institution, CP
(XWP) is cancelled when payment level CA is suspended or cancelled. See
Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP).

Carer commences or increases work during the bereavement period

If the carer commences work in excess of 25 hours per week during the
bereavement period, the usual CP constant care criterion does not have
to be met. All normal income and assets rules still apply, which means
the carer's rate of payment may be affected by the income paid. See
Carer Payment (CP) and Carer Allowance (CA) carer undertakes paid
employment, self employment, voluntary work, education or training
activities.

Nominee arrangements and Power of Attorney cease upon death

After a customer dies, Nominee and Power of Attorney (POA):

-   arrangements stop
-   can no longer get details about the deceased person
-   do not automatically become the executor or administrator

A statutory declaration cannot be used as authorisation for access to a
deceased person's details. Tell the third party to seek advice from a
lawyer, Probate Office or Public Trustee. See Requests for information
after someone has died.

The Resources page contains a link to the Services Australia website for
information on what to do when someone has died.

Related links

Carer Payment (CP) or Carer Allowance (CA) customers and bereavement
assistance

Assessing entitlement to a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Calculation of a Lump Sum Bereavement Payment (LBP)

Death of a child care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an adult care receiver and the effect on Carer Allowance (CA)

Death of an income support customer or their partner

Social work services

Confirmation of the death of an adult or child

Assessment of dependent children, additional income free area and child
income under social security law

Care receiver permanently enters or temporarily/permanently leaves an
institution

Cancellation and suspension of Carer Payment and/or Carer Allowance

Carer Supplement (CS)

Transfer from Wife Pension (WP) to Carer Payment (CP)

                                   

-   Services Australia ABN 90 794 605 008 
